* 2031148
* EXP: Augmenting a Teachable Robot with Adaptive Cognitive and Social Support
* CSE,IIS
* 08/19/2019,04/30/2024
* Winslow Burleson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 04/30/2024
* USD 449,703.00

This proposal investigates robotic teachable agents, a type of cyberlearning
technology that provides cognitive and affective feedback to support students'
learning. The Tangible Activities for Geometry system (TAG) is a robotic
teachable agent platform for middle school mathematics and computational
thinking. Students physically engage within a projected coordinate space with an
interactive teachable robot named Quinn. Students teach Quinn how to solve
challenges involving plotting points on a graph, translating points, rotating
points, and plotting lines by giving procedural and conditional instructions to
Quinn. There appear to be at least two primary advantages to using a robotic
learning platform to investigate how to design teachable agents. First, a
physical presence, provided by a robotic agent, strengthens users' perceptions
of having a social partner that is more than a virtual agent. Second, students
receive cognitive benefits from learning through embodied, physical
interactions. This research investigates the unique affordances of a teachable
robot for supporting students' cognitive and social interactions within a
learning environment as it enhances our understanding of how cyberlearning can
support STEM learning (mathematics and computational thinking). The study will
be conducted in a school system having high percentages of underrepresented
minorities who will learn to design features of the robots, exposing them to
STEM careers and increasing the likelihood of acceptance and scalability. The
investigative team will also disseminate findings and Do-It-Yourself (DIY)
instructions for integrating cyberlearning environments and pedagogical
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal advances an empirical
investigation that uses a teachable robot learning environment built with prior
NSF support, integrated within the NYU Holodeck, a state-of-the-art immersive
collaborative cyberlearning research environment, to improve understanding of
how adaptive cognitive and social support can facilitate embodied interactions
with teachable agents. This project investigates the teachable agent phenomenon
within the context of the Tangible Activities for Geometry system (TAG), a
robotic teachable agent platform for middle school mathematics and computational
thinking. The project has three phases. First, the research team will explore
two factors related to cognitive support: (1) how the teachable agent can give
adaptive feedback representative of a learner (questions, self-explanations)
rather than a tutor (hints, instructional explanations), and (2) how cognitive
prompts can leverage the physical properties of the environment. Second, the
team will explore two factors related to social support: (a) how a teachable
agent can make adaptive attributions to effort or ability for its success or
failure to motivate students, and (b) how the robot can use its embodied
presence (physical or tactile) to contribute social information to enhance
student learning. Third, to assess the efficacy of the interventions, the
project incorporates a study comparing cognitive and social support to a
condition with only cognitive support, only social support, and with no support.
The project will make substantial contributions toward better understanding how
to design and effectively incorporate support, provided by a teachable robot, to
adaptively provide cognitive and social support to improve student outcomes. The
robot framework will be tested in schools, including high percentages of
underrepresented minorities, developing new ways of using technology to learn
mathematics and computational thinking.