* 2031799
* RAPID: SaTC: FACT: Federated Analytics based Contact Tracing for COVID-19
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Ni Trieu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 05/31/2023
* USD 208,000.00

The spread of the Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), a highly-infectious
disease caused by a newly discovered coronavirus, has reached pandemic levels
across the globe. As the numbers in the USA of infections, critical care
interventions and deaths continue to rise, mobile applications (apps) that
enable contact tracing (CT) are being rapidly deployed to monitor the spread of
COVID-19. However, on-going deployments, based on anonymously sharing tokens
without exploiting the rich local device data, are insufficient in monitoring
disease spread in a timely manner and are also vulnerable to privacy and
security attacks. There is an urgent need to develop CT apps that not only
monitor but also intervene to limit COVID-19 spread while respecting user
security and privacy. This project addresses this challenge via Federated
Analytics based Contact Tracing (FACT), a refined federated learning approach to
leverage both device-level data and server capabilities in a private and secure
manner. FACT enables prevention and intervention by including hotspot
identification, user alerts, and continual assessment of user COVID-19 risk.
FACT guarantees a private and secure way to (i) evaluate a user's need for
testing or their resilience to exposure, and (ii) assess herd immunity across
the population.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;FACT addresses both the vulnerability of
current Bluetooth-based systems to a variety of attacks and limited learning at
the server by proposing a secure GPS+Bluetooth system which will enable the
server to detect geographical infection clusters in a privacy-preserving manner.
FACT also harnesses the rich device-level mobility and acoustic sensing data to
periodically predict risks of those exposed to COVID-19 positive patients using
federated learning and without sharing any device data with the server. Several
simple, but well-validated, parameters are extracted from these sensors to
develop local digital markers of COVID risk. At the heart of these innovations
are the refinements FACT brings to standard federated learning via knowledge
distillation and model compression. This project, with the support of ASU
University Technology Office and collaboration with industry companies, will
deploy and evaluate FACT via a mobile app and reach many users. FACT can extend
the clinical utility of acoustic measures, adopted in general clinical trials,
for use in COVID-19 patients. This research also provides immense opportunities
to train and expose diverse graduate students to the technical challenges of
ensuring privacy and security while simultaneously enabling socially beneficial
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.