* 2031043
* RAPID: Reducing the Spread of COVID-19 Through Contact Tracing: The  Influence of Age and Interview Protocol
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Ronald Fisher, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 197,054.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly disrupted daily life, both socially and
economically, worldwide. Epidemiologists have cautioned that a return to “normal
activities” requires contact tracing, which begins with interviews of infected
persons and allows for the identification and isolation of other exposed
individuals. Critically, contact tracing interviews are fundamentally a memory
task, yet the methods used generally do not incorporate memory-facilitating
techniques. Further, research has generally found that critical groups in this
pandemic, children and the elderly, often perform worse on memory tasks than
adolescents and young and middle-aged adults. As such, there is reason for
concern about the accuracy and completeness of reports provided in contact
tracing interviews, particularly for individuals within critical life phases.
This project examines the time-critical issue of how enhanced memory strategies
can improve contact tracing. Through this research, developmental and cognitive
science can play a role in our recovery from this pandemic, as well as other
health-related crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study tests whether
memory for contacts can be improved across the lifespan utilizing empirically-
informed interview techniques. Specifically, this study tests whether
individuals between the ages of 9 and 90 recall more contacts when queried via a
cognitively-informed contact tracing interview, as compared to a baseline
interview. The study will also examine the effectiveness of two types of
administration: a self-administered survey format, and a live interview via
video-conferencing. Developmental differences in the nature of the contacts
recalled, such as the individual’s familiarity with the contact, will also be
analyzed. The results of this study will directly inform our ability to conduct
effective contact tracing interviews with individuals of all ages. Findings can
also aid frontline workers’ ability to conduct safe, efficient, and effective
developmentally-appropriate interviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.