* 2031121
* Sea-ice Snow Microbial Communities’ Impact on Antarctic Bromocarbon Budgets and Processes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Brook Nunn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 08/31/2024
* USD 422,633.00

The ozone hole that develops over the Antarctic continent every spring is one of
the features attributed to human activity, in particular production of the CFC
(chlorofluorocarbons in refrigerants) released to the atmosphere. In spite of
the CFC ban from the Montreal Protocol established in the year 1987, the
recovery has been slower than predicted. Bromocarbons, known to produce the
stratospheric ozone depletion, have recently been estimated to contribute to the
pool of bromines in the lower atmosphere. What is the origin of the bromocarbons
in Antarctic sea ice? Is this an additional source of chemicals creating the
ozone hole? This project will test if bromocarbons in sea ice are produced and
degraded by microalgae and bacteria found in sea ice, in snow and the interface
between the two. The project will collect a suite of chemical and biological
measurements of sea ice and snow to determine bromocarbon concentrations,
microbial activity associated with them, and intra-cellular genes and proteins
involved in bromocarbon metabolism. This project benefits NSF’s goals of
expanding fundamental knowledge of Antarctic systems, biota, and processes, and
improving the understanding of interactions among the Antarctic systems,
cryosphere and organisms. The work will be carried out at McMurdo Station in
late austral spring, including sampling of snow and ice that will be
concentrated in the laboratory, and 24-hour experiments to measure algal and
bacterial activity. Genes controlling synthesis of enzymes involved in
bromocarbon metabolism are of interest in biotechnology and bioremediation,
including products that repair damaged skin from UltraViolet Radiation. The
project will train undergraduate students on chemical and biological techniques.
The Principal Investigators will be involved in the Pacific Science Center in
Seattle with ~10,000 visitors per weekend where they will develop a project-
specific exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microbial processes in snow and ice
associated with bromocarbon synthesis and degradation have not been studied in
Antarctica during winter and spring. This study will inform about microbial
activity in relation to the release of bromocarbons compounds from the snow and
ice surfaces, compounds known to degrade stratospheric ozone. The estimation of
chemical bromocarbons will be combined with metagenomics and metaproteomics
approaches for understanding the potential role of microbes in snow and sea ice.
The environmental, chemical and biological data will be synthesized with
multivariate analysis and significant differences between sites and experimental
treatments with ANOVA. A collaborator from the University of Goteborg in Sweden
will collaborate on bromocarbon analyses. The study will also address “saline
snow” a new environment not previously studied for microbial life. In addition,
this is the first study of meta-proteomics in snow and ice. The Principal
Investigators expect their results will help inform ozone hole recovery in the
21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.