* 2031227
* RAPID: Fluid Dynamic Driving Mechanisms of Airborne Pathogen Transmission and Control
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Michael Kinzel, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Airborne transmitted pathogens such as COVID-19 have caused large scale
infections, death, health system overloads, and severe economic damage. Such
airborne transmission paths can be associated with droplets ejected from natural
human respiratory functions such as sneezing, coughing, speaking, and breathing.
Even in the context of social distancing and face masks, there are several
essential functions associated with hospitals, grocery stores, transit, and
other essential confined workplaces that force interactions and fuel pathogen
transmission. One potential method to reduce the transmission of airborne
pathogens is to reduce the number of small droplets formed from the human
respiratory function. It is generally known that small droplets (such as fog,
mist, etc.) can remain suspended for long time periods. Such droplets enable
transmitting pathogens for long time periods. Since large droplets (such as
rain) are prone to fall from the air, pathogens in these droplets are less
susceptible to airborne transmission paths. The aim of this research is to alter
the host’s fluid properties such that droplets formed during human respiratory
functions remain larger, travel shorter distances, and fall reducing the
propensity for airborne transmission. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to
quantify the droplet character formed during human respiratory function when the
host’s saliva properties are altered. Simple fluids-related solutions associated
with altering the fluid properties of the host such as formulated confections
(lozenges/gum/candy) will change saliva droplet breakup modes resulting in
larger droplets that travel shorter distances and fall. The aim is to understand
how fluid properties can reduce metrics associated with a pathogen’s airborne
transmission path. During the human respiratory function, droplets are formed
through complex processes driven by a pulsed, turbulent jet with many underlying
interfacial instabilities. These processes have not been studied from the aspect
of altering the host’s salvia fluid properties. The project will develop this
knowledge gap using a combination of experiments and numerical predictions
oriented around answering three specific studies: (i) Understanding the role of
viscosity and surface tension in droplet characteristics, (ii) Evaluating how
aerating saliva alters droplet characteristics, and (iii) Determining safe
compounds that reduce airborne transmission while remaining comfortable to a
person. In addressing these scientific questions, this effort aims to develop a
new tool to reduce the transmissibility of COVID-19 (and other airborne
pathogens). The effort is tailored to inform the public, scientists, and
engineers (through press, fast-track publications, and professional meetings) of
the developed science within a timeline that enables product development and
wide-scale implementation that supports the 2020 COVID-19
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.