* 2031056
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapid Antigen-based SERS assay for COVID-19 Detection (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Joel Tabb, Ionica Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2021
* USD 255,468.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to allow testing of potential COVID-19
patients using a rapid and highly accurate diagnostic test, particularly for
patients who are asymptomatic. This will provide a significant advantage in
“flattening the curve” of the number of cases by preventing these patients from
inadvertently infecting their family and community members. Current protocols
require days to return a result, creating problems for public health. This test,
the first of many that can be produced using the underlying platform technology,
would improve: 1) the ability to rapidly identify patients with active COVID-19
cases for expeditious clinical intervention, reducing transmission by that
patient; and 2) outcomes because of the higher performance and accuracy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project addresses the lack of rapid, accurate testing for COVID-19 in near
patient settings. This effort will develop an infectious disease platform that
combines: 1) DNA aptamers, a recognition element for target proteins; 2) surface
enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), a vibrational spectroscopic detection method;
3) and orthogonal partial least squares differential analysis, a well-
established statistical method often applied to vibrational spectroscopy-based
analyses. By employing aptamers that target SARS-CoV-2 related proteins (e.g.
the spike (S) protein), this assay is anticipated to identify the presence of
this protein under 30 minutes after oro- or naso-pharyngeal sample is collected,
and is ultimately expected to achieve &gt;95% clinical sensitivity and
specificity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.