* 2031077
* RAPID: SaTC: COVID19: Science of using wirelessly powered sensors to quickly scale up verifiable decontamination of individual N95 respirator masks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Sara Rampazzi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 05/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

It's extremely important for the health of our nation to ensure that front-line
healthcare workers have access to a supply of N95 masks while caring for
COVID-19 patients. A global shortage of N95 respirator masks has led to the
emergency construction of various decontamination systems for reuse of
disposable masks worn by healthcare workers. While the best choice is a new
mask, decontamination serves as an emergency backup when new masks are in short
supply during likely COVID19 resurgence. Any decontamination must protect
against damage to the masks' filter performance in addition to ensuring
inactivation of harmful levels of bioburdens. Moist heat is one of the readily
deployable decontamination methods. An oven set to a particular temperature will
likely have hot spots and cold spots, leading to a decontamination risk that can
be detected with sensor technology. However, wiring temperature and humidity
sensors for each mask is cumbersome, time consuming, and difficult to scale up.
In high threat environments beyond a controlled clinical environment, sensors
must also withstand adversarial interference. An adversary could use
international radio interference to fool sensors into seeing a false reality at
the analog layer. For instance, cryogenic chambers may cause unintended thawing
of stored specimens if an adversary tricks a temperature sensor into seeing
false, cold temperatures. Thus, this research project further investigates how
to protect large numbers of temperature and humidity sensors from malicious
interference in high-threat environments accessible by an adversary with signal
injection capabilities. The broader impact includes contributions to
N95decon.org, a volunteer consortium of scientists, engineers, and clinicians
from universities and healthcare facilities across the world to study N95 mask
decontamination. Technical reports, publications, and educational training
webinars conducted in multiple languages contribute to broader impact by helping
to protect healthcare workers globally. Moreover, the science of trustworthy
sensor technology can extend to protecting other COVID-19 environments such as
fleets of vehicles transporting patients or office spaces needing technology to
verify the effectiveness of decontamination processes during social
distancing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project tackles the urgent
research needs to (1) assure and inform healthcare workers of the conditions
necessary for mask decontamination processes in ovens with known risks of non-
uniform heating, (2) rapidly encourage the deployment of highly scalable and
trustworthy sensor network technology for monitoring and validation of
individual mask decontamination by using wirelessly powered computational RFID
tags, (3) advance the knowledge and understanding of sensor-based systems
security by preventing malicious interference from violating the integrity,
availability, and confidentiality of sensor data. Key to the approach is the
design and deployment of a wirelessly powered computational RFID tag based on
the Intel WISP and UMass Moo with sensors to measure the moist heat
decontamination processes. By removing wires and batteries, the approach enables
more rapid deployment of monitoring without requiring significant modification
to decontamination systems. The research has particular benefit to small
clinics, rural facilities, and developing countries that lack convenient access
to dedicated N95 mask decontamination systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.