* 2031105
* Explaining color pattern diversity through the dynamic analysis of display
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Trevor Price, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 393,627.00

Humans have been fascinated by the diversity of color for centuries, and the
field of color science spans across art, philosophy, psychology and biology.
Different people and societies have different color experiences, and even the
same person perceives color differently depending on the background. Our ability
to perceive this variation is thanks to a sophisticated color perception system,
especially relative to other mammals. Other animals, such as birds, have even
more complex color perception, and are among some of the most brilliantly
colored animals on the planet. What are the underlying causes of this diversity?
How does an animal’s surroundings, such whether it lives in forests or out in
the open shape the evolution and perception of colors? One reason for our lack
of understanding may be that color signals are frequently presented to
observers, such as rivals, mates or predators, using movements of various body
parts. Recent developments in high-speed video technology and computer
programing now make it possible to accurately describe these movements. This
project will therefore study the association between animal displays, habitat,
and color by comparing closely related species. The over-arching goal of this
work is to understand the diversity of color in nature, and ultimately, the
diversity of how color is perceived.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While long recognized
that display movements are integral component of animal signals, it is only in
the past few years that technology (e.g. high speed video cameras, essential
because many species can perceive movements much more finely than humans) and
analytical techniques (e.g. deep learning methods to trace trajectories of
movements) have become sufficiently advanced that they can be used to study
displays in a comparative context, thereby linking them to differences in color
and ecology across species. The goal of this project is to quantify display
behavior, environmental and ecological features, social context, color, and
color patterns across the Old World leaf warblers (genus Phylloscopus), chosen
because previous work has shown qualitative associations between light
environment, color, and displays in the group. Closely related, sympatric,
species will be compared across a gradient of habitat types to ask how plumage
color (quantified through spectrophotometry) and threat display (quantified by
playback experiments and high-speed video) are associated with habitat,
including background color and granularity, and prevailing light environments.
New methods of analysis derived from comparisons of morphological shape will be
used to place display movements on continuous scales, thereby enabling them to
be ranked across species. The essential concept is that displays vary with
environment, and thereby influence the evolution of both color and color
patterns beyond those predicted from static analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.