* 2031027
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Modeling, Analysis and Control of COVID-19 Spread in an Aircraft Cabin using Physics Informed Deep Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Maziar Raissi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2022
* USD 110,901.00

This project will model, analyze, predict, and present control mechanisms for a
COVID-19 outbreak through an airborne infection in an aircraft cabin. As air
travel resumes, it is expected that many passengers would be exposed to and
possibly infected by the COVID-19 virus. As a result, there is an urgent need to
rapidly develop solutions to determine the speed of the contagion by
understanding the dynamics of the airflow inside aircraft. This research will
combine four separate multi-physics models representing fluid dynamics, scalar
transport, epidemiology, and airborne infection to analyze the spread of
COVID-19 within a closed system such as an airplane. The multidisciplinary
nature of this research will yield new algorithms at the interface of
computational mathematics, deep learning, data science, epidemiology, and fluid
dynamics and will provide novel techniques that can be directly applied to
large-scale data to allow efficient and powerful data analysis. The project will
also serve as valuable training for students. Open-source codes will be made
available to the user community and will be open to contributions from end-
users, academic researchers, industry members, practitioners, and government
research labs. The research may also be extended to other physical spaces, such
as marine vessels, trains, buses, or any other medium of public transportation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will accomplish the following
specific objectives (a) develop a fully 3-dimensional computational model
capturing realistic geometry and coupling four different physical and biological
systems; (b) implement a hidden multi-physics neural network framework to enable
data assimilation and; (c) evaluate the predictive capability using simulated,
experimental, and observational data in addition to developing and studying
novel control and reinforcement learning mechanisms. The framework considers the
characteristics of the exhalation of the droplets from COVID-19 infected members
on an airplane that may not be wearing face masks, tracking the dispersion of
these droplets, and tracking the inhalation of the droplets by susceptible
passengers through these coupled multi-physics models. The research will help to
develop a novel physics-informed deep-learning framework that will be capable of
encoding the multi-physics system of equations modeled into the neural networks
while being agnostic to the geometry or the initial and boundary conditions.
Progress on the goals will provide advances in data-driven discovery, which will
allow a better understanding of the impact of COVID-19.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being awarded using funds made available by
the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act supplement
allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.