* 2031477
* Increasing Massachusetts Partnerships for Advancing Computational Thinking in Pre-K-5 Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Mia Dubosarsky, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 08/31/2023
* USD 297,410.00

This project aims to broaden pre-K-5 students' participation in standards-
aligned and culturally responsive computational thinking (CT). The research team
will establish a research-practice partnership (RPP) that will co-plan and co-
design multidistrict efforts to develop standards-aligned and culturally
responsive professional development (PD) that integrates CT into the PK-5
curriculum and instruction. The populations served are pre-K-5 students and
teachers in Central Massachusetts. The project will connect a diverse team of
researchers, policymakers, professional development coaches, and educators with
diverse expertise on pre-K-5 CT teaching and learning. Following guidelines for
effective partnerships and guided by Design-Based Implementation Research (DBIR)
and Participatory Research, the project has four phases: 1) Build relationships
within the RPP. 2) Identify problems of practice, and conduct in-school
research. 3) Co-create PD in an iterative process of creating-testing-revising
solutions to the identified problems. 4) Disseminate results and sustain the
RPP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central research question asks what factors enable
and hinder successful collaborations between institutions of higher education,
school districts, and the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary
Education to address problems of practice around culturally and linguistically
responsive CT teaching and learning in pre-K-5 classrooms. The RPP will develop
shared understanding about the specific challenges that pre-K and elementary
teachers and administrators from rural, urban, and town districts face
concerning teaching CT to diverse populations. Such a knowledge base is
essential to the development of CT-focused PD to empower teachers to integrate
CT into curricula in accessible and meaningful ways. Using the RPP frameworks of
mutualism and DBIR approaches of systematic and repeated inquiry, project
members will identify and research problems of practice and possible solutions
and strategies in their context. Analyses of the principles and processes will
add to the body of knowledge about implementation research on building capacity
of RPPs to identify and address problems of practice on culturally and
linguistically responsive PD on CT integration for pre-K-5. This project is
funded by the CS for All: Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.