* 2031101
* RAPID: Stress and Emotional Response to Uncertainty in the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Maital Neta, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 87,825.00

Many significant social decisions are made in situations of high uncertainty. A
personâ€™s ability to resolve such uncertainty can have profound implications for
outcomes ranging from health to work performance. Past research has shown that
people exhibit reliable tendencies to respond to uncertainty with either
positive or negative emotions. These personal biases play a significant role in
responding well or poorly to high uncertainty. This project leverages the urgent
opportunity presented by the COVID-19 pandemic to advance the understanding of
individual-level biases in the context of a societal-level stressor. Very little
is currently known about the effects of societal-level stressors, such as a
global pandemic, on individual-level trait-like biases. The negative thoughts
and feelings some individuals experience in response to extreme societal
uncertainty can have deleterious outcomes on health, work performance, and
relationships. This project lays the foundation for developing interventions to
disrupt these maladaptive processes in favor of more productive
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An online study includes three distinct measures
of valence bias (the tendency to ascribe uncertainty with a negative meaning).
Measures of mood/temperament, resilience, and social factors likely affected by
the COVID-19 pandemic (e.g., loneliness) are collected. A subset of participants
in the study completed the valence bias tasks before the pandemic (Wave 1). In a
longitudinal design, these same participants will be re-assessed at the height
of the pandemic (Wave 2) and again after the pandemic ends (Wave 3). By
following people over time, it is possible to gauge the effects associated with
a greater increase in negativity as a function of the global pandemic, as well
as greater recovery after it ends. A new group of participants will be added at
Waves 2 and 3 to provide additional data for a cross-sectional exploration of
the mechanisms that predict individual differences in valence bias at each time
point. Age-related effects will also be explored at each wave. The research
considers how people can learn to "do it better" to increase well-being and
resilience in response to societal threats and uncertainty. The findings will
shed light on how some individuals are able to override stress-related increases
in negativity and instead resolve uncertainty in a positive
light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.