* 2031457
* Dynamic Triggering Seen Clearly: Utilizing Continuous Waveforms and High-Resolution Catalogs to Measure the Importance and Mechanisms of Dynamic Triggering
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Emily Brodsky, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2024
* USD 345,345.00

Every time an earthquake occurs, seismic waves emanate from it and shake the
ground. Thirty years ago it was discovered that these waves can trigger other
earthquakes 100’s or even 1000’s of kilometers away from the first. This
phenomenon is known as dynamic triggering and it is one of the few situations
where a known, measurable, natural stress can be identified as the immediate
cause of an earthquake. Dynamic triggering appears to be a common and expected
consequence of large earthquakes, but it remains unclear what fraction of the
world’s earthquakes are caused by dynamic triggering. Is dynamic triggering an
important factor in determining when and where earthquakes happen or is it a
mere curiosity? The primary goal of this project is to address this question
using the large datasets now available due to recent advances in computation and
instrumentation. The broader impacts of this proposal include collaboration with
scientists at Kyoto University in Japan, support for a graduate student and a
quantification of the hazard increase expected after earthquakes in the study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The capacity to study dynamic triggering has been limited
by both the ability to accurately capture the triggering stresses and the
ability to record the resultant earthquakes. Significant progress has been made
in both areas recently. Measuring the triggering stresses can be improved by
using the full waveforms of dense networks. Recent progress in catalog
generation by template matching has resulted in catalogs that have increased by
an order of magnitude and, in turn, increased the detectability of rate changes.
Together, these data can provide a quantitative assessment of the importance of
dynamic triggering. The same data can also be used for a secondary goal of
assessing the predictions of proposed mechanisms of dynamic triggering. This
project will (1) measuring triggering using waveforms and a modern catalog over
a wide range of frequency and orientations, (2) measuring the time-dependence of
the earthquake rate change, (3) measuring rate changes as a function of
cumulative energy and evaluating non-earthquake sources of seismic waves and (4)
interpreting triggered seismicity rates within the context of geodetic and
hydrological measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.