* 2031535
* Dynamics and Perceptions of Ultrahazardous Flooding across the Wildland Urban Interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* John Houston, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 670,000.00

This project explores post-wildfire flooding risks facing communities and
neighborhoods that have developed at the base and long the slopes of mountains
in the western United States. These kinds of developments have and continue to
expand throughout the southwestern and western United States as urban and
suburban areas move into wildland areas. Post-wildfire flooding can be
ultrahazardous due to its rapid-onset, high-velocity, and erosive potential,
leading to debris-laden flows with unpredictable paths. This project will
advance understanding of these flood risks, and opportunities for increased
flood resilience, considering three interwoven elements: environmental hazards
(wildfire, mud/debris, and flooding), the built environment (stormwater
infrastructure), and human populations. Working with environmental and socio-
economic data from across Riverside County, California – part of the Los Angeles
Metropolitan Region– innovative models that integrate the effects of fire,
debris basins, and flood control channels on flood and debris hazards will be
co-developed with community partners and applied to estimate how exposure varies
spatially and over time. Hazard estimates will be combined with household survey
data capturing hazard awareness, perceptions, and preparedness to characterize
variations in risks and risk perception across the area’s diverse socioeconomic
population. This research supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science and to advance our national welfare by generating both tools and
insights to improve flood risk awareness and preparedness, which will save
lives, reduce economic losses in future events, and enhance community
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change and urban expansion are leading
to an escalation of flood and debris risks. Global warming is resulting in more
intense and frequent wildfire during Summer and Fall and more intense
precipitation in Winter and Spring. Furthermore, awareness and preparedness for
flooding is hypothesized to be especially low among residents, particularly
because the arid southwest is known for “unpredictable flow path flooding” that
occurs after flood controls system are clogged with debris and/or overtopped.
This project will advance an innovative stochastic modeling framework for
estimating present and future flood and debris hazards facing development – a
systematic approach for capturing the uncertainty in rainfall patterns,
wildfires, the performance of flood control infrastructure, and climate change.
Furthermore, the spatial distribution of hazards will be mapped using fine-
resolution flood hazard models and intersected with socioeconomic data and
indicators of vulnerability drawn from a household survey of flood awareness and
preparedness, yielding important new insights into risks and risk perceptions.
Finally, the research team will partner with public works and emergency
management personnel from local and state government to co-develop data products
and tools for flood risk management, and to make these tools widely available
for post-wildfire flood risk management. Publications, software, and data
derivatives generated during this project will be made available on the project
website, GitHub and public data repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.