* 2031218
* RAPID: High-Throughput and Low-Cost Testing of COVID-19 Viruses and Antibodies through Compressed Sensing and Group Testing
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Weiyu Xu, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2022
* USD 149,999.00

Large-scale, high-throughput and accurate COVID-19 virus and antibody testings
are vital tools in the fight against the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Public
health experts believe that mass virus and antibody testings are essential to
stopping spread of COVID-19 viruses, and enabling a safe and fast transition to
normal social life. However, current testing capacity is limited, and, in
addition, there is often a shortage of reagents needed for performing tests.
There is an urgent need to increase the current testing capacity in the United
States and around the world. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project seeks
to significantly increase the throughputs of COVID-19 virus and antibody
testing, and reduce reagent consumptions through mathematical and signal
processing methods, without sacrificing test accuracy. This project promotes the
science of detecting and quantifying virus and antibody. This project serves the
national interest and advances national health, prosperity and welfare by
enabling large-scale COVID-19 virus and antibody testing, effective contact
tracing and a safer, faster transition back to normal economic activities. The
methods proposed in this project are also applicable to testing for other
infectious diseases. If successful, research outputs from this project can be
used as lively examples to inspire the public and K-12 students' interest in
STEM education and research by showing the power of STEM in fighting the
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One simple method to increase the effective
testing capacity is to perform testing on pooled samples of a number of subjects
collectively instead of testing samples from each person individually. Pooled
testing has been successfully used for infectious disease testing such as Human
Immunodeficiency Virus in the past. While a simple version of this idea called
group testing goes back many decades, this project proposes to develop a novel
more powerful and general type of pooled testing based on the compressed sensing
theory, which includes group testing as a special case. In virus testing,
standard swab tests use the Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction
(PCR) process to selectively amplify DNA strands produced by viral RNA specific
to COVID-19 viruses. The widely used quantitative PCR (qPCR) process allows not
only binary detection (presence or absence) of a target RNA sequence, but also
quantification of the RNA, producing estimates of the quantity of the RNA in
test samples. This quantification can enable compressed sensing for pooled
testing in virus testing, which can potentially significantly increase test
throughput, reduce the number of needed tests, reduce consumption of scarce
reagents, and provide quantitative results robust against observation noises and
outliers. The proposed work includes designing optimized pooled measurements,
and optimized inference algorithms for compressed sensing and group testing in
COVID-19 virus and antibody testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.