* 2031756
* RAPID: Mathematical Models for Understanding Key Epidemiological Parameters and Transmission of SARS-CoV-2
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Ruian Ke, New Mexico Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 05/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic, caused by SARS-CoV-2, represents a true global emergency
and crisis that needs to be addressed immediately. Currently we do not have a
good understanding of quantitative estimates of key epidemiological parameters,
such as the time from infection to becoming infectious, the duration of
infectiousness, and how these durations are affected by symptom severity. We do
not know how much transmission is driven by asymptomatic individuals and
individuals with mild, moderate, or severe symptoms. Lastly, we do not know how
the viral load relates to the infectiousness of an individual. By constructing
multiscale models and integrating multiple streams of data from different
biological scales into a coherent model framework, the project will address
these unknowns through mathematical modeling and thus advance our understanding
of COVID-19 transmission. This understanding will be then used to make precise
predictions and evaluations of the impacts of interventions, i.e. much needed
intellectual advancement to address the current COVID-19 global pandemic. The
results of the project will be presented to public health professionals and
government officials to aid decision making through regular meetings and
connections that the team members participate and maintain. For example, co-PI
Ke regularly participates in weekly CDC modeling group meetings and in monthly
meetings with a working group commissioned by the White House called PPFST. Co-
PIs Hengartner and Romero-Severnson have close connections with the New Mexico
Department of Health. The PIs will ensure that the project is designed and
formulated to address critical public health questions and that the results can
be used by public health officials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research project is to advance the fundamental understanding of key
epidemiological parameters and determinants for SARS-CoV-2 that are essential to
better quantify and predict SARS-CoV-2 transmission dynamics. The investigators
will use mathematical modeling of SARS-CoV-2 dynamics across multiple scales.
First, the PI will develop within-host models of SARS-CoV-2 infection and will
fit the model to data from literature to estimate parameters such as the time
from cell infection to release of virus into bodily fluids, the rate of viral
production from infected cells, the infected cell lifespan, and other factors
that link to transmission and disease severity. Another aim is to use the model
to predict the effectiveness of drug therapy as a function of person's viral
load. Second, the PI will tie the within-host dynamics to clinical factors, such
as the time between infection and viral shedding, time to symptoms, and in some
cases to time of death, which are important in understanding transmission
dynamics and intervention effectiveness. Ultimately, this project will provide a
quantitative framework to evaluate the effectiveness of pharmaceutical and non-
pharmaceutical interventions, e.g., quarantine, school closures, and other means
of social distancing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being awarded using
funds made available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act supplement allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.