* 2031464
* An HBCU Community of Practice to Prepare and Support Teachers to Teach Rigorous Computer Science Courses in Culturally Diverse School Districts
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Erin Lynch, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 10/31/2024
* USD 1,998,488.00

While Black people comprise 13 percent of the U.S. population, they represent
only 7 percent of the computing workforce. Even more unsettling, of the many
computational occupations, the majority of that 7 percent are “computer support
specialists.” HBCUs are uniquely positioned to increase the number and
percentage of Black people in the computing workforce. Of the 100 HBCUs that
qualify for federal support, 11 are among the top 100 postsecondary institutions
for graduating Black students in Computer Sciences and Math. Moreover, the
educational outcomes for underrepresented students in college often depend on
the instruction they received in high school. Therefore, the Quality Education
for Minorities (QEM) Network in partnership with L.L. Burge and Associates, LLC
will leverage HBCUs to facilitate a series of professional development trainings
for high school CS teachers in districts that are diverse socially, culturally,
and economically. This will not only increase the number of high school teachers
qualified to teach CS courses, but will also build a community of educators,
HBCU CS departments, and inclusive CS curriculum developers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The QEM Network in partnership with L.L. Burge and
Associates, LLC will plan and conduct a series of culturally responsive
Exploring Computer Science (ECS) PD trainings for teachers in SCED school
districts. The project builds upon a previous NSF-funded project, CS 10K: The
Partnership for Early Engagement in Computer Science High School (PEECS-HS)
Program: Exposing Students to Computer Science in Washington, DC Public Schools
project, which provided professional development to in-service teachers in the
District of Columbia Public Schools (DCPS). The current project will position
two HBCUs (Florida Memorial University and Kentucky State University) as central
to a strategy that will provide a deeper context for the training and contribute
to long-term community building with adjacent school districts. The two HBCUs
have ABET accredited computer science programs and state accredited teacher
education programs. The project goals are to: (1) Position HBCUs as a strategic
resource for SCED school districts to receive high quality, socially conscious
CS PD for their high school teachers; (2) Use ECS to increase the number of high
school teachers in SCED school districts with the training and credentials
necessary to teach CS courses and prepare high school students to pass CS AP
exams; and (3) Build a community of&lt;br/&gt;practice/change whereby newly
credentialed CS teachers in SCED districts can form long-term reciprocal bonds
with other educators from their districts, HBCU CS departments and the ECS
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.