* 2031333
* Sensor Fault Detection and Diagnosis for Enhanced Safety of Autonomous Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Dennis Bernstein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 12/31/2023
* USD 376,692.00

Many modern systems such as autonomous vehicles and manufacturing systems
operate under the control of a computer. All of these systems rely on sensors,
which measure things like speed, temperature, and pressure. If one of these
sensors fails, however, then the computer may take an incorrect action that can
hurt people or damage property. Therefore, it is extremely important to ensure
all of the sensors that provide measurements for the computer are working
correctly. This project aims to enhance the safety of these systems by
developing methods for checking on whether the measurements provided by the
sensors are correct and can be used safely by the
computer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptive delayed left inversion (ADLI) constructs
a causal, delayed left inverse of a dynamical system that represents the
relationship between two sets of sensors, namely, input sensors, which are
suspect, and output sensors, which are assumed to be healthy. Multiple
combinations of sensors will be considered in order to determine whether the
output sensors are indeed healthy. Measurements from the healthy sensors are
used to drive the delayed left inverse, whose output provides estimates of the
expected measurements from the suspect input sensors. By comparing these
estimates with the actual measurements, it is possible to detect and diagnose
sensor faults. ADLI will be applied to discretized nonlinear kinematic
differential equations that relate signals from multiple sensors, thus,
providing the means for sensor fault detection and
diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.