* 2031662
* RAPID COVID-19: Sociotechnical Systems and Complexity Reduction: Enhancing Access to Digital Essential Services for Low-Income Communities during a Public Health Crisis
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Tiffany Veinot, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2022
* USD 199,931.00

This RAPID research will assess and develop remedies for the problems low-income
Americans have using online systems for communicating with clinicians and
getting accurate and timely medical advice from them, especially crucial during
the current crisis. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in disruptions in the
usual operations of healthcare services. However, such services are more
essential now than ever; consequently, many organizations have rapidly
transitioned to providing them digitally. Yet, these efforts are impeded by the
lack of preexisting socio-technical infrastructures. It is also unclear what
role the complexity of tasks, systems, resource requirements, and overall
processes plays in the ability of low-income users to use such services, and
whether they may benefit from service digitization. This is critical to
understand in low income communities where many residents have limited access to
broadband Internet and newer devices, and have fewer digital literacy skills.
Consequently, they are more likely to experience barriers to digital service
use. This is cause for concern since health informatics research has shown that
technologies that increase effort for health-related activities can widen
socioeconomic inequalities in health. However, past human-computer interaction
research suggests that intermediaries such as non-profit organizations and
family members can mitigate such barriers in low-income contexts. In line with
NSF RAPID goals, the study will gather ephemeral data concerning the challenges
faced by a cadre of first-time, low-income telehealth users. It will also gather
information concerning technology intermediation during this crisis, including
ad-hoc and temporary solutions that may soon disappear or fade from memory, and
will disseminate results quickly in order to reduce harm to low-income Americans
during this health crisis.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address
these difficulties and prevent unequal benefit through sociotechnical design for
complexity reduction, including use of technology intermediaries. Study Aim 1 is
to assess the complexity of telehealth services for low-income residents of the
Detroit metropolitan area, and create methods for simplification. This will
involve heuristic evaluation, remote user evaluation of existing telehealth
services with low-income Metro Detroiters, and design of a "simplified process
intervention." Aim 2 is to develop a novel intervention for access to essential
telehealth services in which trained masters students will serve as
intermediaries for federally-qualified health center (FQHC) patients as they
access telehealth - many for the first time. Design of this intervention will
build on insights from interviews with formal and informal technology
intermediaries for Metro Detroiters, and people who have used intermediaries.
Aim 3 involves a pilot evaluation of the interventions from Aims 1 and 2.
Interviews, observations, and surveys will assess patient response to the
interventions, and intermediary work. Electronic health record and telehealth
platform data will be used to evaluate impact on health care access in the form
of call quality and length. The research will also investigate potential
differences based on patient demographics. This project involves collaborations
among university researchers, a Metropolitan Detroit-based FQHC with six
clinical locations, and a nonprofit organization focused on economic opportunity
for Detroit residents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.