* 2031497
* Creating Educational Pathways and Cultivating Leadership at a Hispanic-Serving Regional University to Prepare Undergraduates for STEM Careers in Water Science and Technology Fields
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Joseph Simpson, Texas A&M University-San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 02/28/2026
* USD 649,996.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. To do so, it will support the
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students at Texas A&amp;M
University-San Antonio, a four-year regional, Hispanic serving institution. Over
its five-year duration, the project will provide scholarships to 33 full-time
students. The Scholars will be selected as five annual cohorts and include
first-year students and third-year transfer students. They will receive one to
four years of scholarship support as they pursue bachelor’s degrees in Biology,
Water Resources Science and Technology, Mathematics, or Electronic Engineering
and Technology. The Scholars will work with faculty research mentors on regional
water resource challenges. Examples of research projects include analysis of
water security in the increasingly urbanized areas of south-central Texas and
design of low-impact restoration and development in sensitive watersheds.
Because the University’s undergraduate student population is predominantly
Hispanic, low-income, and first-generation, the project has the potential to
diversify the STEM workforce, particularly in water-related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The project’s specific aims include: 1) developing
student-faculty mentorship and learning assessment tools that elevate Scholars’
academic and career success; and 2) designing and implementing curriculum/co-
curriculum improvements to prepare students for impactful STEM careers in water-
related fields. Project investigators will test the hypothesis that basing
learning activities on an issue of regional and social significance (water
science and technology) will promote the Scholars’ scientific identity and
bolster their academic achievement. The project team will also investigate the
differential effects of scholarship selection criteria, length of scholarship,
the status of cohorts, and the types of mentorship practices on Scholars’
academic achievement. The project will be evaluated using performance metrics
from both faculty mentors (types of practices and their duration and frequency)
and Scholars (academic performance, retention to graduation, graduate school
matriculation). Project results will be made available through campus-wide
seminars, workshops for schoolteachers, STEM education and professional
conferences, and peer-reviewed publications. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.