* 2031509
* RAPID: Open Research Infrastructure for COVID-19 Ventilator Data
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Daniel Marlow, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 04/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The lungs are a key avenue of attack for the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Respiratory
problems are primary symptoms of COVID-19, and early indication is that it does
not behave like previous examples of Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS).
A severe urgency exists to understand how to provide optimal care for patients
requiring artificial ventilation, to minimize both mortality and adverse long-
term effects on those patients who survive. The project will illuminate lung
function under the stress of COVID-19 and provide open tools to engage the
larger community to help understand this very urgent societal problem. The
project output will include instrumentation advances, software and data, as well
as models of lung function under the stress of COVID-19. The project will also
inform the medical community as to how to treat COVID-19 patients, because
COVID-19 differs notably from prior experience with
ARDS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Respiration and lung function is fundamentally a
dynamical physical system amenable to traditional pressure/volume/flow
relationships, with a quantity called "lung compliance." COVID-19 is unique, in
that the underlying biology can lead to changes in the parameters of this
dynamical system that are surprisingly fast, and different from previous ARDS
cases, on the time scale of hours or days. Medical personnel need to navigate
the evolving nature of the consequences of the viral infection as well as
mechanical ventilation induced lung inflammation and potential injury, with
outcomes ranging from recovery with varying impacts on post-illness lung
function to death. This project consists of three related activities: (1)
Instrumentation: Continued development of a low-cost, open-source ventilator
monitor, including additional options for readily sourceable parts, and related
documentation on calibrations. (2) Data: Development, with the broader
community, of open datasets of breathing and ventilator data, including flow,
pressure, O2 levels, and derived quantities of interest to enable innovation and
machine learning in a space that otherwise lacks open data. (3) Models:
Development of open simulations, visualizations, and models for mechanical
ventilation and the breathing process, under stresses like COVID-19, that enable
a physicist's understanding of the system, enable innovation, and can
potentially aid the medical community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being
awarded using funds made available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act supplement allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.