* 2031626
* RAPID: CLEARED: Culture of Living-biopsies for Emerging Airway-pathogens and REspiratory Disease
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Brent Sumerlin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2021
* USD 138,793.00

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the lack of human cell culture
models available for studying this virus, and the devastating consequences of
this shortcoming as it relates to human health and disease. The proposed
project, known as “CLEARED” for Culture of Living-biopsies for Emerging Airway-
pathogens and REspiratory Disease, combines cutting-edge technologies in
3D-printing, soft tissue engineering, artificial-intelligence-enhanced imaging,
human lung biology, and virology to understand the spread of COVID-19 in lungs.
This will increase the knowledge of SARS-CoV-2 biology and transmission. The
researchers have developed the technology to grow portions of lung into living
3D-printed tissue structures that resembles the architecture found in the lung
in a liquid-like-solid matrix. Thus, this system more closely resemble the
environment in living humans versus standard cell culture. After infecting these
samples with SARS-CoV-2 virus, advanced imaging of these “living biopsies” will
be used to study virus spread from cell to cell, and the efficacy of therapeutic
treatments. Outcomes of the proposed research include: (i) Validating a standard
model system using human lung biopsies and known diagnostics in response to
SARS-CoV-OC43 infection; (ii) Determining how the disease develops and spreads
in biopsies infected with different human and bat coronavirus strains. It is
expected that this system will allow scientists to better understand virus
transmission and prevention. This project also supports the training of three
graduate students, leading to an increase in future workers to drive the
bioeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposing team hypothesizes that controlled
perfusion of SARS-CoV-2 in 3D culture models of human respiratory microtissue
explants can recapitulate early stages of SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19
disease. To test this hypothesis, PIs will establish a 3D model of viral
infection using living microtissue explants of human bronchus and peripheral
lung, quantify the early responses to viral infection using a novel 3D tissue
culture platform, and determine the spatiotemporal pathogenesis of different
human and bat coronaviruses strains. Preliminary data show that SARS-CoV-2
indeed infects the micro-tissues of bronchus and peripheral lung. This is a
transdisciplinary team of investigators from Astronomy, Chemistry, Medicine,
Engineering, Virology and lung biology. The proposed work is organized by two
tasks. Task 1 will validate a standard model system using human lung biopsies
and known host-response to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Readouts will include viral
titer, cytokine production and spatiotemporal imaging of viral replication in
response to coronavirus infection. Task 2 will determine the spatiotemporal
pathogenesis of human lung biopsies infected with different human coronavirus
strains (HCoV-OC43, HCoV-NL63, SARS-CoV-2) and one bat strain (btCoV-HKU3). The
heterogenous nature of biopsies will alter the viral titer and cytokine
production of biopsies compared to measurements in cell lines, and will provide
superior information about progression and virus spread through tissues than
standard cell culture technology. This RAPID award is made by the Physiological
and Structural Systems Cluster in the BIO Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.