* 2031677
* RAPID: COVID-19, Consumption, and Multi-dimensional Analysis of Risk (C-CAR)
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* David Watkins, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 05/31/2022
* USD 190,764.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has transformed household dynamics and dramatically
changed food, energy, and water consumption within the home. Stay-at-home orders
and social distancing has caused U.S. households to shift to working and
schooling from home, curtail outside activities, and stop eating in restaurants.
Furthermore, as many households face job loss and increasing home utility and
grocery bills, U.S. residents are experiencing the economic impacts of the
crisis, while at the same time assessing and responding to health risks. The
project team has a unique opportunity to study these shifting household
consumption and behavioral responses and quantify the associated economic and
environmental impacts. The team will collect household food, energy, and water
consumption data as well as survey response data from 180 participating
households in one Midwestern county and compare it to data collected before the
stay-at-home orders were put in place. Questions are being added to previously
administered monthly surveys to study participants regarding their perceptions
and behavioral responses to COVID-19, including changes in household consumption
habits and travel behavior, information sources, and health risk perceptions and
responses. With this data, the team will be able to produce timely research
results that inform current and future response policies to ensure food, energy,
and water security in times of public health crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
first-of-its-kind study will investigate how household behavior changes in
response to sudden exogenous events like pandemics, the persistence of those
changes over time, and the environmental impacts of changing consumption
dynamics. Results will offer novel insights on longitudinal processes in
household sense-making, risk response, behavior change under crisis, and
persistence. Specifically, the data can provide insight into i) how the pandemic
is shaping household consumption and COVID-19 related behavioral responses, and
the persistence of these changes over time; ii) the environmental impacts of
changing consumption patterns, and the implications if changes persist; iii) how
behavioral responses vary based on socio- demographics, perceptions of risks,
information networks, and institutional trust; and iv) how pandemic perceptions
and responses correlate with those associated with other socio- environmental
risks such as climate change. Outcomes from this study will improve
understanding of how to identify and address the material and emotional risks
U.S. residents are facing under this crisis. Identifying changes in household
economics and challenges to provisioning food, energy, and water can improve the
collective ability to aid households in responding to these ongoing challenges
and mitigate future shocks to supply systems. In addition, empirical evidence of
consumption changes that benefit the environment and that households can readily
adapt into their routines may provide important insights on potential pathways
towards sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.