* 2031237
* PlantSynBio:  A Novel CRISPR SynBio Tool for Investigating and Reprogramming the Regulation of Alkaloid Biosynthesis in Catharanthus roseus
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Erin Cram, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2024
* USD 968,613.00

Plants have developed elaborate mechanisms for responding rapidly and
specifically to changes in their environment. For instance, in response to
attack by pathogens, insects, or herbivores, plants strategically redirect their
energy and resources from growth and development towards the production of
defense-related compounds. The production of defense-related compounds is also
carefully controlled by the plant to limit the costly expenditure of energy and
resources. The fundamental scientific contribution of this research is to
understand how plants rapidly and efficiently coordinate and control this
defense response at the molecular level. This project develops and implements
novel experimental tools to characterize and investigate the processes that
regulate the production of terpenoid indole alkaloids in the plant Catharanthus
roseus. The study has the potential to hasten the investigation and consequently
the solution to challenges in engineering hardy crops and producing important
medicines while providing fundamental understanding of plants. There is broad
interdisciplinary dissemination of this science through teaching and the
mentoring of high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand how plants rapidly and efficiently
coordinate and control their defense response at the molecular level, the model
system selected for this research is the Catharanthus roseus plant. This plant
produces the valuable compounds known as terpenoid indole alkaloids (TIAs) upon
herbivory; important TIAs from this plant include the chemotherapeutic drugs,
vinblastine and vincristine. To elucidate the regulation of TIA biosynthesis,
the first aim of this research identifies potential transcription factors
involved in controlling TIA biosynthesis. The second aim designs, builds, and
tests a novel synthetic biology tool based on CRISPR-dCas, to simultaneously but
independently regulate the expression of multiple transcription factors. This
validated synthetic biology tool is then applied to reprogram the regulation and
production of TIAs in transgenic plants or tissue cultures. This research
contributes a novel synthetic biology tool that will be made available for
diverse applications in the plant community, will reveal how plants rapidly and
efficiently coordinate and control the defense response, and will enable
strategies for reprogramming and enhancing TIA
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.