* 2031377
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Rethinking Fuzzing for Security
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Jun Xu, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2022
* USD 596,034.00

In software, a vulnerability is a flaw in the code that can be exploited by a
malicious actor to perform unauthorized activities or change the behavior of the
software. Although a topic heavily studied by security researchers, finding
software vulnerabilities is becoming increasingly challenging because the
software widely used in day-to-day life is growing larger and more complicated.
This project addresses this challenge by rethinking a classic technique called
fuzzing for finding vulnerabilities from large software. The high-level idea of
fuzzing is to create a large number of random inputs to run software and in turn
trigger vulnerabilities. The novelties of this project are the new approaches,
techniques, and tools that revolutionize fuzzing and make the nearly random
testing process more intelligent and targeted. This way, this project will
enhance security of various types of widely used software, ranging from web
browsers to server-side programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To that end, this project
is investigating vulnerability-coverage-driven fuzzing. Existing fuzzing
techniques primarily followed an approach called code-coverage-driven fuzzing,
motivated by the belief that code coverage and vulnerability finding are
strongly correlated. Challenging this widely held belief, this project shows
that code coverage has weaker-than-expected ties with vulnerabilities and code-
coverage-driven fuzzing is not well suited for vulnerability finding. Pioneering
vulnerability-coverage-driven fuzzing, this project invents a series of novel
techniques to (1) obtain feedback on vulnerability coverage (2) prioritize test
inputs that can reach more vulnerabilities and (3) maximize the chance to
trigger vulnerabilities reached by the test inputs. This project also produces
new metrics, new benchmarks, and new frameworks for comprehensively evaluating
the use of fuzzing for vulnerability finding. With the investigators' experience
in research of software security and system security, this project provides a
group of education, training, and research opportunities for both undergraduate
and graduate students. Through industry outreach, the investigators pursue
technology transfers and raise the awareness of software
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.