* 2031546
* RAPID: Learning from the Experiences of COVID-19 Survivors
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Temiloluwa Prioleau, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,736.00

Comprehensive knowledge about the novel coronavirus is significantly hampered by
sparsity and in many cases a complete absence of data about the millions of
people who have been affected. There are still many unanswered questions about
symptoms, transmissibility, severity, treatment, and recovery. In addition, it
is not fully understood why COVID-19 disproportionately affected certain racial
and ethnic populations in the United States. This project aims to improve
collective understanding of COVID-19 incidences by collating and learning from
the first-hand experiences of survivors. The large majority of whom are amongst
the affected individuals that journeyed through their illness in isolation with
little to no medical guidance due to limitations in testing and overburdening of
healthcare facilities. This project is advancing science by building
experiential datasets on COVID-19 to support further research, helping the
society at-large understand the different facets of the virus, and training a
next generation of data and computer scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At its
core, this RAPID project aims to develop and leverage datasets to advance
investigations on COVID-19 and inform existing knowledge gaps about the
pandemic. This will be achieved through three aims: 1) develop and deploy a data
collection platform for collating experiential data from persons who have
recovered from COVID-19, including a population of Black Americans to elucidate
insights on health disparities, 2) develop computational tools to transform
unstructured and distributed data from reputable online sources into a machine-
readable format on a centralized platform for research, 3) apply data analytics
methods to the above datasets to discover insights about contraction,
transmission, severity, coping strategies, and much more. This research has
potential to advance science and engineering through data-driven investigations
that can increase knowledge on the COVID-19 and enable greater understanding of
health disparities associated with the pandemic. Such knowledge can have a
profound impact nationally and globally given the large footprint of the
virus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.