* 2031726
* RAPID: Work, Family, and Social Well-Being among Couples in the Context of COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Boris Baltes, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 191,000.00

COVID-19 has disrupted daily work and home lives. More than 297 million people
in the U.S. have been placed on full or partial social distancing restrictions.
Millions were told to work remotely; others were deemed essential and found
themselves on the frontline of this unprecedented pandemic. More than half the
schools are closed, leaving more than 33 million children at home. Consequently,
millions of dual-income families have been forced to find new ways to balance
the competing needs of work and family while maintaining individual and
relational well-being. Prior to COVID-19, research consistently showed workers
to experience higher work-to-family than family-to-work conflict; however,
workers may now experience as high, if not higher, family-to-work conflict given
that they have to juggle work and family from the same location: home. Both of
these conflicts can have negative effects on individuals and families, including
psychological distress, anxiety, anger, guilt, and decreased couple relationship
quality. Most studies to date have tested spillover effects of work to family
conflict using individual-level data; few have examined the crossover effect
with both members included in the analysis, and even fewer longitudinally. This
project will survey and interview both adults of dual-income couples at three
time points to assess how work, family, and health among dual-income couples
have changed within the context of COVID-19. Findings from this project will
inform workplaces on the development of policies to support workers and their
families during times of crisis and return-to-work transitions, thus
facilitating recovery from this pandemic and preparedness for future extreme
events. These are key insights needed to train employers/workers on best
practices for employment interventions on family-friendly policies, facilitating
organizational change and contributing to healthy workplaces, thus facilitating
health and well-being and U. S. economic
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Covid-19 has disrupted work and
family arrangements owing to school closures, requirements for telework, and
social distancing mandates. This project uses a mixed-methods approach by
combining surveys and in-depth interviews with both members of a sample of dual-
income couples over one year. The project will collect data at three time
points: baseline (while most of country is under lockdown orders), transition
(after orders start to phase out), and adaptation (one year after the first case
of community transmission was detected). The project will use both a traditional
single person data analysis strategy, including growth curve modeling and panel
regression, and a dyadic data analytical method, the Actor-Partner
Interdependence Model, to analyze survey data (n=300 couples; 600 individuals).
For the qualitative data, the project will use a thematic analysis to identify
emergent patterns on perceptual/behavioral work-family conflict, workplace
resources/support, mental health, and relationships. The project will use the
qualitative software package NVIVO to manage interview data. Findings from the
project will inform sociological theories regarding work-family conflict and
accommodation, as well as theories related to the gendered division of household
labor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.