* 2031272
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Mathematical and empirical investigation of a reaction-diffusion system for spot formation in hybrid Mimulus
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Arielle Cooley, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 133,870.00

Life on earth exhibits a dazzling array of patterns. These range from internal
patterns, like the repetition of vertebrae in the spinal cord, to external
patterns like the stripes of black pigment on a zebra. There are two ideas about
how these patterns might form. The “positional specification” model is that the
patterns are created by a set of genes being turned on in specific locations in
a controlled fashion. The “reaction-diffusion” model is that patterns can arise
from a self-organizing system of interacting genes. According to this second
model, the location of each pattern component is determined by random
fluctuations in one gene’s activity level. Other genes in the network respond to
the first gene to create the elements needed for making a unit of the pattern.
Some traits, such as petal spots in the monkeyflower genus Mimulus, appear to
depend on both types of pattern formation. This petal-spot system is being used
to study both positional specification and reaction-diffusion, and how they
interact to create new, complex patterns in nature. The collaborative project
creates research opportunities for one Ph.D. student and eighteen
undergraduates. Three high school students will be recruited from a public
school in rural Walla Walla, WA that specifically serves youth not routinely
exposed to scientific experiences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Previous work in
Mimulus has established that nectar guide spots of red anthocyanin pigment are
formed in a manner consistent with a reaction-diffusion system. The discovery of
elaborate spot patterns in the petal lobes of Mimulus cupreus x M. luteus var.
variegatus hybrids creates a unique opportunity to examine (a) whether this
reaction-diffusion system explains floral patterning in Mimulus more generally,
(b) whether positional cues originating from petal vasculature shape these
patterns, and (c) how the inter-genomic interactions associated with
hybridization can generate novel phenotypes not seen in either parent species.
The researchers will first develop a reaction-diffusion model that recreates the
distribution of anthocyanin spotting phenotypes observed in a hybrid F2 genetic
mapping population. They will test this model by examining the diverse sets of
homozygous genotypes present in a Recombinant Inbred Line population, and by
using transgenic manipulation to alter the expression of key genes in the
anthocyanin regulatory network. Finally, they will investigate the hypothesis
that petal vasculature influences the location of spot formation. This will be
achieved by using digital image analysis and spatial statistics to test for
correlations between spot and vein locations, and experimentally manipulating
vein development through chemical and transgenic perturbations to test for
effects on spot formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.