* 2031467
* Computational Thinking and Physical Computing in Physical Education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Marcelo Worsley, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,024,084.00

This project is a research practice partnership that bridges computer science
and physical education. The research team and K-5 physical education and coding
teachers will co-design and implement learning experiences that incorporate
wearable technologies into traditional physical education and coding classes.
These experiences will help learners see the broad implications of computer
science on athletics and help them see how physical education can advance
computational thinking skills. The experiences will also engage students in
designing and inventing their own wearables. Finally, the project includes re-
envisioning how to assess learning in non-traditional computer science classes.
Collectively, the different components of this project help address three
important concerns: 1) a shortage of trained computer science teachers, 2)
limited time in the school day for additional course content, and 3) the need
for computer science education experiences that broaden participation. This
project will train approximately 30 educators who can sustain and grow this work
beyond the award period. Additionally, the project will reach more than 600 3rd
through 5th grade students and examine the impact that this project has on their
short-term and long-term interests, perceptions and knowledge of computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is informed by prior research on
constructionism, embodied cognition, culturally responsive computing and
practice-linked learning. These bodies of literature come together to create a
generative learning space that sits at the nexus of computational thinking,
physical computing and physical education. This integration will be realized
through activities that involve testing, critiquing, and designing custom sports
wearables. Teachers will design activities that encourage students to 1) collect
multimodal data (e.g. indoor location tracking, accelerometers, and bio-
physiological sensors) using commercial wearables; 2) use that data to answer
questions about their athletic performance; and 3) design low-cost prototypes
that enable further exploring and improving their physical performance.
Methodologically, this project uses a design based implementation research
approach to study the following questions: 1) What are the components of an
authentic and generative in-school learning experience that connects computing
and athletics? 2) In what ways do these experiences impact short-term and long-
term student and teacher perceptions, interest, knowledge and confidence with
computing? 3) How do we appropriately re-envision assessments of student
learning within these expansive learning environments? These questions will be
addressed using a combination of data sources and analytic approaches.
Researchers will use repeated measure statistical analyses of periodic
questionnaires to quantify changes in perceptions, interest, confidence, and
content knowledge. Many of the questionnaire items are drawn from the Computer
Science Teachers Association (CSTA) and International Society for Technology in
Education (ISTE) guidelines, and the STEM activation framework. These measures
will be complemented by bi-directional artifact analyses of student projects and
in-session observations. This bi-directional approach centralizes and
synthesizes learning processes and learning products. Finally, the project uses
student interviews and logs from a community-wide remote learning platform (EL3)
to construct rich long-term learning trajectories for student participants.
These data points and analyses will help surface some of the different pathways
students might take after engaging in expansive computer science learning
opportunities. Moreover, they will elucidate important design principles that
integrate learning sciences theory with the practicalities of school. This
project is funded by the CS for All program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.