* 2031920
* Collaborative Research: Equity of Access to Computer Science: Factors Impacting the Characteristics and Success of Undergraduate CS Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Christine Alvarado, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 11/30/2023
* USD 348,021.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
computer science education. It will do so by completing a research study that
can reveal potential systemic limitations in access to computer science
education by all students. This research study will examine ten-years of
undergraduate student application, admissions, and retention data from four
institutions. Analysis of these data will describe how students of varying
demographics and pre-college preparation are present throughout the computer
science talent pipeline. This study will fill an important research gap about
factors that affect the flow of students into and through the computer science
major. It is well documented that the demographic characteristics of computer
science students are highly skewed toward males versus females and have skewed
racial/ethnic distributions. What is not yet understood is at what point in the
talent pipeline these imbalances are greatest and the degree to which they
change as students progress through computer science undergraduate programs. In
addition, the current educational disruption caused by COVID-19 provides the
important and unique opportunity to determine what effect, if any, the resulting
educational changes have had on participation of different groups of students in
computer science. Students from underrepresented groups appear to have
encountered greater difficulty accessing distance learning and being connected
to the full range of educational opportunities presented by these unique
circumstances, which are very strongly related to technological know-how. There
is legitimate cause for concern that the pandemic will further divide the
advantaged from the disadvantaged, further marginalizing the underrepresented
groups that the project is studying from opportunities to advance into computer
science majors and progress successfully through them. Computer science is an
area of critical strategic importance for the nation, and a field in which
cultivating domestic talent can have enormous impact. Thus, examining pre- and
post- pandemic patterns of participation in computer science have the potential
to help the nation meet its growing needs for talent in computer science and
related fields, such as cybersecurity and artificial intelligence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use a large, rich data set compiled from
ten years of undergraduate application, admissions, and course-level data from
four institutions: Loyola Marymount University, Cal State University Long Beach,
the University of California Riverside, and the University of California San
Diego. Analysis of these longitudinal data will improve understanding of who has
access, who applies, who is admitted, and who succeeds in computer science.
Using classical statistical approaches and modern machine learning based
approaches to analysis of large data sets, the study seeks to understand how to
improve the inclusion of all students in computer science. It will supplement
this large-scale quantitative analysis with qualitative analysis of results from
targeted focus-groups and interviews. The qualitative analysis, coupled with the
quantitative analysis of longitudinal data from four institutions with different
student demographics and other characteristics, will provide a deeper analysis
of access to and success in computer science than any previous study. The
resulting extension of knowledge has the potential to lay the foundation for
achieving equitable access to computer science education for all students. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.