* 2031522
* START UP SJV: STEM Teachers Alliance for Regional Tech thinking through Underrepresented Professional development in the San Joaquin Valley
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Stefano Carpin, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

The University of California, Merced in collaboration with local school
administration officials, teacher preparation program staff, and both in-service
and pre-service teachers, will develop a Research Practitioner Partnership
focused on High School. The goal of the project is to create a self-sustaining
and scalable professional development program, called START UP SJV, to support
high school teachers who teach Computer Science. The START UP SJV program will
aim to help teachers improve their own computer programming and computational
thinking skills, so that they can better teach their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The START UP SJV project will develop an online
and supported educational and engagement platform called Compass to leverage
existing tools and curriculum from ECS and TEALS, and set up the materials with
accompanying exercises on the online Compass educational platform. The Compass
system allows participants to read materials, work on code, and get support all
in one place. To provide real-time support on the system, the PIs will recruit
advanced Computer Science Engineering undergraduate students from UC Merced, a
Hispanic-serving institution, who will sign up for course credit, and serve as
support personnel on the system, answering participant's questions and providing
overall guidance and support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.