* 2031785
* RAPID: Arresting the spread of SARS-CoV-2 on surfaces and in the air using engineered water nanostructures enriched with de novo designed neutralizing peptides
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Philip Demokritou, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The recent COVID-19 pandemic has spotlighted the problem of rapid transmission
of infectious diseases. The COVID-19 virus is transmitted to new hosts through
contaminated surfaces as well as through the air. The virus is known to survive
in air for hours and on surfaces for days. All current approaches for stopping
the transmission, such as masks, frequent hand washing, and social distancing,
are insufficient and cause other detriments, and the high numbers of
asymptomatic cases and shortage of efficient facemasks are driving the number of
infections higher. Current methods for general prevention of transmission of
airborne infectious diseases, such as air filtration, use of chemical gases
(such as hydrogen peroxide) and the use of ultraviolet radiation, have
significant shortcomings and health risks, and they cannot be implemented
indoors with people present. This project seeks to utilize the recently
developed (by the investigators) nanotechnology-based carrier platform using
Engineered Water Nanostructures to inactivate viruses. If this technology is
proved successful it can be scaled up and systems can be built and used in
various applications. This innovative technology is particularly applicable to
closed indoor environments and could help in battling the COVID-19 pandemic as
people emerge from their social isolation states and return to work. As a part
of the project, graduate and postdoctoral students will be recruited and trained
in interdisciplinary research. The knowledge gained through the project will
lead to better control and prevention of the COVID-19 threat.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this RAPID project, novel computational methods will be
used to design neutralizing disulfide-rich peptides de novo and functionalize
them to bind the spike protein of COVID-19 and block it from interacting with
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, its endogenous receptor. Then, such peptides,
along with other antimicrobials, will be incorporated in a nanocarrier platform
using engineered water nanostructures synthesized using combination of
electrospray and ionization. A thorough characterization of the physicochemical
properties of these water-based nanostructures will be carried out using state
of the art analytical methods. The capability of these materials to interact and
inactivate the virus on both the air and on surfaces will be assessed using
microbiological assays. The interdisciplinary approach of interweaving synthetic
biology with nanotechnology would provide a solid tool for tackling COVID-19 on
environmental media. Furthermore, the project will lead to the continuation and
enhancement of educational activities on emerging aspects of environmental
nanotechnology and nano-bio interactions. Results will be disseminated to
relevant stakeholders through multifaceted communication activities including
publications, conferences, and other out-reach activities. In summary, the
proposed nanotechnology-based method has the potential to transform the way we
currently control airborne infectious diseases. The social, technological,
scientific, public health and economic impact will be significant if such a
novel, sustainable, low energy, chemical-free and environmentally friendly
method is proven to be effective in the battle against
COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.