* 2031111
* RAPID: Sprayable Cellulosic Nanoparticle Coatings for Covid 19
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Jamie Hestekin, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 05/31/2022
* USD 194,865.00

COVID-19 has caused the entire world to go into an unprecedented level of
voluntary and involuntary isolation affecting mobility, health, and economic
stability. One critical, under-researched aspect is preventing the spread of the
virus through exposure to contaminated surfaces, which can remain contaminated
with active virus for several days. This project will lead to a new plant-based
nanomaterial coating to protect frequently contacted surfaces from
contamination. Specifically, this project will evaluate the effectiveness of
attaching different anti-viral chemicals on the plant-based nanomaterials and
testing whether they are effective in treating viruses including COVID-19. At
the end of this one-year project, it is expected that there will be a sprayable
surface coating that destroys viruses rapidly and thereby prevents the spread of
diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coating will be made from Oxone® modified
cellulose nanoparticles incorporating active chemistries made specifically for
destroying viruses. The researchers on this team have shown that they can use
click chemistry on cellulose surfaces which basically allow for any group to be
attached. All of the chemistries that will be studied have been approved for
decontamination by the Center for Disease Control so approval of this new
technology for widespread use could be rapid. Preliminary work has shown that
the coatings can be made in thin layers of around 4 microns with at least 10
different chemistries bound covalently with anti-bacterial properties to prevent
bacterial growth. In addition, the coating hydrophilicity can be tuned using a
hydrophobic wax and is also resilient enough to withstand at least 40 touches
when applied to a metallic surface before requiring reapplication. These
preliminary studies indicate that the new coating with chemistries for virus
destruction could be used for COVID-19 as well as a general anti-viral and anti-
bacterial coating for surfaces in the future. Specifically, this project will
evaluate the effectiveness of attaching different anti-viral groups in
deactivating a model virus using RT-PCR and determine the durability of varying
coating hydrophobicity on its adhesion to three model surfaces (glass, metal,
and plastic). The properties of the cellulose nanomaterial on virus destruction
and adhesion will also be studied. At the end of this one-year project, it is
expected that there will be a sprayable surface coating that destroys viruses
rapidly and thereby prevents the spread of diseases such as COVID-19. As part of
this project one graduate student and one post-doctoral student will be
educated. This spray-technology could also be used for making membranes and new
types of packaging materials that could significantly increase the use of
renewable cellulose. Finally, if successful, this project could be widespread
because it could be one of the only known ways to have continuous long-term
treatment of a surface that destroys COVID-19 and other viruses. . One graduate
student and one post-doctoral student will be educated as part of this project.
But the most exciting part of this project is the fact that the involved
students will have a profound and positive impact on the world. In a functioning
society, people must go out in the public to high traffic areas such as grocery
stores, hospitals, nursing homes, post offices, etc. This spray could be used to
prevent the spread of COVID-19 from all those doorknobs and handles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET) Division and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.