* 2031489
* GigCity CS4All: Creating an Inclusive 21st Century Gig-Enabled Teaching and Learning Community
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Joseph Kizza, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 269,916.00

Chattanooga, TN is among the top 10 fast-growing metro areas for advanced
industries, having added&lt;br/&gt;more than 3,000 high-paying jobs since 2010,
many of which are in the technology sector. Unfortunately, Chattanooga does not
have a district course pathway to prepare students to take advantage of and
thrive in these career opportunities. Through this project, University of
Tennessee Chattanooga (UTC) will partner with Hamilton County Schools (HCS) and
Chattanooga State Community College to develop a PreK-14 computer science (CS)
course pathway that integrates ongoing HCS initiatives and best practices
already in place in districts across the nation. The project team will implement
a small pilot of the program in eight schools. They will refine the program
based on the pilot outcomes, and they will create a scalable implementation plan
that broadens the participation of underrepresented groups, women, and
disadvantaged rural students in CS knowledge. This project will help HCS improve
student academic achievement, expose students to advanced coursework, increase
ACT scores, and improve district graduation rates. More broadly, this project
will be instrumental in developing a much-needed workforce trained in the CS
skills necessary to develop the next generation of technology-driven products
and services across a range of
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Tennessee Chattanooga
will partner with Hamilton County Schools (HCS) and Chattanooga State Community
College to formalize a GigCity CS4All Researcher-Practitioner Partnership (RPP).
Together with stakeholders, the RPP will develop and implement a PreK-14
computer science (CS) course pathway that integrates ongoing HCS initiatives and
best practices implemented in other districts across the nation. The project
will take place in three phases. In Phase 1, project leaders and stakeholders
will formalize the RPP and draft a GigCity PreK-14 CS/CT Pathway based on
ongoing HCS programming, as well as best practices from other districts
implementing current CS pathways. In Phase 2, the RPP will implement and
evaluate a small pilot of the CS pathway in eight schools representing diverse
student populations. In Phase 3, the RPP will focus on refining the CS Pathway
curriculum and professional development model based on results of the pilot and
focus groups with teachers. The RPP will also create a comprehensive
implementation plan to scale the model districtwide, as well as a replication
guide to support other districts. HCS educates a student body that is more
diverse than the state average, and the district includes urban schools in
Chattanooga as well as 19 outlying rural schools. The leadership team will
ensure that this diversity of voices are represented in this collaborative
project, and they will create an integration plan that broadens the
participation of underrepresented groups, women, and disadvantaged rural
students in CS/CT knowledge and skills which will be transferrable to a wide
spectrum of degree programs and careers. This project has the potential to help
HCS improve student academic achievement and district graduation rates. The
research will also contribute new knowledge towards the effectiveness of ongoing
CS initiatives within HCS schools, as well as known barriers to successful CS
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.