* 2031714
* SBIR Phase I:  A Wearable for Remote Monitoring of the COVID-19 Patient Population
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Alireza Akhbardeh, CEREVU MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop real-time monitoring of COVID-19
symptoms toward public health objectives. This project will provide healthcare
systems the ability to remotely manage patients during quarantine, protecting
hospitals and healthcare workers from unnecessary visits that can quickly
overwhelm the healthcare system. This remote monitoring will allow for early
identification of patients requiring hospitalization by continuously monitoring
key symptoms and notifying patients, caregivers, and loved ones when urgent care
is required. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project is to integrate a forehead patch, smartphone/tablet app,
firmware, and cloud-based data portal to continuously assess and monitor
COVID-19 patients. The first step will be to develop firmware to measure and
display key COVID-19 symptoms, such as changes in SpO2/hypoxia, heart rate,
respiration rate, and body temperature. The system will also monitor vital signs
including dyspnea, myalgia, coughing frequency, and coughing intensity. The
monitor user interface will capture non-measurable patient inputs, such as
consumption of fluids and food, gastric problems, changes in smell and taste
capabilities, and medication usage. Rule-based alert algorithms will be
developed to provide notifications to healthcare professionals when critical
condition thresholds have been triggered. A datahub and physician dashboard will
be developed to remotely monitor large groups of COVID-19
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.