* 2031281
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an oral recombinant subunit vaccine to protect against COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Elodie Burlet, VAXFORM, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 12/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a new self-administered vaccine
for COVID-19 using a novel oral delivery platform. This project will develop a
new technique to generate a strong immune response. It can be used in
formulating and evaluating potential vaccines for many diseases, strongly
supporting public health.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to develop an orally administered
recombinant subunit vaccine targeting SARS-CoV-2. This will be achieved by
adsorbing C-type lectin receptor agonist (mannan) and the target antigen
(receptor binding domain subunit of spike protein) to aluminum adjuvant,
followed by enteric microencapsulation for oral delivery, and spray drying. This
platform has been shown to successfully induce mucosal immune response, which is
ideal to protect against SARS-CoV-2, which enters via mucosal surfaces. This
project will also help advance the technology by further developing analytical
assays and optimizing the spray drying processes. Biophysical characterization
of the target antigen RBD and formulation development and will first be
conducted to achieve good antigen physical stability. Then, dried powder
processes will be investigated and optimized. The stability of the dried powders
will be analyzed in vitro by particle size, ELISA, during accelerated stability
at high temperatures, and in vivo in mouse immunogenicity studies, to further
understand the manufacturing process and its impact on vaccine stability and
potency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.