* 2031258
* Computer Science For and By Teachers:  An Integrative Toolkit for 3rd-5th Grade Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Dwayne Cormier, CodeVA
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 04/30/2024
* USD 999,985.00

Although many states now mandate computer science (CS) / computational thinking
(CT) integration into K-8 classrooms, there are still challenges to ensuring
that all American students have access to CS education. This project focuses on
two central challenges: teacher capacity to access and implement CS- and CT-
integrated curricular materials, and equity in CS/CT learning opportunities for
all students. In this project, CodeVA works in partnership with researchers from
the University of Virginia and Virginia Commonwealth University, and two
Virginia school districts, to develop and test a model to support elementary
teachers in the development and ongoing adaptation of their own culturally
relevant lesson plans that integrate CS and CT across core subjects (math,
social studies, science, English language arts). Through a process of
developing, testing and refining the model and resources, the project will
develop the model and supporting “toolkit” resources: a Computer Science
Integration Guide for teachers to use as part of their lesson planning process,
the development of an online professional learning community, an integrated
lesson library of over 200 teacher-created lessons, and exemplar videos that
will be used to help teachers visualize integrated CS and CT instruction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team uses a Design Based Implementation
Research approach to refine the professional learning model, and collect
qualitative and quantitative data, to investigate the impact of the professional
learning experiences and the toolkit resources as well as what is needed to
support the use and implementation of the tools. Research questions focus on how
the project activities help teachers develop culturally relevant CS integrated
lessons; how the teachers implement the lessons; the impact of the lessons on
student learning and interest, and the impact of the project activities on
teachers’ cultural competency, CS understanding and self-efficacy for teaching
CS. The project is informed by Culturally Relevant Teaching theory as well as
the Knowledge Integration framework. In addition to the toolkit of resources for
teachers, the project will share research findings with researchers and
practitioners; create white papers to support school administrators; and develop
policy briefs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the CS for All:
Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.