* 2031841
* RAPID Choices under Short-Term Threats and Behavioral Response to Social Distancing in the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* So-Yeon Yoon, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2023
* USD 102,708.00

Social-interaction restrictions have to be respected to contain the spread of
highly contagious diseases such as COVID-19. Ensuring compliance to strict
health interventions, however, needs better understanding of individual
decisions under risk. Until a vaccine is developed, policy makers not only need
to find the best incentives for people to avoid physical proximity, but they
also need to create plans for relaxing social distancing in the near future.
Behavioral forecasts from the models developed in this project help to guide
decisions in both cases. Specifically, this project provides answers to several
policy-relevant questions such as: What changes in social behavior are people
adopting in response to the disruptions created by the COVID-19 outbreak? Who is
more likely to respect health guidelines, including social distancing protocols?
What are safety/risk perceptions of physical proximity in public spaces
(pharmacies, grocery stores, take-outs at restaurants) and how are these
perceptions shaping daily choices? How to create incentives for individuals to
sustain social-distancing? How are COVID-19 disruptions causing losses in
individual welfare, and how can analysts derive metrics to value such losses?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the research team adopts and
significantly adapts crowding research tools and methods in retail and
transportation studies to analyze social distancing behaviors as preventive
action against threats to health. An innovate virtual-reality-based online
survey with choice experiments on social distancing collects time-sensitive
behavioral data. The data are modeled using micro-econometric discrete-
continuous choice models with structural equations for attitudinal components
and heavy-tailed error distributions for preference shocks. Unlike standard
thin-tailed distributions, error terms that exhibit heavy tails not only
generalize standard assumptions but also address decision-uncertainty behavior.
Flexible decision rules under risk are integrated into the discrete-continuous
choice models that represent time-use scheduling during total and partial lock-
downs. Ultimately, research outcomes from this study provide guidance to policy-
makers for how to best implement measures such as social distancing and
quarantines in order to control major epidemics, and then how to best phase out
these measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.