* 2031404
* Collaborative Research: Supporting Rural Paraprofessional Educators and their Students with Computer Science Professional Learning and Expansively Framed Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Victor Lee, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 07/31/2024
* USD 370,000.00

With the call to provide more computer science instruction to all students,
school districts are increasingly relying on a range of educators beyond the
classroom teacher to help teach computer science. In rural and small towns and
in districts with limited budgets, this responsibility is often assigned to
part-time paraprofessional educators, especially in elementary schools. These
individuals typically are hired from the local community and do not have formal
training in computer science or pedagogy. As teaching computer science
represents a substantial expansion and shift in their responsibilities,
districts are seeking ways to help these elementary school paraprofessional
educators learn to teach introductory computing concepts as well as provide them
with curriculum and teaching resources. This research-practice partnership
addresses the training and curriculum needs for elementary schools in a rural
serving district. This project will develop a model for supporting
paraprofessional educators’ learning in order to enhance their ability to teach
computer science. The model will also inform the development of instructional
materials that build on and connect to existing classroom-based mathematics
instruction such that mathematical concepts are revisited and strengthened in
the context of computing instruction. As the model builds on a widely used and
standards-based curriculum, it can be used by many other school districts. The
evolving nature and dynamics of the partnership itself will also be iteratively
examined and refined in order to generate knowledge of how research-practice
partnerships can be better structured for equitable participation and continuous
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance theory and knowledge
in three different areas: 1) the design and study of a learning model for
underserved and underprepared paraprofessional educators in rural areas who are
tasked with introducing students to computer science; 2) the design and
implementation of a curriculum that integrates classroom mathematics instruction
with computer lab instruction using a model of expansive framing; 3) the study
and documentation of the dynamics and influence of researcher and practitioner
partnerships, which are increasingly becoming prevalent in educational research
and as a school improvement model. A combination of research surveys, video
records of instruction, paraprofessional collaboration and learning sessions,
and interviews with stakeholders and educators will be collected. These data
will be used for research and for iteratively improving the design of
paraprofessional learning experiences, curricula, and the partnership structure.
Over 20 paraprofessionals and their 500 rural students will gain new skills
related to computer science during the course of this project. This project is
funded by the CS for All program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.