* 2031693
* Updating FishNet 2 to sustain its use in high-impact, global, ichthyological research
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Henry Bart, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 792,510.00

FishNet, and its successor, FishNet 2 (http://www.fishnet2.neT), have served the
needs of researchers for quality data on fish specimens in research collections
for the past 20 years. FishNet 2 currently comprises data from 75 institutions
globally and provides researchers access to 4.8 million records, representing
more than 50 million fish specimens. It is the most trusted source of
information and specimens for scholarly research on fishes. However, the
proprietary software on which the FishNet 2 was built has passed the end of its
service life and needs to be updated. Updating FishNet 2â€™s operating system will
require updates to the much of its software and other system components. The
proposed project will completely rebuild all components of FishNet 2 using the
latest technology and an Open Source environment. All components of the FishNet
2 cyberinfrastructure will be updated. The number of institutional data
providers to FishNet 2 will be greatly expanded. The process of harvesting data
from providers and processing the harvested data will be automated to keep the
data up to date. We will also offer a variety of support services for FishNet 2
data providers. A dynamic, relational database design will be implemented with
the flexibility to add data fields not currently reported to FishNet 2 users. A
number of new search and results-reporting features will also be implemented.
Lastly, new services will be added, including data quality assessment tools, a
FishNet 2-specific R package (statistical computing and graphics software), a
web forum for communicating with users and data providers, a FishNet 2 hosted
data publishing (IPT) service and a new and improved FishNet2 Application
Programming Interface (API).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Notices on all project
activities and all project products will be broadly disseminated to FishNet 2
data providers, software developers and members of the biodiversity informatics
community through web forums, conference presentations, scholarly publications,
and posts to the GitHub source code management service. We will provide training
workshops on use of new FishNet 2 features to FishNet 2 data providers and users
at ichthyological and informatics conferences. The FishNet 2 user base will be
expanded to include educators and the general public by integrating data from
FishBase and the Ocean Biodiversity Information System (OBIS) into FishNet 2
results reporting, and by inviting educators to serve on a planned FishNet 2
Testing and Advisory Group. The Testing and Advisory Group will also involve
FishNet 2 users and Tulane University Computer Science Capstone students, who
will be engaged in platform design and code development for the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.