* 2031172
* EAGER Research Organization Registry: An Open Science Approach to Linking the Products of Research through Open Affiliations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* John Chodacki, University of California, Office of the President, Oakland
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,267.00

Persistent identifiers (PIDs) are increasingly central to the research
landscape. In light of emerging open science guidance such as by funding
agencies, PIDs for institution affiliations is a relatively new development,
following PIDs for research outputs (DOIs) and for researchers (ORCID). Further
research and analysis is needed to better understand and explain where open
affiliation identifiers should be adopted, how they can connect to other PIDs
for research products, and how these linkages can be leveraged to both achieve
and enable open research practices across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;California Digital Library (CDL) will work with partners in the
Research Organization Registry (ROR) project to drive wide adoption of open
affiliation identifiers in research infrastructure. CDL will research the
current status of affiliation identifiers in existing infrastructure, explore
the measurable benefits of adoption of these identifiers with a specific focus
on how they enable open science, and develop tools and guidance to support
adoption by specific stakeholder groups. This project will result in new tools
and guidance for how open affiliation identifiers should be implemented and used
to contribute to a more connected set of research
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.