* 2031472
* Improved Understanding of the Moist Dynamics of the Extratropical Storm Tracks and Their Response to Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Paul O'Gorman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2024
* USD 440,059.00

At a fundamental level the frontal weather systems we see on maps can be
explained by the theory of baroclinic instability, in which small disturbances
grow by extracting energy from the temperature contrast between the warm tropics
and the cold poles. The theory works but it neglects the enormous heat release
that occurs when water vapor condenses to form clouds and precipitation. It is
reasonable to assume that condensational heating is destabilizing but our
understanding of its effects on the growth rate, propagation speed,
precipitation intensity, and other aspects of weather systems is quite limited.
The role of condensational heating is a practical concern as the amount of water
vapor in the atmosphere increases with temperature, thus one might expect more
intense precipitation and stronger storms as climate
warms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this award seeks to develop a theoretical
basis for the effects of condensational heating on baroclinic instability and
the dependence of these effects on global temperature. One target of the study
is diabatic Rossby vortices (DRVs, also called diabatic Rossby waves), which are
relatively small-scale weather systems fueled by condensational heating which
propagate quickly and can intensify rapidly into powerful storms. DRVs were
first identified in simplified model simulations but have now been implicated in
the development of severe storms like winter storm Lothar in 1999, among the
most destructive to hit western Europe in several decades. A more theoretical
concern is the effect of condensational heating on the most unstable baroclinic
mode, meaning the pattern of troughs and ridges that grows most rapidly for a
given middle-latitude temperature contrast and its accompanying upper-level jet
stream. Earlier work by the Principal Investigator and others shows that
condensational heating causes the regions of upward motion in the mode to
contract and become more intense relative to the regions of downward motion. The
narrowing and intensification of the updraft regions is important as it
increases the likelihood of extreme precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
has societal relevance due to its focus on the strength of weather systems, the
intensity of precipitation they generate, and the extent to which warmer
temperatures lead to more destructive storms. The project also provides support
and training to a graduate student, thereby contributing to the future workforce
in this research area. In addition, the Principal Investigator serves as a
faculty mentor in the MIT Summer Research Program, which seeks to increase the
engagement of undergraduate students from underserved minority groups in science
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.