* 2031748
* RAPID: Virtual Epidemics for Promoting Upper Elementary and Middle School Studentsâ€™ Immersion and Inquiry into Pandemic Outbreaks
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Yasmin Kafai, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Bradley Barker
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,306.00

This RAPID was submitted in response to the NSF Dear Colleague letter related to
the COVID-19 pandemic. Epidemiologists have long used simulations of epidemics
to better understand their complex dynamics. More recently, simulations have
been used as a teaching tool for public health prevention and protection
measures. Research has shown that through virtual simulations students can
better understand the underpinnings of disease spread and social interactions.
This project focuses on how virtual epidemics can engage teachers and students
(10-14 years old) as participants and epidemiologists to experience and
investigate critical aspects of epidemics, including characteristics that
highlight vectors of a COVID-19 outbreak. The project will use an online virtual
world called Whyville.net with over 8.4 million registered players (ages 8-16;
average age 13; 78% female) which is free of charge and commercial
advertisements. In the Whyville virtual world the project will launch a virtual
epidemic called WhyCough. WhyCough will provide students opportunities to learn
about epidemic outbreaks through immersion. Immersion in the virtual world
includes experiencing outbreaks, engaging in prevention, and promoting social
action and collecting data about outbreak, using simulators in a virtual CDC,
and writing about experiences. Students and teachers will have access to
supplemental materials for online discussions and activities. The project
activities will provide teachers and students with opportunities for learning
about infection, prevention, immunity and social interactions. Additionally,
participants will learn about societal reactions to perceived health risks in
order to promote a better understanding of infectious diseases on individual and
community levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to offer a
novel approach to learning about infectious disease, utilizing prominent
features of virtual worlds that include; persistence, real time, and personal
representation. The virtual world offers massive numbers of players allowing
students to experience and investigate a virtual epidemic outbreak. The project
will recruit at least 50 teachers and 1,500 students. Using a combination of
survey and observational methods, the research will provide further insights
into the design of large-scale online activities that promote a better
understanding of epidemic outbreaks and issues related to individual reactions
to those outbreaks. The research questions include: &lt;br/&gt;1. What
attributes of virtual virus design and associated activities do students find
most engaging? 2. What do teachers find valuable about the virtual epidemic
experience for student learning and engagement? What activities and innovations
do they implement in their classrooms? 3. What kinds of connections do youth
make from their experiences of a virtual epidemic to real life? The project will
make data sets from the study accessible to other researchers and designers
interested in understanding patterns of participation in massive communities.
Activities proposed for virtual epidemics in Whyville will be available for
adoption by other virtual worlds and networked games. The project will
communicate results via multiple channels across a wide range of disciplines and
audiences, including researchers, practitioners, and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.