* 2031245
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Experimentally Validated Modeling of the Dynamics of Carbon Dioxide Removal from the Bloodstream via Peritoneal Perfluorocarbon Circulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Joseph Friedberg, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 05/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project brings
together a multidisciplinary team of control engineers, biomedical engineers,
medical researchers, and clinicians to explore a novel pulmonary-independent
method for supplementing gas exchange in an animal. Specifically, the research
team will study whether the circulation of oxygenated perfluorocarbon (PFC)
through the abdomen (the peritoneal cavity) of a large animal, can serve as a
pathway for clearing carbon dioxide (CO2) from the animal’s bloodstream; and
what are the governing dynamics of this CO2 clearing process. The peritoneal
cavity essentially acts as a “third lung” in this scenario, providing critical
life support for patients whose compromised lung function has exceeded the
support achievable through mechanical ventilation. There is currently a critical
need for this treatment, within the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, but this
system also has potential to emerge as a standard modality in the critical care
of hundreds of thousands of patients in pulmonary failure. Furthermore, the
medical community will benefit from the deep fundamental understanding of the
CO2 removal capabilities of peritoneal oxygenated PFC circulation, which will be
an essential element in bringing this technology into future clinical
trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the challenge of building an
experimentally validated model of the dynamics of carbon dioxide transport from
the bloodstream of a large animal into oxygenated perfluorocarbon perfused
through the animal’s abdominal (peritoneal) cavity. Using the experimental data
obtained as part of this project, the team will develop and parameterize a
control-oriented, multi-compartment model of the transport dynamics governing
CO2 removal. While previous experiments on peritoneal oxygenated PFC circulation
have predominantly examined quasi-steady conditions, the research team will
ensure the richness of its data by deliberately designing the underlying
experiments to maximize the identifiability of the CO2 removal dynamics. The
result will be a dataset better suited for the modeling and estimation of
underlying system dynamics than the quasi-steady datasets. The system dynamics
and control community will benefit from the opportunity to apply its scientific
tools and methods to the dynamic modeling of a novel ventilation technology.
Particularly important is the degree to which such modeling can help broaden the
interdisciplinary impact of the dynamic systems and controls discipline to a new
health-related application technology. Addressing this research challenge
urgently, but rigorously, has the potential to provide critical assistance to
the medical research community, particularly considering the COVID-19
crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.