* 2031066
* RAPID: Collaborative Research:  Electronic Mentoring  to Address Challenges in Engineering Graduate Programs During the COVID-19 Pandemic
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2020,10/31/2020
* Guan Saw, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 10/31/2020
* USD 109,317.00

Researchers from the University of Texas at San Antonio and University of Kansas
will examine how electronic mentoring (e-mentoring) affects student academic,
career, and mental health outcomes during the COVID-19 pandemic. This is an
important topic particularly for faculty who are forced to continue mentoring
and supporting students through computer-mediated communication technology. The
study investigates the life and work challenges for engineering graduate
students affected by the COVID-19 outbreak and e-mentoring attitudes, support,
and practices at U.S. institutions. The research will yield important insights
about e-mentoring and generate empirical data to document the differential
impact of e-mentoring practices on graduate students. The research results also
will shed actionable guidance about how to address the life and academic
challenges of engineering graduate students affected by the COVID-19
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will examine four research
questions: (1) What are the life and work/academic challenges of engineering
faculty and graduate students affected by the COVID- 19 outbreak? (2) What are
the e-mentoring attitudes, support, ad practices of engineering faculty during
the COVID-19 outbreak? (3) How do engineering graduate studentsâ€™ perception of
e-mentoring support associate with their academic, career, and mental health
outcomes during the COVID-19 outbreak? and (4) To what extent do the
relationships between perceived e-mentoring support and student outcomes vary by
demographics, disciplines, and institutional characteristics? The conceptual
model for the study was derived from the literature on faculty-student mentoring
and adoption of new technologies/practices, face-to-face mentoring, and
e-mentoring. The researchers will employ a multistage stratified sampling design
to conduct two national online surveys using Qualtrics with faculty and students
.from U.S. institutions, including minority-serving institutions. Descriptive
statistics will be used to analyze the survey data. By highlighting the
differential e-mentoring practices and outcomes for underrepresented groups, the
project will offer evidence that can inform interventions aimed at broadening
participation in STEM during a crisis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is
made by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program in the Division of Graduate
Education/Directorate of Education and Human Resources, using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act. ECR supports
fundamental research focused on STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.