* 2031090
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Enabling the Development of COVID-19 Vaccines, Therapeutics and Diagnostics through Innovations in Measurement Science
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Merlin Bruening, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 04/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

This broader impacts of this proposed RAPID proposal is to provide critically
enabling measurement science tools to government, industry and academic
professionals engaged in mitigating the effects of COVID-19 through work from
the NSF Industry-University Cooperative Research Center for Bioanalytic
Metrology (CBM). Researchers at Indiana University have developed unique
instrumentation to determine the composition of very large particles such as
viruses, and they will characterize viruses, vaccine candidates, and antibodies
bound to viral particles. Making this unique instrumentation generally available
to researchers working on COVID-19 vaccines across the national network of
government, industry and academic researchers will quickly address the
measurement science problems that will inevitably arise during the race to
develop a safe and reproducible vaccine. In parallel, the CBM will address
challenges of rapid antibody tests that are not quantitative nor highly
sensitive, and typical lab-based methods for determining antibody concentrations
are long and cumbersome. Researchers at the University of Notre Dame and Purdue
University will develop devices to rapidly quantify the amount of COVID-19
antibodies in patient serum. Such analyses are vital for low-cost examination of
antibody levels (and hence immunity) over time. The proposed devices will
exploit a combination of innovative antibody capture technology developed at
Notre Dame, which provides enhanced signals, and Purdue Universityâ€™s expertise
in the development of point-of-care diagnostic devices. These measurements will
be important for investigating the problem of fading immunity and determining if
convalescent plasma from a given patient is appropriate for therapeutic studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed RAPID research aims to provide fundamental
knowledge of the structure of COVID-19 and its elicited antibody response.
Analytical and measurement science support of vaccine and biomolecular
therapeutic research is notoriously difficult. The molecules in question are
often too big and complex for standard characterization methods, and many
questions about heterogeneity, stoichiometry and structure cannot easily be
answered. Researchers will use advancements in Charge Detection Mass
Spectrometry (CDMS) and Ion Mobility Spectrometry (IMS) to study the
heterogeneity, stoichiometry, structure and interactions of viral protein
assemblies and to provide essential measurements for characterizing newly
developed vaccine and therapeutic candidates for COVID-19. The CDMS and IMS
tools at the CBM are unique and will allow researchers to directly observe
inactivated viruses, 'dummy' viral particles without nucleic acids,
bioconjugates containing immunogens on a hapten carrier, oligonucleotides,
antibodies complexed to target proteins, and antibodies bound to viral
particles. These instruments are starting to revolutionize the analysis of
bioconjugations, vaccine development, gene therapies and protein therapeutics.
Development of devices for rapidly examining antibody titer will rely on
antibody capture in porous membranes that have a long pathlength for sensitive
optical detection and a high surface area to volume ratio that enables efficient
antibody capture. Device design will exploit expertise in the development of
thin strip microfluidic diagnostics. Based on the fluorescence intensity of
captured secondary antibodies, these devices will provide a measure of the
abundance of different classes of COVID-19 antibodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.