* 2031925
* Collaborative Research: Leveraging historical collections and new surveys to characterize foundational shifts in vital symbioses in the threatened Arctic
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Anne Arnold, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 10/31/2023
* USD 443,935.00

All living things on Earth, and the environments that sustain them, are shaped
by symbiotic interactions. These interactions are important worldwide, but they
are especially vital for organisms that live in extreme environments such as the
terrestrial Arctic, where diverse but understudied symbiotic fungi (fungal
endophytes) live inside the healthy plants and lichens that drive ecosystem
processes. Fungal endophytes are hyperdiverse and represent a large fraction of
Earth’s undiscovered fungal biodiversity. They are important in shaping their
hosts’ responses to environmental stresses, including those intrinsic to the
Arctic as well as the rapid and pervasive environmental changes associated with
the warming of our planet. This project will discover and chart the diversity of
fungal endophytes in iconic plants and lichens of the Arctic, provide
information on how communities of endophytes have changed over time, and test
predictions about how symbiotic communities are sensitive to environmental
factors, with implications for understanding biodiversity dynamics in the vast
Arctic region and beyond. The scientific aims of the project parallel a
commitment to inclusively training and diversifying the next generation of
biodiversity scientists while contributing broadly to science, education, and
society. Overall the project will provide new insight into the biological
resources of the North American Arctic by discovering diversity, tracking its
environmental sensitivity over broad geographic, environmental, and temporal
scales, and contributing to training, education, and outreach relevant to
strengthening national resources in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will conduct two field campaigns to test predictions regarding endophyte
diversity, community composition, and distributions along transects that span
all major Arctic subzones in eastern and western North America. Endophyte
communities will be detected in representative plants and lichens via culture-
based and culture-free, next-generation sequencing approaches. Field- and
specimen-related data from these field collections will be contextualized by
surveys of endophytes in herbarium specimens of plants and lichens collected
over the past 100 years at these same sites, leveraging a recently validated
approach for accessing endophyte communities in preserved host tissues. DNA
sequences for newly discovered endophytes will be integrated into new tools for
mapping Earth’s evolutionary history and biodiversity, with a framework based on
more than 20 years of global sampling. Finally, genomic, phylogenomic, and
population-genomic analyses will be used to explore diversification of
endophytes and related fungi, with a focus on the most diverse lineages that
engage in these important symbioses. Through these endeavors the project will
generate and make public diverse new data, biodiversity informatics tools,
protocols, specimens, outreach activities, educational modules, and training
relevant to a wide array of disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.