* 2031496
* RPP HS Strand (Small): Preparing High School Teachers to Broaden Participation by Teaching Programming Online
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Florence Martin, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 10/31/2023
* USD 299,848.00

The University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNCC) in collaboration with the
North Carolina Virtual Public School (NCVPS) will partner with surrounding
school districts to build a Research-Practitioner Partnership (RPP). High
schools struggle to not train teachers to offer CS courses, but also to
diversify the students taking computing courses. This project will develop and
offer an online professional development course for high school teachers to
prepare them to teach computer science to diverse learners including learners
from underserved and underrepresented groups. This project will advance the use
of automated graders as well as culturally responsive instructional materials to
teach computing. In addition, this project will prepare the teachers with
strategies to effectively teach computing online which is essential to our
current society and to reach students who do not otherwise have opportunities to
study computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RPP partnership will leverage the AP
Computer Science A (APCSA) course offered online by NCVPS throughout North
Carolina. The project team seeks to enhance the teaching of Computer Science
content using online resources with a long-term goal to increase participation
in high school courses by students from traditionally underrepresented groups.
This project will address one of the structural constraints (e.g., not enough
teachers) faced when broadening participation using automated assessment tools.
Furthermore, to make computing relevant to a diverse student population, they
plan to create culturally responsive teaching materials and train teachers on
their use. The project staff will: (1) foster the development of an RPP with
NCVPS teachers, (2) develop and deliver an online course focused on how to teach
Computer Science online with a focus on Broadening Participation, (3) develop
teaching materials to train teachers on how to use automated graders in CS
courses, and (4) develop teaching materials to train teachers how to teach CS to
culturally and racially diverse students. This project will expand the offering
of APCSA to districts and schools that traditionally have been under served,
with the goal to increase the number of students from underrepresented and
underserved groups taking the APCSA course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.