* 2031246
* RAPID: Analyses of Emotions Expressed in Social Media and Forums During the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Megan Richardson, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2022
* USD 196,890.00

The investigators are constructing a comprehensive database that collects,
stores, and analyzes content related to fear, anxiety, sadness, and anger
associated with COVID-19 from social media and web-based forums. Prior
literature has demonstrated that stress can reduce decision making capacity and
quality. Online risks (e.g., privacy, security vulnerabilities) may have
increased as social media and web-based forums have become a predominant form of
communication. This dataset will establish a location- and time-linked record of
emotions that may be associated with increased vulnerability to virtual threats.
The data will permit analyses of risks such as sharing of more personal
information online, misinformation initiation and spread, relaxed security
preferences, and insider threat. A second goal is to answer fundamental research
questions about the linkages of negative emotions experienced during this
pandemic with regional variation and socioeconomic status. This research is
urgent and timely given that many online data sources do not archive data or
make archives available for analyses. This research advances science by
informing community response and policymaking during pandemics through an
analysis and understanding of how emotions are linked to local and regional
social and geographic indicators during the pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will collect COVID-19 data from 10-15 social media and web-based
forums from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. Data collection will begin
when Chinese authorities first treated pneumonia cases that later became known
as the coronavirus. The investigators will follow responses to COVID-19 for a
year to assess the public's emotional responses to the pandemic. To examine
health and economic disparities by region, the investigators will analyze
geolocated posts and integrate the data with variables from the Census Bureau
Survey. Artificial intelligence and data science techniques will be used in
processing and analyzing the large amounts of heterogenous data collected in
this effort. From these analyses, policies could be created to improve
prevention, security, privacy and other public understanding and policies during
the pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.