* 2031313
* SBIR Phase I:  Intravitreal oxygen nanobubble technology for treatment of retinal artery occlusions
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Wen Ren, REVIVE BIOTECHNOLOGY INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop and test a novel system to treat
blockages of the blood vessel to the eye, known as Central Retinal Artery
Occlusion (CRAO). Approximately 32,500 people are affected by CRAO in the U.S.
and currently no effective therapies exist for them. This project will develop a
treatment for this and related conditions caused by insufficient oxygen flow to
the eye. The proposed technology will increase quality of life and reduce the
burden of treatment for these otherwise chronic conditions.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
advance the development of dextran oxygen nanobubble (DONBs) for CRAO and other
ischemic retinal conditions. Acute hypoxic injury from artery occlusions
currently has no acceptable treatment. Mitigating the severity of insult due to
oxygen deficit especially during the first 24 hours is vital, before the onset
of permanent damage. The DONBs will be nontoxic, stable, have sufficient shelf
life for long-term storage, with sufficient oxygen carrying capacity and release
properties to rescue retinal tissue from hypoxia. DONBs can be delivered through
pars plana with a 30-gauge needle, allowing for safe delivery by injection into
the vitreous cavity, a well-accepted technique in ophthalmology. Unlike most of
the existing nanobubbles, the current formulation is perfluorocarbon-free,
nanometer in size (100 â€“ 400 nm), nontoxic, and directly injectable into the
eye.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.