* 2031157
* A Research to Practice Conference to Identify and Disseminate the Evidence, Characteristics and Program Models that Demonstrate the Value of Connected STEM Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Elizabeth Murphy, National Science Teaching Association
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 12/31/2022
* USD 74,998.00

The National Science Teachers Association will convene a conference that will
bring together STEM researchers and practitioners to review the growing
connected science learning movement. A connected science learning environment
has been described as a robust science ecology containing a wide variety of
programs, across a range of institutions and places, allowing youth different
and multiple ways to engage with STEM. Such environments can include small
partnerships, such as a science museum and K-12 schools, or a large, community-
wide network of a variety of organizations such as K-12 schools, museums,
universities, government agencies, and community organizations. The conference
will bring together over forty participants, who will meet in a series of
several online meetings. The conference will result in a series of papers,
articles in the online Connected Science Learning journal and other
publications, a series of webinars and online forums where participants can
engage with themes identified in the conference, and conference presentations at
the annual meetings of organizations including the National Science Teachers
Association, the Association of Science-Technology Centers, and others. This
award is funded by the Advanced Informal STEM Learning program which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference will: (1) document the research foundation that supports and
demonstrates the impact and value of high-quality connected science learning
experiences; (2) identify areas for which future research is recommended; and
(3) provide effective, practitioner-focused resources that advance connected
STEM learning. The conference will include participants that represent a wide
range of researchers and practitioners in informal and formal STEM education, as
well as representing gender, racial/ethnic and geographical diversity. The
results and products of the conference will be instrumental in developing the
understanding and appreciation for connecting STEM learning and ultimately
improving connected STEM learning for K-12 youth. The importance of emphasizing
diversity, equity, and accessibility will be strongly represented in the key
evidence identified through the conference and will be reflected in the
resources that will be disseminated to a broader
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.