* 2031269
* EAGER: Structural Basis for Assembly and Replication of Coronavirus
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Chad Rienstra, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2023
* USD 299,577.00

Molecular models provide essential insights that inform therapeutic strategies
to thwart viral infection and reproduction. A worldwide effort has been
mobilized to understand the properties of all 29 SARS-Coronavirus-2 proteins
with experimental and computational techniques. The nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) experiments in this project will inform efforts to model viral assembly
and genome replication of the virus and provide vital insights into critical
stages of the viral life cycle. Data from these studies will be rapidly
disseminated through public repositories where it can be accessed by the
scientific community to leverage for maximal benefit. This project will support
graduate student and post-doctoral training in NMR and collaborative science to
address pressing societal needs. Methods and data resulting from the project
will also be disseminated through the National Magnetic Resonance Facility at
Madison (NMRFAM) via its workshops, web-site and other outreach efforts to
inform the broader scientific community and public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal leverages existing collaborations and instrumentation at NMRFAM to
initiate NMR studies of the structure and dynamics of two SARS-coronavirus-2
proteins: nsp8 and membrane (M) protein. Nsp8 is part of several complexes
involved in efficient replication and translation of the large coronavirus
genome and is observed in multiple conformations in known structures. The
proposed research uses solution NMR to examine the ensemble of nsp8
conformations in the absence of any binding partners to understand how nsp8 acts
as interaction hub in assembly of these different complexes. The M protein is
sufficient for membrane vesicle formation and interacts with other structural
and non-structural SARS-CoV-2 proteins to assemble the viral envelope, exclude
host proteins, and incorporate nucleocapsid into the budding virus. The proposed
research uses solid-state NMR and in vitro assays to examine the structure,
dynamics and membrane interaction of M, in true lipid bilayers with functional
lipid composition, to provide insight into how it induces budding and assembly
of the coronavirus membrane envelope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award is
made by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.