* 2031097
* RAPID: Who is (Not) Complying with the Social Distancing Directive and Why?
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Russell Fazio, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2021
* USD 63,789.00

In the current COVID-19 pandemic, one approach to minimizing the spread of the
virus focuses on people’s behavior – social distancing. Since the start of the
pandemic, government leaders and health experts have requested citizens to
follow social distancing directives. Despite this repeated message and despite
the fact that many people are taking the message seriously, many others are
violating the new norms. That raises important questions: who is and who is not
complying, and why? Understanding why people choose not to practice social
distancing is crucial for designing effective public service campaigns. This
research investigates who complies, what specific beliefs should be addressed,
and what factors make public campaigns believable. The project seeks to identify
the factors that lead to greater compliance for the greater good, and will
inform future public service campaigns.

A series of studies examines how social distancing behaviors vary as a function
of belief systems. An innovative measure of social distancing is developed – one
that is more behavioral in nature than the typical survey. The critical beliefs
that are to be examined stem from a conceptual framework regarding a directive
as involving three essential components. One is the source -- someone is
requesting people to change their behavior. A second is the surrounding context
-- the request is in response to some challenge. The third component is the
target -- the persons to whom the request is addressed. Belief systems relevant
to each of these three components are expected to influence the likelihood that
people will comply with the request. As a result, an entire network of beliefs
is expected to influence how people respond and why. Some individuals’ belief
systems will lead them to view the request favorably, thus promoting appropriate
social distancing behaviors. Others will reach more negative conclusions and
subsequently refuse to take directives seriously. Once the concerns about the
pandemic have lessened, study participants will be re-contacted and asked to
again respond to social distancing behavioral scenarios and to indicate if they
had experienced virus symptoms in the interim. Those follow-up data will shed
light on the relationship between individuals’ social distancing behaviors and
their subsequent likelihood of infection. The research aims to inform theory
regarding social compliance processes, and will provide a stronger foundation
for developing future public service campaigns.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.