* 2031468
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Mathematics of Biological Ecosystems with Data Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* William Penuel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Using software tools to explore, analyze, visualize, and explain data is
increasingly common. However, the development of data science skills and
practices are still not common in much of K-12 education. This project will
create and study "data excursions," structured activities that develop high
school students' competencies with data practices and modeling within existing,
phenomenon-based science curriculum. Integrating the Common Online Data Analysis
Platform (CODAP), a free web-based data analysis and modeling tool designed for
students in grades 6 â€“ 14, the data excursions will allow students to interact
with existing datasets drawn from primary research. Students will learn to
aggregate and represent data to explain biological phenomena such as the spread
of antibiotic-resistant bacteria and population changes in the Serengeti
plains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use design-based research to
investigate how working with real datasets, creating computational
representations and using them to reason about ecosystem phenomena can support
students' development of data science literacy. Transfer tasks, classroom
observations, student interviews, and short exit surveys will be used to
identify what aspects of the interventions lead to desired learning outcomes.
The researchers will also develop professional learning opportunities for
teachers to help them create relevant and coherent materials for students from
nondominant communities. This project is funded by the CS for All: Research and
RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.