* 2031871
* Collaborative Research: Correlating Device Performance and Interfacial Properties for Weyl Spintronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Axel Hoffmann, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2023
* USD 298,154.00

This grant supports research into understanding new mechanisms by which
electrical currents can be used to switch the magnetic orientation of thin
magnetic layers in devices for data processing and storage. The use of current
pulses to alter magnetism is central to the operating principles of a variety of
electronic and spintronic devices. However, new materials systems are needed to
reduce the power consumption required for magnetic switching and to enable
future device scaling. This award supports fundamental research to identify
quantum materials known as Weyl semimetals that enable significant improvements
in the efficiency of current-induced magnetic switching. The project will
characterize a variety of Weyl semimetals for use in magnetic devices with
emphasis on understanding how the switching metrics are influenced by the
interfacial properties between the Weyl semimetal and the magnetic layer. The
project will also identify how Weyl semimetals can be used to enable switching
of perpendicular magnets to facilitate emerging device concepts. The insights
into how new quantum materials can reduce power consumption in electronic and
magnetic devices may lead to new advances in electronics and computing devices,
providing broad societal benefit. The studentsâ€™ research training enabled by
this project will serve to advance the U.S. economic interests by providing them
with the experimental skill set needed to contribute to the technological
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will lay the groundwork
for low-power spintronic devices through a series of research activities aimed
at providing a detailed understanding of spin-orbit torques generated by Weyl
semimetals. The charge-to-spin conversion process will be thoroughly
characterized at a series of interfaces between Weyl semimetals and
ferromagnetic metals to quantify torque efficiencies. The interfacial properties
of these same structures will be characterized using resonant x-ray
reflectivity, a technique that allows for both the elemental concentration and
magnetization to be determined as a function of depth across the interfaces. The
correlations between spin-orbit torque efficiency and the composition and
magnetic properties of the interfaces will elucidate the roles of intrinsic
(Weyl physics) and extrinsic (non-idealities at the interfaces) contributions to
the torques. These activities will yield a thorough understanding of spin-orbit
torques across real interfaces in device-based structures fabricated using
industry-relevant deposition processes. The research will also identify novel
spin-orbit torques, including those associated with an out-of-plane spin
polarization, enabled by the unique properties of Weyl semimetals and quantify
torque metrics relevant for non-volatile magnetic memory devices and thermally
driven stochastic oscillators, where the magnetization of the free magnetic
layer is controlled via spin-orbit torques. Through these research activities,
this project will advance progress toward employing Weyl semimetals in emerging
electronic and spintronic device architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.