* 2031951
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Measuring the Value of Anonymous Online Participation
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Rachel Greenstadt, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 594,784.00

Many ordinary people desire anonymous communication for good reason, such as to
keep their medical histories confidential or their finances to themselves.
People in totalitarian countries may want to communicate about their views
anonymously. This project could enable anonymous participation in spaces like
Wikipedia and Reddit, while avoiding the negative social behaviors for these
online communities of such participation. This research examines the trade-offs
in using users' identifiability to reduce bad behavior on online sites versus
allowing anonymity, which could allow some users to participate and possibly
contribute valuable content without fear of reprisal. The empirical research
will clarify the effects of online identifiability and anonymity in influencing
the production of counter-normative versus useful behavior, and explore ways to
introduce accountability into anonymous speech. The research could have
potential use for policy, and online communities and libraries. The project also
includes research experiences for teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
uses experiments to understand the effects of anonymity on contributions and
others' judgments, and qualitative research to understand service providers' and
users' beliefs about the threats associated with identified and anonymous
participation. The proposed software development has the purpose of reducing
inappropriate behavior by uncovering only identifying information that predicts
bad behavior. In addition, the empirical results will help answer fundamental
questions in social psychology about when anonymity is valuable and when it
encourages inappropriate behavior.