* 2031407
* Collaborative Research: Encoding Geography - Scaling up an RPP to achieve inclusive geocomputational education
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Atsushi Nara, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 419,996.00

The geospatial services industry is a profitable and rapidly growing field;
however, employers find it difficult to hire scientists with expertise in both
geography and computer science. The limited availability of training
opportunities in both computer science and geography has created a shortage of
workers with the necessary knowledge and skill sets for those jobs. Through a
Researcher-Practitioner Partnership (RPP), The Association of American
Geographers (AAG), in collaboration with Texas State University, the University
of California-Riverside, San Diego State University, the California Geographic
Alliance, Sweetwater Union High School District, and San Diego Mesa College,
will create an inclusive high school to college curriculum pathway that bridges
concepts in computer science and geography. This RPP will support the
development of a curriculum that is conceptually rigorous, inclusive, and
culturally relevant. It will also produce a replicable approach for teaching
geocomputation that is accessible and motivational for all
learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Association of American Geographers (AAG), in
collaboration with Texas State University, the University of California-
Riverside, San Diego State University, the California Geographic Alliance,
Sweetwater Union High School District, and San Diego Mesa College, proposes a
CSforALL-PreK-14 Pathways Strand project to scale up its Encoding Geography
Researcher-Practitioner Partnership (RPP) activities in California. This RPP
will pursue research and development activities supporting an inclusive
curriculum pathway toward geocomputationally intensive majors and careers. The
first year of the project will focus on baseline data collection. In year two,
AAG will convene a workshop with RPP members to produce culturally relevant
geocomputational lessons and being to implement those lesson in CS and geography
courses in high school and college. In the final year, the RPP will revise the
lessons for ongoing implementation. The AAG will also implement a dissemination
plan to scale up the RPP across California and to other states. An expert
committee will provide a formative and summative evaluation of the project. This
RPP will produce a replicable methodology for articulating curriculum pathways
in geocomputation that are inclusive, accessible, and motivational for all
learners. By involving the very stakeholders with whom the curriculum is
concerned, systemic change toward a more diverse workforce in geocomputation is
more likely to be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.