* 2031660
* Sustaining the USA National Phenology Network
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Theresa Crimmins, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 553,979.00

The timing of events such as leaf-out, flowering, migration, and hatch are a
strong indicator of plant, animal, and ecosystem response to rapidly changing
climate conditions. The USA National Phenology Network (USA-NPN) was established
with the primary aim of documenting the timing of such seasonal life cycle
events in plants and animals. A primary activity of the USA-NPN is to maintain
Nature’s Notebook, a phenology observing program used by thousands of citizen-
and professional-scientists for collecting and maintaining phenology
information, while approachable enough to be used daily by thousands of
volunteer data collectors nationwide. Further, hundreds of higher education
institutions and K-12 classrooms nationwide use Nature’s Notebook and consequent
data in inquiry-based learning and hands-on exploration of phenology and large
datasets. The observations generated through Nature’s Notebook are regularly
incorporated into scientific research and publications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide short-term, partial support for
USA-NPN team activities. This award enables the USA-NPN to continue to offer a
wide range of real-time phenology maps and short-term forecasts, maintain the
Nature’s Notebook program and infrastructure, support existing Nature’s Notebook
participants and group leaders, and continue to engage with science, research,
educator, media, and other end-user communities over the next year. The USA-NPN
also offers a growing roster of maps and short-term forecasts to support
biological research, planning and management decisions. USA-NPN map and forecast
products are also widely referenced in forestry, urban forestry, agriculture,
and invasive species management applications. Over the course of the one-year
award, we anticipate growing the Nature’s Notebook database by 4M records, to a
total of over 30M phenology records while working to secure long-term and
sustainable support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.