* 2031233
* Universal Design for Computer Science Learning: Partnership for Inclusive Elementary Computer Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Maya Israel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 12/31/2023
* USD 355,884.00

This collaborative partnership project works to broaden participation by
focusing on increasing inclusion of elementary students with disabilities in
four school districts in four different regions of the US. Increasing access to
computer science (CS) education for this broad range of learners presents an
equity issue. It is widely known that people with disabilities are significantly
underrepresented in computing education (e.g., NSF, 2019; Taylor &amp; Ladner,
2011). Beyond equity, increasing diversity within the STEM disciplines,
including CS, produces benefits to everyone as the range of ideas that come from
diverse stakeholders supports critical thinking and development that benefits
all of society (Ferrini-Mundy, 2013). The partnership between the University of
Florida and CS education leaders from New York City Public Schools, San
Francisco Unified School District, Broward County Public Schools, and P. K.
Yonge Developmental Research School will develop and make available a range of
professional development resources that will allow teachers to challenge their
beliefs about students with disabilities and develop skills and knowledge about
effective instructional approaches for accessible and engaging instruction for
all their learners, including those with disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project uses early-phase design-based implementation research (DBIR) to address
a shared problem of practice related to the meaningful inclusion of students
with disabilities in elementary CS education. An important part of this project
is the work done to create an infrastructure for sharing knowledge, testing new
ideas, empowering the Research Practice Partnership partners, and disseminating
knowledge with the CS education field. Necessary steps to ensuring equitable
access to CS education for students with disabilities include: (1) understanding
the level of inclusion of these learners in elementary CS instruction as well as
catalysts and barriers to inclusion in CS instruction across the school
districts, (2) investigating instructional practices to support teachers in
making CS accessible and engaging for these learners typically underrepresented
in the computing fields, and (3) beginning to develop flexible resources that
can be used in professional development for general and special education
teachers on inclusive CS education. This project will, therefore, generate new
and transferable knowledge about the degree to which students with disabilities
participate in elementary CS education, how different districts approach
inclusion in CS education, and the catalysts and barriers involved in this
effort. In addition, the investigators will conduct case studies of each
practice partnersâ€™ unique contexts. Lastly, this project will operationalize
inclusive CS in different instructional settings and provide examples of how the
Universal Design for Learning framework and a balanced approach to using
explicit instruction within open inquiry CS education can be used to foster
inclusive elementary CS learning. This project is funded by the CS for All:
Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.