* 2031803
* Support for Trainees and Independent Junior Investigators at BMES Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering Conference 2021; Palm Springs, California; 3-7 January 2021
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Brenton Hoffman, Biomedical Engineering Society
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2022
* USD 20,350.00

This award will support participation and provide travel stipends for students,
postdoctoral fellows, and independent junior investigators (Rising Stars) for
the 2021 Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES)-Cellular and Molecular
Bioengineering (CMBE) Conference; Palm Springs, California; 3-7 January 2021.
The meeting is intended to integrate the disparate fields of protein engineering
and microphysiological systems to transform our abilities to model, probe, and
understand pathophysiology as well as translate new discoveries in ways that
ultimately benefit human health. There are two aims associated with this
meeting: (1) Promote adoption of new technologies and strategies to achieve
transformative discoveries and (2) Facilitate interaction of junior
investigators, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students with leaders in these
burgeoning sub-fields of CMBE. Twelve trainees will be selected by the
organizing committee to receive Student/Fellow Awards and present short talks,
which will be integrated into the themed sessions. In addition, eight diverse
early-career independent faculty investigators will be selected for the special
'Rising Star' awards and session, which will take place on the first day of the
meeting, to showcase their work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of the 2021
Conference will be “Lighting and Leading the Way: Molecular Tools in
Multicellular Systems’’. The scientific goals are to 1) catalyze the development
of new molecular-scale tools for probing and manipulating cell behavior, 2) ease
the transition of these cutting edge approaches for use in complex multicellular
systems that more accurately model physiological and pathological processes, and
3) enable the translation of the these advancements in ways that can ultimately
benefit human health, such as improved drug screening systems and cellular
theranostics that sense and respond to environmental cues found in disease
states. The conference will introduce and integrate a diverse group of engineers
and basic scientists possessing clinical and/or entrepreneurial experience.
Invited speakers and keynotes will discuss how they bridge the gap between
fundamental research and translation in their specific fields. The CMBE field is
experiencing exponential growth, with the subfields of protein engineering and
microphysiological systems development being significant drivers. The 2021
Conference will bring together leaders in the field of biology, medicine, and
engineering to address how these cutting-edge approaches can be integrated and
applied innovatively in CMBE research and education. This award is co-funded by
the Systems and Synthetic Biology cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.