* 2031637
* RAPID: Prototype of a medical mask using a novel antimicrobial / antiviral biofilter material
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Rakesh Gupta, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2021
* USD 198,499.00

During the current coronavirus pandemic, there is a shortage of masks that are
part of personal protective equipment used by health care workers. This shortage
is due to two reasons: (i) supply has been outstripped by unprecedented demand,
and (ii) current masks are meant to be used only once and then discarded.
Critically, the lack of proper and effective personal protective equipment poses
a significant risk to healthcare workers that are treating and caring for
COVID19 patients. This RAPID project seeks to remedy these issues by fabricating
novel and improved filters using polymers derived from natural sources
(agriculture and forestry) that are compostable. These filters would be
removable, renewable, and reusable. Furthermore, these filters would incorporate
small-sized antimicrobial/antiviral copper particles, which enhance the
effectiveness of masks beyond current capabilities. This project will rapidly
develop and optimize the fabrication of these filters. Developed filters will be
tested to demonstrate that they have all the properties required for masks to be
worn by medical personnel. If the research is successful, it will result in the
development of a reusable medical mask that is superior to the single-use mask
currently in use. Finally, the project will promote collaborations across
different fields such as wood science, health science, engineering, chemistry
and biology which, in turn, will support training and education of students in
these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this RAPID
research project is to develop a prototype for a reusable and environmentally
friendly biofilter with antimicrobial and antiviral properties to be used as a
filtering facepiece respirator. This objective will be attained with the use of
bio-nanocomposites of polylactic acid in combination with cellulose nanofibrils
and coated with copper nanoparticles. The result will represent improvements on
current medical masks, including the design, fabrication processing and material
properties. Process development will involve mixing cellulose nanofibrils into
polylactic acid and converting the compounded material into filaments coated
with copper nanoparticles, rendering the material suitable for additive
manufacturing of the reusable biofilter. The copper nanoparticles will endow the
filter with antimicrobial and antiviral properties, while the properly-dispersed
nanocellulose will help to retain the microorganisms and also provide mechanical
integrity. It is expected that masks using these filters will have the ability
to both prevent penetration by microorganisms (having a diameter as small as 50
nm) and to kill many infectious agents as well. Rejuvenation of the filter will
be done with the help of mild heat treatment. The structure and properties of
the filters will be determined using standardized tests. The ability to compost
polylactic acid will be helpful in the eventual disposal of the filter. If
successful, the research will result in the development of a reusable respirator
mask that is superior to the present-day mask. This will help to ease the
shortage of personal protective equipment for health care workers and give them
the best possible protection against microbial threats such as COVID19. Finally,
the successful completion of the project will advance the knowledge and
understanding of bio-nanocomposite components compatibility, and their specific
effects on the final material performance within the context of engineering and
technology education. This new knowledge will be generated across different
fields such as wood science, health science, engineering, chemistry and biology.
The proposed work will support synergies among these disciplines and foster
training and education of students in these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.