* 2031808
* New Paradigms for Inverse Heat Conduction Problems: Creative analytics and experiments utilizing advanced technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Jay Frankel, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 110,484.00

This project allows for the systematic investigation of problems that are highly
elusive and difficult to solve owing to harsh thermal environments. These
conditions appear in high-speed flight, combustion, material processing,
airplane and automatic brakes, chemical and energy processes, fire research,
geophysical sciences, and defense and national security applications. These
applications render a difficult situation for surface instrumentation needed for
interpreting engineering quantities of interest. As such, the methods under
development at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville allow for in-depth or
backside analyzes to be performed rendering the surface temperature and heat
flux caused by the harsh environment. The proposed approach is both
transformative and possesses a natural broader impact to other areas of
engineering as it represents a new paradigm. Both computational and experimental
studies will be performed indicating the merit of the methodology and a newly
designed small sample test facility. Further, the research findings will be
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses for enhancing creative
problem solving. A short-course and workshop will be developed for presentation
at universities; conferences; and, available to interested industries for
assuring an international competitive edge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
offers transformative analytical concepts and novel experimental developments
for resolving inverse heat conduction problems applicable to both classical
(parameters required) and calibration (parameter free) formulations. Experiments
are designed based on component validation in the edifice of calibration test
facility. Inverse analysis is receiving significant attention as applications
are becoming extreme and thus creating instrumentation nightmares. High
temperature and high heat flux applications can significantly damage surface
instrumentation rendering it either useless or unreliable for future
interpretation. Such situations arise where reliable surface assessments are
fundamental to understanding the physical situation. This project promotes the
development of new formulations for both linear and nonlinear studies that
require experimental verification. Experimental verification is based on
developing a small sample, open architecture test facility that allows for air,
inert gas and light vacuum conditions using the latest instrumentation and
heating sources. A benchmark quality test facility will be designed, fabricated
and tested applicable to the aerospace and mechanical engineering communities.
New high temperature and high heat flux electrical heaters represent the
fundamental heating element. These heaters are composed of aluminum nitride with
tungsten traces that are fully integrated with RTD?s in a thin package. Careful
component studies can be initiated to accurately quantify the heat flux in a
designed configuration. Thin film thermocouples will be adhered to the test
specimen for estimating the surface temperature during the system calibration.
The front condition, i.e., surface temperature and heat flux, will alternatively
be estimated using a pulse-echo ultrasonic transducer for measuring round-trip
time. Conventional inverse heat conduction is predicated on the availability of
in-depth instrumentation and requires the specification of thermophysical and
geometrical properties; and, sensor characteristics. Quantification of
thermophysical properties and sensor characteristics is costly and requires a
significant time effort. Insight gained from understanding a calibration view
can be applied for improving classical inverse methods. In-house, calibration
reduces costs and time delays if a test facility can be designed for turn-key
results. Integrating acoustic instrumentation into the calibration approach is
novel and will lead to accurate surface temperature and net heat flux
predictions based on an opposing-side measurement.