* 2031181
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapid COVID-19 diagnostics with CMOS-integrated single-molecule field-effect transistors
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Erik Young, QUICKSILVER BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 03/31/2022
* USD 255,678.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I Project is to reduce time-to-diagnosis for COVID-19
through the development of a novel all-electronic single-molecule molecular
diagnostics platform. The proposed technology has the potential to eliminate
sample processing bottlenecks that have resulted in delayed diagnosis. The
system's form-factor is compact and widely deployable, enabling point-of-care
and/or near-point-of-care test settings. The system comprise a reader unit and
disposable test-chips. This will enable rapid testing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will advance a prototype of a all-electronic single-molecule molecular
diagnostics platform and demonstrate direct detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA.
Prototype completion will involve integrating our single-molecule biosensors
onto application-specific integrated circuitry and optimizing the chemical
functionalization process to enable single-molecule detection. Processes will be
developed for controlled RNA fragmentation, required for direct RNA detection.
Direct detection will eliminate the need to perform extensive enzymatic
processing required in quantitative Reverse-Transcription Polymerase-Chain-
Reaction (qRT-PCR)-based systems. Efficient data processing algorithms will be
designed and implemented in the data acquisition hardware to accelerate
diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.