* 2031213
* Improved Numerical Methods for Solving Optimal Control Problems with Nonsmooth and Singular Solutions
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* William Hager, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 609,025.00

This project advances computational methods for solving nonsmooth and singular
optimal control problems, in which a control input is selected to maximize or
minimize some objective function. Non-smooth problems arise when the optimizing
control includes sudden jumps. Singular problems arise when the control input
does not directly influence the objective function. Solutions to optimal control
problems are found using numerical approximations that are constructed on a
pattern of grid points. This project improves upon existing approximation
methods for nonsmooth problems by constructing grid patterns that better capture
the jump points, resulting in higher accuracy using less computing power. This
innovation also helps better demarcate any singular regions of the problem. The
project further improves the control solution for problems with singular regions
by using corrective modifications to the objective function only in those
regions. A wide range of problems of national importance may be formulated as
nonsmooth or singular optimal control problems. These include control of high-
speed vehicles, treatment of diseases, and optimization of manufacturing
processes. The results of this project will confer benefits to the national
health and prosperity by offering faster and more accurate solutions to these
problems. Graduate students from diverse backgrounds will play a central role in
the research including one mathematician and one engineer. The methods that are
developed will be implemented in high quality software that will be made widely
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the development of new
collocation methods, called hp methods, and the use of these collocation methods
in solving optimal control problems with nonsmooth solutions. The approach is
purely computational and does not require any a priori knowledge of the
structure of the optimal solution. In addition, the methodology is aimed at
solving challenging problems that arise when an optimal control is singular. The
hp collocation methods are developed in a manner that enables accurate
identification of the points where the optimal solution is nonsmooth. The
methods developed in this research can be employed extremely efficiently using
sparse nonlinear optimization techniques and will provide much higher accuracy
solutions without a priori knowledge of the solution structure. With a suitable
placement of the variable mesh points, the hp collocation methods converge
exponentially fast even though the solution may be nonsmoooth. The approach
developed in this research could lead to a very rapid mesh refinement process
where a small mesh will be maintained and few mesh refinement iterations would
be required to obtain a high-accuracy approximation of the optimal
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.