* 2031154
* SBIR Phase I:  Antiviral and Anti-inflammatory Live Biotherapeutics (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Yiannis Kaznessis, General Probiotics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 08/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of new therapeutics against
coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 and associated COVID-19. Few broad-spectrum antivirals
exist, and vaccines are effective but strain-specific and require development
time for each new strain. This project will engineer probiotics native to the
upper respiratory tract of humans to serve as antiviral and antibacterial
agents. These probiotics will inhibit viral entry inside human lung cells and
stop lung inflammation that causes lethal severe acute respiratory distress in
COVID-19 patients. This development will be enabled by modern synthetic biology
techniques and an agile research and development
paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will advance the development of new probiotics. These benign, non-
virulent microbes will be equipped with defensins, protegrins and compstatins.
Defensins are peptides known to inhibit critical steps in viral infection,
including the antagonistic binding of angiotensin converting enzyme 2, the human
cell receptor thought to facilitate Covid-19 entry inside lung epithelial cells.
Protegrins are broad spectrum antimicrobials, with strong activity against
bacteria, such as pneumonia-causing Klebsiella spp. and viral particles,
including enveloped viruses like SARS-CoV-2. Compstatin is a complement system
inhibitor that modulates the overactivation of inflammatory responses, which in
the case of a coronavirus infection results in severe acute respiratory
syndrome. At the end of this project, a library of live biotherapeutics will be
developed that can exhibit antiviral, antibacterial and anti-inflammatory
activity when expressing and secreting combinations of
peptides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.