* 2031110
* Redefining Geometric Periodicity to Enable New Wave Responses in Radial Phononic Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Kathryn Matlack, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2023
* USD 350,410.00

This grant will support fundamental research to model and characterize new
structures that can passively control radially-propagating vibrations.
Vibrations plague machinery, turbine blades, gear trains, and reciprocating
mechanisms. They are particularly problematic when propagating radially through
these components, and can cause severe damage and rapid wear of structural
components. This work aims to engineer the vibration mitigating properties
directly into the geometry of such components. While existing materials can
passively mitigate vibrations, these behaviors are unattainable for radially-
propagating waves. Results of this research have applications in improving
safety, efficiency, and longevity of structures in aircraft, automotive, and
energy infrastructure, which remains as one of society's pressing needs. This
research will positively impact education through K-12 outreach activities and
new laboratory-based learning modules in both undergraduate and graduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will introduce new mathematical models,
computational models, and experiments for radially-propagating waves. The
specific objectives of this work are to introduce a modeling and experimental
framework to characterize radial metastructures that passively mitigate damaging
radial vibrations. Existing phononic materials are promising candidates for
vibration mitigation, since they can forbid certain frequencies from propagating
through the material. However, these beneficial phononic properties are
unattainable for radially propagating waves. This is because analysis methods
for phononic materials, e.g., Bloch theorem, are not applicable to radially
propagating waves, since periodically varying material properties do not lead to
periodic coefficients in the wave equation in radial coordinates. The work will
address these challenges by introducing (1) new architected materials with
radially dependent properties that will enable modifications of the equations of
motion to enforce periodicity mathematically; and (2) a modeling framework for
radial metastructures with effective periodicity. Specifically, this work will
introduce a new modeling framework that redefines parameters in the wave
equation to be radially dependent in order to achieve periodic coefficients, and
thus enable Bloch analysis. The models of radial elastic wave propagation in
anisotropic layered media will be validated by finite element simulations and
verified by experiments. This work will result in new anisotropic structures
that exhibit phononic behaviors in the absence of geometric periodicity, and
lays the foundation to explore interactions between material dispersion and
source geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.