* 2031391
* RAPID: Communicating difficult medical choices in a COVID-19 context
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Paul Conway, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 61,086.00

Amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, healthcare providers face the challenge of how to
make and communicate extremely difficult medical decisions. If medical decision-
makers focus primarily on logic rather than emotion, they risk appearing
callous, eroding public trust in the medical system and fostering negative
reactions to medical advice. Yet, dire medical treatment situations might
mandate a 'strict utilitarian' approach – one that focuses on saving the most
lives by prioritizing care for patients with the best chance of survival. This
may in turn produce a disconnect between the medical community and the public,
since research shows that people tend to trust decision-makers who express
emotional concern for individuals rather than the logic-based sacrificial
judgment of saving lives overall. Thus, during the pandemic, healthcare
providers overwhelmed by virus patients face an additional challenge: how to
communicate about their medical decisions. If they focus mainly on their
decision making without an emotional recognition of the situation, they may
appear overly logical and not sufficiently emotional, thereby undermining trust
in the medical community. When the public loses trust in the healthcare system,
medical advice such as wearing masks or engaging in social distancing may be
ignored. A better understanding of medical decision making and its communication
can help shape future approaches to dealing with such dire situations in a way
that maximizes the health-related outcomes for society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project directly compares how healthcare providers
versus laypeople view difficult and controvesial medical decision-making. The
research tests the hypothesis that laypeople exonerate healthcare providers who
communicate moral character by displaying a combination of emotional concern for
individual targets (the patients who are very ill or dying) together with a
logical focus on the big picture (reducing overall deaths). The research also
tests the hypothesis that during the height of the crisis, people view the
pandemic as similar to fighting a war, which makes medical sacrifices to treat
the most patients seem more acceptable. As the crisis fades over time, however,
people may no longer experience such a wartime mentality. If so, then some
people may change their mind about healthcare providers’ medical decisions. To
test these hypotheses, the research examines how the public views medical
professionals’ sacrificial decisions near the height of the crisis and again one
year later. Results will suggest communication strategies that healthcare
providers can use to communicate moral concern when making difficult medical
choices. The project includes development of a short video describing study
results and recommending communication strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.