* 2031345
* Recruiting,Educating, and Graduating a Diverse Community of Mathematicians Through Mentoring, Peer Support, and Undergraduate Research
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Lindsey-Kay Lauderdale, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 01/31/2026
* USD 999,152.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled mathematicians by
supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students
with demonstrated financial need at Towson University. Over its five-year
duration, the project will provide scholarships to 32 unique full-time students
who are pursuing undergraduate degrees in mathematics. The project will award 14
four-year scholarships to first-time, first-year students across two cohorts,
and 18 two-year scholarships to transfer students across three cohorts. The
project will recruit locally from Baltimore city schools and from area community
colleges including Harford Community College and Howard Community College. The
project will enhance Scholars’ educational experience by supporting their
academic and professional development. Such supports include enhanced advising
and mentoring, a course on career pathways for mathematics majors, and coding
workshops and hackathons. The project will also support Scholar’s engagement in
undergraduate research through a new sophomore/junior level course-based
undergraduate research experience, as well as assistance in applying for a
summer research experience. The project’s student support activities will be
available to all mathematics majors, expanding project impact beyond the
scholarship recipients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is
to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The project will use confirmatory analysis to
assess project components and decision tree analysis to identify the factors
that most impact the Scholar’s attainment of educational goals. Confirmatory
analysis will examine two hypotheses. First, that components of the project
represent observable and cumulative evidence of academic integration, and
therefore predict graduation with a mathematics baccalaureate degree within six
years. Second, the student experience of these components represents evidence of
social integration of the student in the institution and predict graduation and
cumulative GPA for the subset of individuals who attended/completed each
element. Decision tree analysis will be performed on a data set that includes
student records and demographic data, as well as all data collected as part of
the confirmatory analysis. By analyzing this rich data set, the project should
be able to draw more nuanced conclusions about which interventions are the most
valuable for supporting the success of low-income students in mathematics.
Project results will be disseminated in the Joint Mathematics Meetings,
MathFest, and in refereed publications. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.