* 2031326
* RAPID: Accelerating the Future of Work? Understanding Future Shifts in Technology Adoption in the Seafood Industry in Response to the COVID19 Pandemic
* ENG,EFMA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Kemi Jona, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,651.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will collect ephemeral data to
investigate the accelerated adoption of new technologies in the seafood industry
in response to both worker and food safety concerns arising from the COVID-19
pandemic. As supply chains continue to face disruption due to the COVID-19
pandemic, the ability of the U.S. to provide safe, fast, and domestically
sourced food—including seafood—has become of paramount importance. Seafood
processing still relies primarily on humans working in close proximity to one
another in plants that are known for dirty, cold, and dangerous conditions. The
ephemeral data collected by the research team during this period of
unprecedented economic disruption will be provide new knowledge regarding the
future of work in seafood processing plants, including the demand for, and
feasibility of, adopting human-collaborative autonomous systems to process and
package food more safely and efficiently at all stages of production. The result
of this new knowledge will be used to inform both seafood processing as well as
other systems in agriculture and healthcare that are potentially undergoing
rapid technological change in response to the pandemic. The ephemeral data
collected through this research can also inform a new set of design requirements
for next generation systems at the FW-HTF. The research activities undertaken to
collect the data will also help train a new generation of engineers and social
scientists to address interdisciplinary challenges at the convergence of
robotics, human-robot collaboration, and labor economics through the
participation of graduate student researchers who will learn to incorporate
elements of different domains into their thinking. Multi-generational teams that
include students from Northeastern University’s nationally recognized
cooperative education program will enhance the pipeline for STEM education
through innovative hands-on research experience specifically geared towards
undergraduates. The U.S. imported $22 billion of seafood in 2018—more than at
any point in history due to an inability to meet domestic consumer demand. This
project will advance US leadership in a globally competitive and domestically
underserved industry, while simultaneously advancing understanding of key
scientific, engineering, and societal challenges associated with the rapid
acceleration of technology adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the
urgency to collect data that can inform how firms are responding to the COVID-19
pandemic, this project will adopt a disrupted socio-technical systems (STS)
framework to study how firms are re-evaluating the human and technology
components of their systems, their relationships, and the values and design
principles that are used to shape and reshape those system. The contributions of
this research stem from the following interconnected goals: (1) Collect
ephemeral data on how the COVID-19 pandemic has changed the human interaction
dynamics in the seafood processing industry, (2) Develop new knowledge to
advance our understanding of the degree to which STS will change as technology
adoption is accelerated in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in both the seafood
industry and other similarly situated systems, including agriculture and
healthcare. (3) Assess the feasibility of alternative uses of integrated robot
co-workers to address both the current pandemic in the near-term as well as the
future-of-work in the longer-term. This ephemeral data will capture the
reassessment of this overall system through a survey of roughly 100 firms in the
seafood industry along with 5-7 follow-up interviews and three case studies.
Specifically, this project will measure how firms valued the human and
technology elements of the system before the pandemic, and how their views have
changed with the associated economic disruption. This new data will help develop
technologies to facilitate social distancing in seafood processing plants over
the next 18-24 months while also ensuring that these solutions are aligned with
designs to advance the future of work in the seafood industry beyond the current
pandemic. Collection of this data before firms adopt any new technology will
enable the study of processes by which firms revise their STS frameworks in
response to such disruptions. Doing so will allow the new knowledge created by
this research to inform extrapolations to systems in other industries that will
also be reshaped by accelerated adoption of new technologies in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.