* 2031632
* EAGER: Exploring the Self-Repair Role of Astrocytes in Neuromorphic Computing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Abhronil Sengupta, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

With the unprecedented success of deep learning in pattern recognition tasks,
the demands for computational expenses required to train and implement such
Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems have also grown beyond current
capabilities. “Neuromorphic Computing” strives to reduce the gap in
computational efficiency of AI platforms by exploring bio-plausibility in the
underlying computational primitives and hardware substrate. This project goes
beyond the focus of current neuromorphic computing architectures on
computational models for neuron and synapse to examine other computational units
of the biological brain that might contribute to cognition and especially self-
repair. To this end, this EAGER project will forge new directions by drawing
inspiration and insights from computational neuroscience regarding
functionalities of glial cells and explores their role in the fault-tolerant
capacity of emerging hardware enabled neuromorphic computing platforms. Graduate
students and undergraduates from Penn State's Schreyer Honors College will be
involved in the project. The highly interdisciplinary nature of the project will
contribute significantly to the training of next generation students who will
gain knowledge in the design of neuromorphic computing frameworks combining
knowledge from hardware, neuroscience and machine learning. The PI plans to
integrate the results from this project into the Electrical Engineering
departmental K-12 summer camp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior literature on
exploring impact of astrocytes on self-repair has been primarily confined to
small scale networks without any machine learning perspective. Further, self-
repair has been studied primarily from a simplistic software simulation
standpoint with stuck-at-zero faults. Neuromorphic hardware implementations for
astrocyte functionalities have been also limited to Complementary Metal Oxide
Semiconductor (CMOS) technology – which is highly energy and area inefficient
due to the functional mismatch between CMOS transistors and glial functionality.
To bridge this gap, the proposed research agenda explores a hardware-software
co-design approach to incorporate glial cell functionality in neuromorphic
platforms through the usage of spintronic technologies. The EAGER program
focuses on the following research thrusts: (i) Exploiting astrocyte
computational models to evaluate the aspects of glial functionality crucial for
self-repair in the context of neuromorphic machine learning platforms, (ii)
Exploring spintronic device and circuit primitives to design a coupled neuron-
synapse-astrocyte network capable of self-repair where the underlying device
mimics the astrocyte functionality through their intrinsic physics, and (iii)
Combination of the above top-down and bottom-up perspectives to leverage
astrocyte self-repair in the context of hardware realistic faults like
resistance drift, parasitic effects, device to device variations, among others
in neuromorphic AI systems. The proposed research agenda, would provide proof-
of-concept results toward the development of a new generation of efficient
neuromorphic platforms that are able to autonomously self-repair non-ideal
hardware operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.