* 2031385
* EAGER: Fundamental Study on Multistage Sustainability Assessment and Decision Making for Reshaping Technology Innovations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2024
* USD 235,998.00

This exploratory research project will create a framework for systematically
assessing the sustainability of emerging technologies. Sustainability assessment
and decision-making for technology innovations is a key step towards achievement
of industrial sustainability goals. This research will address how technology
innovation can be reshaped to fully incorporate sustainability principles from
the early development stage. The approach will use a unique methodology that
incorporates sustainability science, large-scale system science, and
engineering. The methodology and case studies are anticipated to be valuable for
enhancing research and education on the sustainability of emerging
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ a methodological
framework for conducting systematic sustainability assessment of emerging
technologies in their early development life cycle stages by recommending
technology sets after performing sustainability impact evaluation. The framework
will feature capability to effectively apply sustainability science and systems
theory to methodically conduct multistage sustainability assessment, identify
intertwined sustainability aspects, systematically process uncertain
information, and provide system-level optimal decision support for technology
innovations in different product development and manufacturing stages. This
framework will be constructed using a hierarchical assessment and decision
making scheme, and consist of a coherent set of concepts, propositions,
principles, and methods that could improve the ability of researchers, decision
makers, and organizations to reshape technology innovations. The proposed
framework will be tested through investigating new technologies for nanopaint
design and coating manufacturing, as compared to current coating material and
application technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.