* 2031349
* Collaborative Research: Laboratory Measurements of Oxygen (O) and Nitrogen (N2) Ultraviolet (UV) Cross Sections by Particle Impact for Remote Sensing of Thermosphere O/N2 Variation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Joseph Ajello, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 08/31/2023
* USD 698,000.00

Space-based remote sensing is widely used to measure the Earth’s atmosphere.
Most of these measurements are based on detection of naturally occurring light
emissions from the atmospheric molecules and atoms. To interpret these
measurements correctly, understanding how the light emission occurs in these
particles is of fundamental importance. A quantity called emission cross section
is a key parameter that describes the emission process. While this parameter can
sometimes be inferred from observation, laboratory measurement in a controlled
environment is essential to provide a definitive estimate for such parameter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to determine the UV emission
cross sections needed for remote sensing observations of the Earth’s dayglow by
NASA spacecraft. In the dayglow, a unique signature of the O/N2 column density
ratio, derived from satellite-based UV observations, comes from the intensity
ratio of the OI (135.6 nm) and N2 Lyman-Birge-Hopfield (LBH) band system
(125-250 nm), both optically forbidden emissions. The O/N2 column density ratio
is key to understanding ionosphere and thermosphere composition changes on a
global scale under all geomagnetic conditions from Earth-orbiting satellites,
e.g. GOLD (Global-scale Observation of the Limb and Disk). The team’s research
in the last funding period shows laboratory spectroscopy for the past 50-years
has failed to measure the cascade-induced UV spectrum and determine LBH
vibrational intensities or cascade emission cross sections, which accounts for
~30% of the total emission cross section, of the Earth’s strongest FUV emission.
This failure has precipitated a controversy in the literature that has persisted
for over a decade due to the dichotomy between terrestrial airglow observations
and forward model calculations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team have
measured in the laboratory the FUV cascade-induced spectrum of the LBH band
system of N2 excited by 30–200 eV electrons. The cascading transition begins
with two processes: radiative and collision-induced electronic transitions
(CIETs) involving two states (a and w), which are followed by a cascade induced
transition a X. In this project, the team will investigate the threshold
emission cross sections from 10-30 eV. The uniqueness of this project is the
measurement of both the atomic O and molecular N2 absolute Qem (total emission
cross section) and Qcasc (cascade-induced cross section) more accurately with a
special apparatus designed with a ten times bigger collision chamber than
previous laboratory measurements to properly account for the cascade
contributions under the same experimental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory spectroscopy at LASP has made a
monumental step by measuring the optically-forbidden cascade-induced UV spectrum
of N2 for the first time. However, much work needs to be done to complete the
study of LBH and other important optically forbidden transitions that began in
the first chamber (0.75 m radius). The second chamber with a radius of 2 m (more
than double that of the first chamber) allows a whole new realm of atomic and
molecular physics. The lifetime ranges available for laboratory studies of
single scattering electron impact induced fluorescence spectra were 1-100ns
(mainly allowed UV electronic transitions) for the past 50 years prior. With two
large vacuum chambers at the University of Colorado even more highly forbidden
transitions with lifetimes to 10ms can be studied to capture the full light
emission and partial light emission to 100ms with an ability to model to 1000ms.
This new field of physics involving optically forbidden transitions allows the
study of spectra never before measured in single-scattering conditions such as
that from LBH, the Cameron Bands of CO and Vegard-Kaplan band system of N2. The
PIs of this proposal have an extensive 50 year track record of measuring the
absolute Qem and Qcasc for atoms and molecules of interest to Earth and
planetary atmospheres. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multi-facet approaches of both
experiment and modeling promise a critical thermosphere parameter (O/N2) for an
understanding of the Earth’s thermosphere and extending in scope to other
planetary atmospheres. The project team’s data provides a bench-mark reference
for high resolution studies by current and future satellite missions (e.g.,
Atmosphere-Space Interactions Monitor (ASIM) carrying a suite of instruments on
the International Space Station).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.