* 2031358
* BRIGHT-CS PD: Building Student Retention through Individuated Guided coHort Training in Computer Science Professional Development Researcher Practitioner Partnership
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Ryoko Yamaguchi, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2022
* USD 296,630.00

BRIGHT-CS PD (Building Student Retention through Individuated Guided coHort
Training in Computer Science Professional Development) a CS for All High School
strand Researcher-Practitioner Partnership (RPP) submitted by the University of
North Carolina at Greensboro (UNCG). BRIGHT-CS PD will provide math and science
teachers access to and support for rigorous CS learning. The RPP will
collaboratively create robust professional development (PD) materials for high
school teachers to improve school and classroom practices to better support and
broaden participation of black girls in computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on the BRIGHT-CS middle school
student and school projects. Lessons learned from these projects indicate that
robust PD materials for teachers are critical to systemically broadening the
participation of black girls in CS. The proposed RPP will work with math and
science teachers to provide access and support as the teachers participate in
high-quality, extant CS instruction via Harvard Universityâ€™s CS50 courseware.
The RPP team will then work with these teachers to adapt and build out their
new, up-to-date CS/CT knowledge via robust PD materials designed to help
teachers inculcate CS/CT skills into their math and science
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.