* 2031336
* Identifying the determinants of high protein content in seeds of Phaseolus vulgaris
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Carlos Vallejos, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 07/31/2024
* USD 903,408.00

The first farmers initiated the process of domestication of present day crops
approximately 8 to 12,000 years ago by selecting plants with desirable traits
from ancestral wild populations. During the domesticatin of common bean these
traits included, among others, increased seed size, which increased yield and
productivity due to a five- to eight-fold increase in seed weight. The increase
in seed weight was associated with an increase in the relative starch content at
the expense of protein content, perhaps explained by the fact that it is
energetically less expensive for the plant to fill the large seeds with starch
than with protein. It appears that early-farmers inadvertently selected for
genes that can synthesize high levels of seed starch, along with genes that make
larger seeds. With a focus on improving protein content, this project examines
the basic molecular underpinnings of how starch and protein content is varied.
Understanding how the balance of protein to starch is regulated during seed
development will help explain how this important traits are controlled. Genes
that control the relative content of starch and protein in common bean seeds
will be identified by comparing developmental expression in wild and
domesticated varieties. Knowledge about these genes and the mechanism by which
they operate could help us improve the protein and nutritional content of
present day beans through genetic manipulation. During the research, high school
teachers will gain lab experience and will contribute to the development of high
school teaching modules in quantitative development Two graduate students will
be trained on the latest biological and technological approaches and procedures
applicable to this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Domestication of seed crops
resulted in seed size and yield increases. These gains were attained through
increases in relative starch content at the expense of protein accumulation.
Although on a dry weight basis starch and protein have the same caloric content,
protein biosynthesis is several-fold more metabolically expensive than starch
biosynthesis. Increases in relative starch content are correlated with decreases
in relative protein content because the biosynthesis of these polymers draws
from the same carbon pool. The main objective of this proposal is to identify
key determinants of the strength of protein and starch sinks in seeds of
Phaseolus vulgaris. This objective will be accomplished through a comparative
analysis of evolutionary changes that separated the Andean from the Mesoamerican
gene pool, and cultivated forms from their wild ancestors in each pool.
Phenotypic and gene expression differences will be evaluated in the context of a
developmental index based on mathematical descriptions of seed/pod growth and
development. Genes with a differential pattern of expression that is correlated
with phenotypic differences will be subjected to genetic analysis to identify
genes responsible for phenotypic differences. The nutritional value of beans and
other legumes could be improved after the identification of genes that control
protein and starch sink strength in the seed. In addition, increasing seed
protein content will help increase the reliance of human diet on plant-based
protein because animal protein production is associated with environmental
degradation. The educational component of this project includes the training of
two graduate students, two high school teachers and the public at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.