* 2031594
* RAPID: SCH: Smart Wearable COVID19 BioTracker Necklace: Remote Assessment and Monitoring of Symptoms for Early Diagnosis, Continual Monitoring, and Prediction of Adverse Event
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Yao Wang, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2022
* USD 125,000.00

Due to the outbreak of the 2019 novel Coronavirus and the shock to the
healthcare systems, it is critical to conduct fundamental research and
scientific studies on the development of smart and scalable technologies that
can be produced rapidly and in large scales for (a) continual in-home and in-
hospital objective tracking of multiple symptoms using wearable sensors, (b)
detecting early&lt;br/&gt;health anomalies from the measured multiple symptoms,
and (c) predicting potential adverse events from the measured historical data.
This project will address the aforementioned aims to transform the current
subjective infrequent telemonitoring for COVID19 patients to continuous
objective monitoring and help to reduce the burden on the health care system and
the corresponding social and economic impacts. The successful development and
deployment of the wearable device will further open doors to conducting
fundamental research on the temporal evolution of COVID19 symptoms and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a wireless smart
Internet of Things (IoT) necklace, containing multimodality sensors that can
accurately and objectively track multiple vital symptoms of respiratory
malfunction and infection, covering a large spectrum of COVID19 symptoms. It
will be capable of recording and telereporting, the sound and vibration dynamics
due to breathing and coughing together with the body temperature, heart rate,
and fatigue-related mobility. In addition, peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2)
will be measured and fused with the collected data by the IoT necklace. The
project will also develop novel machine learning models to detect early health
anomalies in the multidimensional biosignal space and predict the upcoming
adverse events over a future temporal horizon based on the past time-series
captured by the device. By partnering with industry, this technology can be used
not only for COVID-19 but also for patients with other causes of pneumonia and
other respiratory conditions, including lung cancer. The project will generate a
unique transdisciplinary educational environment by conducting workshops and
undergraduate projects with a focus on promoting STEM-related activities within
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.