* 2031833
* I-Corps:  Chalcogenide Hybrid Inorganic/Organic Polymers (CHIPs) for Infrared Thermal Imaging Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Jeffrey Pyun, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new class of infrared (IR) optical polymeric materials. The use
of IR thermal imaging (i.e., “night vision”) has long been used for defense and
military applications. IR thermal imaging also has significant potential in
consumer electronics, transportation, medical imaging, and robotic and aerospace
industries. One of the key limitations hindering wide-scale implementation of
infrared thermal cameras for consumer markets is the high cost of these imaging
systems. In the current IR thermal imaging systems, the transmissive optical
elements (e.g., lenses, windows) require the use of expensive inorganic elements
(e.g., germanium). To address this technology barrier, the goal is to pursue the
development of IR optical polymers, which are composed of inexpensive starting
materials and can easily be melt or solution processed into windows or lenses.
Successfully implementation of these materials as inexpensive IR plastics may
enable creation of less expensive IR cameras and the potential for entry of
these IR imaging systems in automobiles, housing, and medical imaging
sectors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of Chalcogenide Hybrid Inorganic/Organic Polymers (CHIPs), which are a new class
of synthetic polymers with enhanced optical properties for IR applications.
These polymers have the highest refractive index of any synthetic polymer to
date and possesses superior IR transparency in comparison to classical synthetic
polymers due to a very high content of sulfur-sulfur (S-S), or sulfur-selenium
(Se-S) bonds in the copolymer backbone. CHIPs materials may be melted or
solution processed into optical elements such as lenses or windows, which are
directly suitable for IR-thermal imaging. In the proposed research, the plan is
to develop improved synthetic methods to enable large-scale synthesis of these
materials and new additive manufacturing processing methods to fabricate
windows, lenses, and optical elements. In addition, the goal is to implement
these polymer-processed optical elements into prototype IR thermal imaging
systems to exploit the favorable properties of these new polymeric
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.