* 2031087
* Template-Free Synthesis of  Oriented Zeolite Membranes with Improved High-Activity Molecular Separation Characteristics
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Jerry Y.S. Lin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 04/30/2024
* USD 341,103.00

MFI-type zeolite membranes are among the most stable microporous materials with
molecular sieving capabilities. High-performing MFI zeolite membranes on hollow
fiber supports will enable development of new and more efficient separation
technologies for the chemical and petroleum industries by significantly
improving purity, heightening flux, and minimizing capital and operating costs.
Due to the unique pore structure of MFI zeolite crystals, b-oriented MFI zeolite
membranes offer better molecular sieving separation characteristics than
randomly oriented polycrystalline MFI zeolite membranes. These properties make
b-oriented MFI zeolite membranes highly attractive for industrial applications
including separation of xylene isomers. However, high quality b-oriented MFI
zeolite membranes have been fabricated only on disk supports by complex
synthesis methods that include the use of costly organic-templates. Such
templated MFI zeolite membranes also exhibit unfavorable pressure dependence of
separation properties, characterized by a decrease of permeability and
selectivity with increasing feed xylene vapor pressure. Several challenges must
be addressed to further advance the synthesis of b-oriented MFI zeolite
membranes beyond the laboratory scale. These challenges include synthesis of
high-quality b-oriented MFI zeolite membrane on supports that can be arranged
into modules with high packing density by cost-effective and scalable methods
and understanding the separation characteristics of b-oriented MFI zeolite
membranes in contact with feed mixtures at high vapor pressures. This project
will therefore develop methods for facile syntheses of high-quality b-oriented
MFI zeolite membranes on hollow fiber supports and study the synthesis-
structure-separation property relationship of such grown b-oriented MFI zeolite
membranes for use in the separation of xylene isomers at high vapor pressures.
The knowledge developed through this project will be translatable to other-
oriented crystalline microporous membranes for other separation processes. In
addition to graduate student training opportunities, the broader impacts of the
project include a public outreach activity aimed at demonstrating how inorganic
membranes work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the synthesis of
b-oriented MFI zeolite membranes on alumina hollow fiber supports by a scalable,
template-free synthesis method. The method will consist of filtration “seeding”
using 2-dimensional MFI zeolite nanosheets, followed by template-free secondary
growth. Preparation of a zeolite layer using 2-dimensional MFI zeolite
nanosheets by filtration offers a versatile and scalable method of fabrication
leading to a high-quality b-oriented MFI zeolite seed layer for secondary
growth. The MFI zeolite seed layer will be preferentially grown into a
b-oriented MFI zeolite membrane with a template-free synthesis solution of
optimized composition. The use of a template-free solution produces zeolite
membranes of higher quality by minimizing or eliminating intercrystalline gaps
that permit non-selective diffusion of gas or liquid mixtures. It also reduces
the number of synthesis steps and eliminates the use of costly organic
templates. Synthesis of templated and template-free, randomly and b-oriented MFI
zeolite membranes enables a systematic study of the synthesis-structure-
separation property relationship of the MFI zeolite membranes. In particular,
the study will be focused on understanding the effects crystal
shape/orientation, intercrystalline microstructure, and zeolite framework
composition on the feed pressure dependence of xylene permeability and
selectivity of MFI zeolite membranes. This work will also identify conditions
for the synthesis of high-performance b-oriented MFI zeolite membranes for
effective separation of xylene mixture under industrially relevant
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.