* 2031741
* RAPID: Determination of the cross-over frequency of SARS-CoV-2 for rapid identification concentration
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Woo Jin Chang, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 05/31/2024
* USD 193,230.00

The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee received an award to investigate an
electrical trapping technique to rapidly concentrate SARS-CoV-2 virus to produce
highly pure samples for the development of vaccines and therapeutics. Currently,
purification through multiple in-series applications of filtration and
centrifugation require up to two days to prepare virus samples. Unfortunately,
the purity and viability of the separated viruses are still low after being
collected by conventional methods. In this research, a correlation between the
virus, nanoparticle size, and electrical dielectrophoretic trapping conditions
is investigated to determine the best operating conditions to concentrate 80 –
160 nm size SARS-CoV-2. The developed method will enable the rapid concentration
of pure viruses from cell culture and patient samples. The concentrated samples
will enhance the development of vaccines, cures, and rapid diagnostic methods
for infectious diseases by rapidly supplying highly concentrated pure virus
samples. Thus, the research will contribute to improve the public safety related
to infectious diseases and economy in the diagnostics and therapeutics area. The
developed method is also applicable to the concentration of biomolecules,
including DNA, protein, cell lysed fragments and particles, in addition to
viruses. Thus, this research will give a substantial improvement on the rapid
characterization and applications of molecules in various disciplines, such as
virology, genomics, proteomics, diagnosis, forensic science, in addition to
vaccine and therapeutics development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel
dielectrophoretic nanoparticle manipulating method developed in this research
can rapidly concentrate viruses into highly pure samples from virus-infected
cell media and samples from patients. A charge polarization happens to a
dielectric particle when the particle is exposed to an unevenly distributed
electric field. The particle will move to either a dense or sparse electric
field area depending on the given condition, such as electrical potential,
frequency, and permittivities of the particle and medium. The direction of
particle movement is inverted depending on the frequency; this is called cross-
over frequency. The cross-over frequency varies depending on the characteristics
of the particles, such as components, structure, charge, etc. In this research,
the cross-over frequency of different bio-nano-particles, ranged from 60 to 500
nm size, will be investigated using heat-treated SARS-CoV-2 and nanoparticles.
Initially, the cross-over frequency of different size nano-particles will be
determined using dielectrophoretic traps, by modifying the applied potential,
frequency, and particle size. Then, the same operating condition screening
strategy will be applied to heat-treated SARS-CoV-2. Purity and efficiency of
the isolated nano-particles and SARS-CoV-2 will be determined using the
developed conditions. The developed method will circumvent the drawbacks that
exist with the current serial treatment method used to separate virus, which
are: time-intensive, laborious, complicated, and less effective. Consequently,
this research will significantly enhance the understandings of the structures
and characteristics of bio-nano-particles, such as live viruses, by supplying
higher purity samples rapidly. Obtained results will be rapidly applied to other
viruses and particles for further characterization and detection, as well as
development of applications. This RAPID award to the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee is made by the Division of Biological Infrastructure using funds from
the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.