* 2031818
* SBIR Phase I:  Transcatheter Tricuspid Valve Replacement using Physical Vapor Deposition Thin-Films
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Daniel Anderson, NININGER MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to provide a life-saving treatment
option to patients suffering from a specific heart condition called tricuspid
regurgitation (TR). In the US, 1.6 million patients need treatment for life-
threatening TR, and no good medical, surgical, or transcatheter therapy exists.
Current solutions lead to bleeding complications, damage to the circulatory
system, or inability to deliver the device. This project will develop a novel
device to address these constraints with a method that can be manufactured at
scale, resulting in significant cost savings to the healthcare system and
improved quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will enable the development of a new transcatheter
tricuspid valve replacement device and novel technology to produce 3D physical
vapor deposition (PVD) nitinol thin-film leaflets. One of the main challenges in
valve development is a design that can be compressed into a catheter
successfully. The use of a thin film rather than the standard of pericardial
tissue will significantly reduce the volume of the valve material, enabling a
much smaller delivery catheter profile. This study addresses critical
developmental objectives, such as manufacturing feasibility and thin film
leaflet characteristics. The solution will be optimized for material fatigue
life, valve characteristics, valve durability, and anchoring to validate it for
medical use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.