* 2031021
* Rationally Designed Biphasic Block Co-Polymer/Ionic Liquid Transport Platforms through Manipulation of Physical Chemistry and Nano-Confinement
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Paul Scovazzo, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,968.00

Industrial energy production processes generate gaseous products such as carbon
dioxide that must be removed from the exhaust streams to meet regulatory
emissions standards. The selective removal of individual molecules like carbon
dioxide from enormous volumes of hot, high-pressure gas is a challenging
problem. Energy-efficient separation technologies, such as membranes, are
required to preserve profits and minimize environmental impacts. A special class
of membranes formed from a composite of polymer and ionic liquid is a promising
energy-efficient gas separation technology with demonstrated applications
ranging from natural gas pretreatment to carbon emission reduction. However,
polymer/ionic liquid composite membranes are not suitable for use at high
pressures due to instability and performance limitations, preventing industrial
deployment of these systems. This project seeks to expand the effectiveness of
polymer/ionic liquid composites as gas separation membranes through an
alternative design that confines the ionic liquid within a polymer platform. The
resulting chemical and physical characteristics are expected to yield membranes
with enhanced mechanical stability at industrially-relevant pressures and with
competitive separation performance. The investigators will focus on synthesis
and demonstration of polymer/ionic liquid composite membranes for selectively
removing carbon dioxide from a gas stream also containing methane. Computer
simulations will illustrate the fundamental mechanisms behind membrane
performance, which can be used to further optimize the design. In addition to
the technological benefit to society, the project will broaden the participation
of underrepresented groups in STEM through hands-on undergraduate research
projects. Undergraduates at the University of Mississippi will also gain
awareness of the membrane science field through instructional modules developed
for polymer science, membrane science, and simulation
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to design a biphasic
polymer/ionic liquid composite membrane with optimal gas separation properties
by exploiting the beneficial changes in the ionic liquid-rich phase properties
resulting from ionic liquid nano-confinement within a block copolymer platform.
Through an integrated experimental and computational research approach, the
investigators will elucidate the structure/property/performance relationships
between block copolymer size and structure and nano-confined ionic liquid
structure to develop stable gas separation membranes of industrial interest.
Specifically, the design of a tunable block copolymer platform will be achieved
by combining design-of-experiments methods with molecular dynamics simulations
to inform experiments. The investigators hypothesize that maxima in chemical
permeability and selectivity in ionic liquids exist due to scale-dependent
confinement effects resulting from intramolecular ordering. The design of
experiments details the use of two copolymers: polystyrene-block-poly(N,
N-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate) (PS-b-DMAEMA) and polystyrene-block-
polyethylene glycol (PS-b-PEG). Two ionic liquids have been selected for study:
1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)-imide [EMIM][Tf2N] and
1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium thiocyanate [EMIM][SCN]. During the baseline
experiments, the homopolymers of DMAEMA and polystyrene will serve as models of
the hydrophilic (polar) and hydrophobic (non-polar) components of the block
copolymers. Pure gas permeation of carbon dioxide and methane will be measured
to assess gas separation performance of optimal biphasic membranes. Mixed
permeation studies will also be conducted. Using simulations, the investigators
will predict the polymer/ionic liquid interactions and quantify the nano-
confinement effect on carbon dioxide and methane absorption through proper
energetic and structural metrics. The investigators will work to increase
student awareness of the membrane field by developing research-integrated
modules for undergraduate courses in polymer science, membrane science, and
molecular simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.