* 2031736
* RAPID: Advanced Topic Modeling Methods to Analyze Text Responses in COVID-19 Survey Data
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Philip Resnik, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 04/30/2023
* USD 191,785.00

As the COVID-19 pandemic continues, public and private organizations are
deploying surveys to inform responses and policy choices. Survey designs using
multiple choice responses are by far the most common -- "open ended" questions,
where survey participants provide a longer-form written response, are used far
less. This is true despite the fact that when you allow people to provide
unconstrained spoken or text responses, it is possible to obtain richer, fine-
grained information clarifying the other responses, as well as useful “bottom
up” information that the survey designers did not know to ask for. A key problem
is that analyzing the unstructured language in open-ended responses is a labor-
intensive process, creating obstacles to using them especially when speedy
analysis is needed and resources are limited. Computational methods can help,
but they often fail to provide coherent, interpretable categories, or they can
fail to do a good job connecting the text in the survey with the closed-end
responses. This project will develop new computational methods for fast and
effective analysis of survey data that includes text responses, and it will
apply these methods to support organizations doing high-impact survey work
related to COVID-19 response. This will improve these organizations’ ability to
understand and mitigate the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project’s technical approach builds on
recent techniques bringing together deep learning and Bayesian topic models.
Several key technical innovations will be introduced that are specifically
geared toward improving the quality of information available in surveys that
include both closed- and open-ended responses. A common element in these
approaches is the extension of methods commonly used in supervised learning
settings, such as task-based fine-tuning of embeddings and knowledge
distillation, to unsupervised topic modeling, with a specific focus on producing
diverse, human-interpretable topic categories that are well aligned with
discrete attributes such as demographic characteristics, closed-end responses,
and experimental condition. Project activities include assisting in the analysis
of organizations' survey data, conducting independent surveys aligned with their
needs to obtain additional relevant data, and the public release of a clean,
easy to use computational toolkit facilitating more widespread adoption of these
new methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.