* 2031003
* RAPID: Revolutionary Massively-Parallel Bioreactions for COVID-19
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2021
* Gregory Faris, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 10/31/2021
* USD 239,918.00

This project will provide the basis for a new test and diagnostic that can be
performed in as little as 2 minutes and a cost as low as $2. This could be used
routinely to test for hidden spreaders of disease at airports or entrances to
hospitals or long-term care facilities. Availability of this diagnostic would be
transformative. The speed and low cost could provide the first point-of-contact
molecular tests diagnostic for diseases such as COVID-19. Two minutes and $2 is
fast enough and inexpensive enough to perform such routine screening in airports
to detect asymptomatic spreaders as they embark or disembark from airplanes.
Thus, this tool could prevent such diseases from spreading beyond the initial
outbreak. Similarly, the method could be used to screen employees when they
arrive to work at hospitals, long-term care facilities, or prisons, and avoid
the huge toll a disease such as COVID-19 is taking. Finally, the method could be
used for routine screening at large facilities such as factories, food
processing or distribution facilities, and large government buildings, allowing
our economy to return to a more normal state. The research will also lead to new
knowledge on performing massively-parallel microscale reactions and provide
training for a student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance research
and applications on massively-parallel bioreactions to enable a new point-of-
contact for testing and diagnostic that will have a transformative impact on how
we handle pandemics such as COVID-19. The technology will enable a 2-minute test
for sample diagnostic at a cost of $2 per assay. The investigator uses a new
format to speed thermal cycling while achieving approximately 1,000,000-fold
sample partitioning to accelerate sample preparation without micro-patterning or
microfluidics. They will achieve the required large area temperature uniformity
using optical heating while simultaneously using confinement of lateral
diffusion to produce ~1,000,000 virtual reaction
wells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.