* 2031614
* RAPID: Impact of CoVID-19 Stay-at-Home Orders on urban stream quality in Denver Metro Area with application for future urban living scenarios
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* John McCray, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 04/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The COVID-19 restrictions in the Denver Metro area present an unprecedented
opportunity to understand how urban river water quality might improve during
times of greatly reduced traffic. Cleaner, fishable and swimmable urban rivers
would be another justification for sustainable living practices that entail much
less driving, including working from home (telecommuting), remote education,
increased on-line shopping and delivery, and enhanced public transportation.
These urban-living practices are inevitable, but the COVID-19 pandemic could
potentially accelerate these practices into near-term living scenarios. The
information will be useful to urban planners regarding green infrastructure
needed for cleaning urban water, and to public health officials and legislators
for managing urban water. Additionally, recent trends for manufacturing, urban
development, traffic design, and public transportation mean the historical data
on urban water quality may no longer describe current conditions. Thus,
continued study is critically necessary to ensure a future clean, resilient
water supply, as well as a healthy urban river ecosystem.

The project team will collect perishable water quality and flow data from urban
streams and waterways during COVID-19 and evaluate the impact of reduced traffic
by analyzing this data in combination with long-term, infrequent, historical
data, as well as more frequent post-pandemic data collected for this study. The
team will collect data on traffic-based pollutants, including heavy metals,
selected organics (PAH, BTEX), total-dissolved solids, basic water-quality
parameters, and macro-organisms that respond rapidly to pollution. Chosen sites
are representative of the urban spectrum, and also are likely to be impacted by
future stay-at-home living practices. Results will be scaled up to the city-
scale using mass-balance hydrological and water quality models in combination
with GIS-based traffic data. The data collected can be used in combination with
complex hydrological and traffic models to evaluate numerous scenarios
associated with future urban living practices.

This award was co-funded by the Hydrologic Sciences and Environmental
Sustainability programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.