* 2031312
* AGS-PRF: The Building Blocks of Shear-Driven Atmospheric Turbulence
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Michael Heisel, Heisel, Michael
* Fellowship Award
* Chungu Lu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 190,000.00

Irregular wind velocities and swirling motions contribute to an erratic
phenomenon known as turbulence. Considered one of the most confounding problems
in physics, turbulence remains a research frontier in many fields despite
centuries of study. Yet society exists within the turbulence of atmospheric
winds. For instance, the interaction of these winds with the earth surface
affects local, short-term weather and global, long-term climate, determines the
dispersion of pollutants and other chemicals in the atmosphere, alters the
transport of organic matter such as dust and seeds, and influences the water
security of ecosystems stressed by evapotranspiration. It suffices to state that
turbulence is crucial to life on Earth as we know it. Traditional atmospheric
models account for the erratic behavior of turbulence in terms of statistics
such as averages and standard deviations, but these models have no connection to
the instantaneous features – such as persistent swirling vortices – or the
dynamics that lead to the statistics. The present project uses recent
visualizations of turbulent flows to identify a representative turbulent feature
or “building block” (a sort of DNA of eddies) to represent turbulence as a
series of these building blocks. The research will address how turbulence
phenomenology drives the mechanisms of complex processes such as pollutant
transport. The building block framework will also inform modeling approaches
that are implemented in large-scale simulations pertaining to weather and
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies revealed that shear-driven
atmospheric turbulence is predominately self-organized into relatively uniform
flow regions separated by smaller-scale layers of concentrated shear and
vorticity. The research will build on these studies to investigate a combined
deterministic and stochastic framework for representing turbulence. This
framework will bridge the observed self-organized structures, time-averaged and
scale-dependent statistics, and similarity relations in atmospheric turbulence.
While the organization of the flow into these two structural types, i.e. the
building blocks, is deterministic, the size and intensity of the structures will
be described stochastically. The project includes simulating a stably stratified
atmospheric boundary layer to explore the effects of buoyancy on the self-
organized structures. The research will lead to an improved phenomenological
understanding of empirical similarity relations, specifically how modifications
to the instantaneous structures due to buoyancy lead to quantitative changes in
important time-averaged statistics such as the mean velocity profile and
turbulent transport of momentum, energy, and mass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.