* 2031343
* RAPID: IIBR: Instrumentation: Time-resolved studies of the SARS-CoV-2 endonuclease NP15
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Petra Fromme, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 04/30/2023
* USD 199,993.00

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) crisis has produced an urgent need to
understand the structure and dynamics of the proteins of SARS-CoV-2 (CoV-2), the
coronavirus that is the cause of this severe infectious disease. Research
supported by this award will unravel the catalytic mechanisms of one of the most
interesting and unique CoV-2 enzymes, the RNA endoribonuclease, NendoU, which is
only found in the highly virulent coronaviruses. NendoU plays a key role in
limiting the sensing of viral RNA by host sensors and is thus a very important
target to elucidate the mechanisms of viral pathogenesis at the molecular level.
The researchers will use a combination of advanced techniques and new
innovations in sample preparation to make “molecular movies” that reveal the
mechanism of action for the NendoU protein to advance our understanding of viral
biology and may aid in the identification of potential therapeutic compounds.
Results from these studies will be shared through on-line seminars, at
scientific meetings, in public data repositories, and through publications in
peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Static structures of the NendoU
from SARS, MERS and most recently, also from CoV-2 have been determined by
standard crystallography under cryogenic conditions, but no structures have been
captured with the substrate RNA bound nor have any time-resolved studies been
performed on the enzyme. This COVID-2019 RAPID award focuses on time resolved
studies using a combination of time-resolved femtosecond crystallography (TR-
SFX) and time resolved cryo-electron microscopy (TR-cryo-EM) to capture a
molecular movie of the catalytic reaction of NendoU. After the establishment of
micro/nano-crystallization conditions for NendoU, mix-and-inject TR-SFX studies
will be performed at an x-ray free electron laser (XFEL) to capture snapshots of
key reaction steps, including substrate binding as well as the catalytic
reaction. Secondly, the mix-and-inject technology developed for Tr-SFX, will be
adapted for TR-cryo-EM, which complement the TR-SFX study by unravelling the
later time points in catalysis, including product release and the steady state.
These time-resolved studies of NendoU will unravel the structure of the
transition state and may provide a basis for development of novel drugs for
severe coronavirus infections or investigations of the role of NendoU in
suppression of the immune response. This RAPID award to Arizona State University
is made by the Division of Biological Infrastructure using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.