* 2031095
* III: RAPID: Stay-at-home attitudes and their impact on the COVID-19 pandemic
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Elena Zheleva, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2022
* USD 99,338.00

The rapid spread of the novel SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus has paralyzed societies and
strained health care systems, with a rising death toll and severe economic
consequences. Stay-at-home orders around the globe have been embraced by some
and protested by others. At the same time, little is known about the spectrum of
attitudes towards these orders and people's justifications for following or
resisting them. This research will develop algorithms for analyzing stay-at-home
attitudes on social media, connecting these attitudes to pandemic impact through
a novel visual representation that takes geographical location and socioeconomic
context into account. This research will bring greater awareness to the public
about the role of values that protect life in public discourse and their
influence on citizens' appraisal of policies that affect their own well-being.
Shared values, beliefs, and understandings build the social cohesion and
cooperation needed to build greater economic prosperity. The results of this
project will help policy makers craft more persuasive public health directives
to enhance public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Framing--highlighting certain
aspects of an issue or event--can have a significant impact on the formation of
perspective. To address the complexity of modern information networks, this
project will develop algorithms that automatically detect frames propagated
through social media. It focuses on value frames because people use those values
to justify a position and issues can be re-framed accordingly to appeal to and
change the opinions of target audiences. Creating the first dataset of its kind,
this project will collect and annotate tweets that include stay-at-home
attitudes and core value frames. Current state-of-the-art approaches to
detecting attitudes in tweets are limited to binary or ternary classification of
either sentiment (positive, negative, neutral) or language type (abusive versus
"normal"). By bringing together state-of-the-art deep learning models with
models that have more explanatory power, this project will devise a novel
methodology for identifying values frames in microblogs that takes advantage of
semantic and discourse structure information. By enabling statistical computing
and analysis over geospatial data, for which few techniques exist currently,
this research will make it possible to analyze datasets at multiple levels of
spatial aggregation and to compare temporal and spatial differences to enhance
participation and promote positive public health
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.