* 2031750
* Collaborative Research: Contrasting the Effects of Aerosols on Marine Boundary Layer (MBL) Cloud-precipitation Properties and Processes in Boreal and Austral Mid-latitude Regions
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Xiquan Dong, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 415,831.00

The project is to investigate formation of marine-boundary-layer clouds, which
are clouds that are directly influenced by the ocean. Particularly, how tiny
suspended particles or aerosols contribute to clouds and how clouds interact
with aerosols. Aerosols are generated from atmospheric, land, and oceanic
processes such as urban/industrial activity, dust storms, burning vegetation,
biological activity, sea spray, wind currents, and volcanoes. Certain aerosol
types can initiate marine-boundary-layer cloud development more easily than
others. This adds to the complexity and uncertainty of marine-boundary-layer
cloud impacts on weather variations. Marine-boundary-layer clouds have
significant climatological effects on the hydrological cycle and the Earthâ€™s
radiation balance. For example, varying distributions of marine-boundary-layer
clouds around the globe contribute to areas of deficits and surpluses in solar
energy and rainfall. Many studies have been conducted on aerosol-cloud
interactions in the Northern Hemisphere where most of the global population and
landmasses are located. Not much is known over the vast area of remote land and
oceanic regions in the Southern Hemisphere. This study will investigate
differences and similarities of aerosol-cloud interactions between the Northern
and Southern Hemispheres by analyzing recent field observations and utilizing
numerical model simulations. The project involves undergraduate and graduate
students to participate in the research project and train them to be the next
generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study employs long-term
ground-based observations and remote sensing retrievals from a dedicated
observation site in the Eastern North Atlantic Ocean and aircraft in situ
measurements from two intensive field campaigns in 2018: 1) the Aerosol and
Cloud Experiments in the Eastern North Atlantic (ACE-ENA), and 2) the Southern
Ocean Clouds, Radiation, Aerosol Transport Experimental Study (SOCRATES). The
research team utilizes a synergistic measurement/modeling approach in
conjunction with meteorological patterns to compare the characteristics of
marine-boundary-layer aerosol, cloud, and drizzle properties over the two
hemispheres through answering three scientific questions. Those are: 1) what are
the relative roles of surface cloud condensation nuclei and updrafts in aerosol-
cloud interactions over the marine boundary layer and warm rain processes? 2)
what are the characteristics of marine-boundary-layer aerosol, cloud and drizzle
properties and their interactions during two field campaigns? 3) what are the
characteristics of marine-boundary-layer aerosol, cloud, and drizzle properties,
their interactions over the Southern Ocean, and their similarities and
differences compared with those in the Eastern North Atlantic Ocean? Comparisons
of precipitation processes and aerosol-cloud interactions at the two sites with
significantly different environmental conditions will shed light on the
controlling factors in aerosol-cloud interactions and eventually lead to a
generalized parameterization for aerosol-cloud interactions applicable for the
global climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.