* 2031573
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic Data Analytics for the Power Grid via Koopman and Perron-Frobenius Operators
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Umesh Vaidya, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2023
* USD 281,148.00

The modern power grid is becoming increasingly complex. Ensuring stable grid
operation is becoming more and more challenging. Classical tools for stability
assessment for power systems largely rely on accurate system models. Such models
are becoming less reliable as the grid continues to aggressively integrate new
renewable, and often distributed, energy resources. Efficient computational
tools are necessary to ensure reliable operation. This proposal seeks to develop
such tools for stability monitoring, combining both coarse model information and
real-time data streams from the power grid. Existing relationships with the
power industry will play a crucial role in disseminating the research findings.
Students working on this project will learn to utilize powerful techniques from
modern data science that have applications in power systems. Research outcomes
will be seamlessly integrated in multiple existing courses at both universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work leverages a linear transfer operator-
based framework to build computational tools for stability monitoring, involving
the Koopman and Perron-Frobenius operators. These operators are used to lift the
nonlinear dynamics from state space to linear dynamics in the space of functions
of the states. The eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of these operators are rich in
information that is relevant to stability monitoring for a power grid. This work
builds a framework to combine measurements of a subset of the states of a power
system and a potentially coarse power system model to adaptively compute
eigenvalues and eigenfunctions using kernel methods from machine learning. The
eigenfunctions are then leveraged to estimate region of attraction of power
system dynamics and propagate uncertainties in initial condition and model
parameters. Special attention is paid to scalability of the approach to viably
evaluate power system stability, in (almost) real-time. The proposed methods are
fundamentally different from techniques that rely on local linearization that
cannot capture the complex nonlinear behavior of power system dynamics. These
methods are deeply rooted in dynamical systems theory and offer a natural
mechanism to harness both model information and measurements from sensors within
a unified framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.