* 2031590
* I-Corps: Infrared-driven organic light-emitting diode (OLED) projection display
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Do Young Kim, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide an
innovative, cost-effective, highly-flexible, extremely-large display screen
technology with excellent display image qualities. The proposed innovative
organic light emitting diode (OLED) display technology may fulfill the societal
need for extremely-large and high-quality display screens for use in venues such
as schools, churches, and theaters. Furthermore, the novel display approach is
environmentally-friendly, only requiring a simple solution-based inkjet printing
processes instead of environmentally disruptive and damaging semiconductor
manufacturing processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to
evaluate the commercial potential of a new cost-effective, highly-flexible,
extremely-large display screen technology and to accelerate the translation of
this technology into emerging products. Direct conversations with prospective
customers will allow for greater understanding of customer segments and further
value proposition refinement. Participation will also help the I-Corps team
clarify business and technology directions such as refining the product
development process to target and identify specific market
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.