* 2031542
* SBIR Phase I:  An integrated digital approach to mental health and skill development for workforce re-entry (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Derrick Drakeford, DRAKEFORD SCOTT & ASSOCIATES
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2023
* USD 255,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide integrated digital tools to
support mature learners in rejoining the workforce. The proposed system
leverages best practice in engaging learners virtually through several different
tools, enabling them to interact both with facilitators and their peer groups;
moreover, content can be delivered in a self-paced fashion. Furthermore, the
system incorporates new understanding of mental health challenges in operating
virtually to support re-entry to the workforce. This is particularly critical in
the realignment of the workplace following the COVID-19 pandemic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project synthesizes a number of technologies such as self-paced digital courses,
peer-to-peer virtual environments, and live coaching to provide both functional
instruction and social/emotional support for return to the workforce. The
proposed project will test the feasibility of both the digital tools as well as
pedagogical approaches to assess feasibility of an integrated
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.