* 2031929
* Ocean Response to Prolonged Common Era Surface Climate Trends
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Geoffrey Gebbie, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 11/30/2023
* USD 770,001.00

Earthâ€™s surface has generally warmed over the past 100 years, but the ocean has
slowed this warming by taking up heat that otherwise would have remained in the
atmosphere. Eventually, changes in the temperature of the atmosphere will affect
the entire ocean, including the deep ocean. But we currently do not have enough
observations to know whether the deep ocean can continue to act as a brake on
surface warming. This project seeks to understand how the ocean responds to
prolonged surface changes by using observations and models of the past. The team
will generate and collect evidence from sea floor sediments related to ocean
temperature changes of the last 2,000 years and interpret their causes with an
ocean circulation model that includes the deep ocean. Climate science will be
advanced by better estimates of how heat stored in the deep ocean affects
surface climate. This project will support education. It will include a graduate
student and community outreach through several local organizations. The results
of the project will also benefit society by providing information about the
influence of the ocean that is needed to improve climate projections of 21st
century and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The last 2,000
years is marked by long-term trends in surface climate, such as a 600-year
cooling trend between the Medieval Climate Anomaly and the Little Ice Age. The
key question is, how does the ocean respond to prolonged surface temperature
trends? This question is difficult to answer because there are few observations
of regional surface and deep ocean temperature before the Industrial Revolution.
The team will use published and new observations from marine sediment that make
it possible to investigate the deep ocean response to surface climate changes
during the last 2,000 years. They will work on sites near North Atlantic Deep
Water formation, and downstream in the deep Atlantic, Indian, and Pacific
Oceans. The focus is to provide constraints on centennial-scale regional
temperature variability. This will be achieved with observations of benthic
d18O, surface temperature, and bottom water temperature data. The Common Era
evolution of global ocean temperature will be reconstructed by assimilating
temperature data into an ocean circulation model. The project will provide an
estimate of changes in deep ocean heat content relative to the upper ocean. It
will also estimate polar amplification and the difference in the timing of
climate shifts between hemispheres. These results will be used to test whether
heat loss in the deep ocean can offset global heat gain in the upper ocean. They
will also be used to evaluate heat uptake estimates from coupled climate models,
and to suggest whether it is possible for a remnant influence of the Little Ice
Age to still be influencing the ocean today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.