* 2031545
* RAPID: Current and Next Generation Mask Elastomer Straps: Mechanical Integrity with Sterilization and Reuse
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* John Reynolds, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 05/31/2022
* USD 164,784.00

This COVID-19 Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will investigate how
sterilization and reuse strategies for personal protective equipment used by
healthcare workers affect the properties of mask straps. Single use N95 and
other masks are in short supply in the US and globally, which has stimulated
interest in their sterilization and reuse. In addition to the sterilization
procedure killing viruses, it is important that the mask retains a known
fraction of functionality including mechanical durability over multiple
sterilizations. Sterilization treatments have the possibility of degrading mask
materials, in particular elastic straps, which have been identified as a weak
link in initial studies. This project will contribute to this important, global
need by studying the effects of various sterilization treatments on the
structure and properties of strap materials to ensure safe and reliable fitting
of masks that will be reused a limited number of times prior to disposal.
Additionally, there will be a need for technology developed in this project in
low to middle income countries that transcends the immediate crisis and will
impact emergency care situations world-wide for years to
come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to correlate the type and
extent of sterilization treatment with the properties of the elastomeric straps.
To accomplish this, materials characterization experiments will be performed
that establish links between changes in material structure and properties to the
combined effects of the sterilization method used and the mechanical deformation
associated with donning and doffing. Specifically, chemical changes will be
evaluated using thermal and spectroscopic methods that quantify the extent and
the spatial distribution of the changes as a function of exposure dose and time.
Complementary testing of viscoelastic and mechanical properties will evaluate
changes in performance because of sterilization. Beyond characterization of the
straps, the integrity of the attachment to the mask will be measured using
mechanical testing. The results of this work will provide a more complete
understanding of strap degradation for each sterilization method, thereby
informing the design of sterilization processes and mask components to optimize
the effective mask lifetime. Furthermore, should this work conclude that strap
integrity is the limiting factor in the lifetime of a given N95 mask,
understanding these underlying failure mechanisms will provide insight into the
development of feasible material alternatives or modifications that can be made
to extend overall mask lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.