* 2031325
* I-Corps: Harnessing Unary Computing for Modern Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Kia Bazargan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a novel computing method called “unary computing,” which makes
computations very efficient with limited hardware resources to perform complex
calculations. Applications of this method include signal processing
(image/video/audio/radar) and machine learning for autonomous vehicles, UAVs,
satellites, as well as cloud computing and internet-of-things (IoT) systems. The
proposed methodology has the potential to significantly reduce power and energy
requirements for emerging applications on the cloud and at the embedded-systems
level, benefiting chip manufacturers and cloud platform companies. Furthermore,
IoT applications that may benefit from reduced hardware cost and smaller
batteries include medical implants, ultra-low latency trading, and unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs)/ &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of unary computing, which uses an “uncompressed” data
representation (unary) instead of the traditional binary representation to make
computations very efficient. Conventional methods would require many
multiplications and addition operations to calculate functions such as cosh(x),
tanh(x) and y=x^0.45 through polynomial expansions. Unary computing is able to
perform these calculations cheaply and directly without any multiplication
operations or additions. The proposed method shows remarkable performance
benefits compared to conventional binary computations. For example, when
implementing tanh(x) at 8 bits of resolution, a hybrid unary-binary method can
implement the function with only 24 units of area on FPGAs (a particular type of
integrated circuits), whereas conventional binary would need 509 units. The
unary method outperforms binary in other performance metrics, such as speed and
power. The method results in approximately 20%-30% area improvement for
constant-coefficient multiplication, which is heavily used in machine learning
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.