* 2031490
* Supporting computational thinking for middle school mathematics students through diagrammatic reasoning and representational logic
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Alan Shaw, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 12/31/2023
* USD 498,276.00

This research project studies conjectures about the learning of computational
thinking through the development of a curricular and pedagogical intervention.
The intervention adds a computational environment to a successful effort called
the Algebra Project, and is focused on engaging all students in a predominantly
African American middle school in computational thinking. In so doing, this work
seeks to develop a remedy for the fact that many low-performing students lack a
sufficient contextual understanding of the symbols that they are taught to
manipulate in their mathematics courses. This research seeks to demonstrate how
the use of various types of computational thinking can increase conceptual
understanding, visual reasoning, and representational logic. In pursuit of this
outcome, this project is seeking to determine to what extent a specific type of
simulation and modeling application can enable teachers and middle-school
students to use visual reasoning and spatial logic when analyzing mathematical
functions. Students in this intervention will work collaboratively in small
groups among themselves, and with near peer mentors and tutors, to examine
shared experiences that are grounded in mathematical and computational logic.
Through their ongoing collaboration and discourse, the students will determine
solutions for various tasks and challenges that they are presented. In addition
to using visual reasoning and spatial logic in this work, students will also
learn to use Python scripts and functions to aid them in their
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research study will be carried out by using
a specific type of Python-based microworld, that combines enactive-iconic
representations with an experiential math curricular approach developed by the
Algebra Project. The Algebra Project’s curricular approach uses a 5-step
collaborative model for mathematics inquiry in the classroom. The first step
begins with the students experiencing a shared event. Next, students examine the
experience by representing the event pictorially, then through everyday
language, then through an agreed upon regimentation of everyday language, and
finally through the use of iconic and conventional symbolic representations and
equations. This research will extend the Algebra Project’s curricular and
pedagogical approach by providing students with enactive-iconic and diagrammatic
mathematical constructions that they can manipulate virtually in a computational
environment that they can use to further examine the mathematical features and
logical structures involved. The results of the previous work of this research
team that piloted this approach with a very small number of students in an urban
context, found that the students involved developed a greater conceptual
understanding of core mathematical ideas, namely equation and function, grounded
in visual reasoning and representational logic. Furthermore, indicators
suggested improvements in ownership and engagement. The research team had not
yet examined the extent to which core elements of computational thinking were
developed by the students, and this research will address that issue, as well as
expand the content of the mathematics and computational material involved. This
project is supported by the CS for All: Research and RPPs
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.