* 2031195
* RAPID: Data-Driven Models to Optimize Ventilator Therapy in ICU COVID Patients
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Raimond Winslow, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) is one of four infectious diseases caused by
the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Although the clinical signs and patient symptoms of this
complicated disease vary in presentation and severity, clinicians and
investigators have reported constitutional symptoms (cough and fever), upper and
lower respiratory tract symptoms, as well as gastrointestinal symptoms. Among
the most concerning is the life threatening acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) in patients. The pathophysiology of severe ARDS results from a rapid
decline in pulmonary function and requires intubation of patients in critical
condition for invasive mechanical ventilation to combat lung recruitability,
reduced peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2) and risks of organ failure
and death. Ventilator settings to increase SpO2 and oxygen delivery is achieved
with positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP). However, controlling ventilation
at a high PEEP for extended periods of time significantly increases risk for
ventilator-associated lung injury (VALI). This RAPID project will develop novel
engineering strategies for optimal ventilator control to maximize SpO2 in
minimal time, while minimizing PEEP and the duration of ventilator use are
needed to minimize VALI and subsequent complications, and to improve favorable
patient outcomes. In the management of patients with COVID-19, these strategies
are significant to optimize oxygen delivery, minimal invasive ventilator use and
mechanical lung injury. Further, the understanding of ventilator requirements
and operative settings highlights the need for available ventilators. The
management of severe ARDS is complicated and strategies and protocols are
desperately needed.

To achieve this goal, we will develop data-driven linear parameter-varying (LPV)
dynamical systems models that relate patient clinical state and ventilator
inputs to the output variable patient SpO2. Patient state will be characterized
using data from the electronic health record (EHR) and minute-by-minute
physiological time-series (PTS) data (e.g., heart rate, respiratory rate, SpO2)
acquired from patient monitoring. We will first develop the LPV model using
retrospective data from non-COVID-19 patients who are on ventilators to help
treat conditions such as pneumonia and ARDS. Then, we will test the predictive
capabilities of the LPV model in COVID-19 patients who are placed on
ventilators. Finally, we will develop an optimal ventilator control strategy for
COVID-19 patients to regulate SpO2 levels in ICU patients based on the LPV
model. Attempting to control a complex biological system using control
strategies based on mechanistic models is generally intractable. However, the
LPV framework allows for sophisticated optimal strategies to be implemented that
not only allow for better performance than other classical methods, but also
provides stability and performance guarantees.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.