* 2031854
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Seasonal and Interannual Changes in Shelf-Derived Material Inputs to the Arctic Ocean: The Arctic Radium Isotope Observing Network (ARION)
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Matthew Charette, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 01/31/2026
* USD 705,115.00

Within the Arctic Circle, rapidly rising air and sea temperatures have resulted
in the loss of sea ice, increased river discharge, coastal erosion, and
permafrost thaw. Many of these changes are adding nutrients and carbon to the
shallow seas that surround the Arctic Ocean, specifically by increasing
interactions with sediments on the land or those over the continental shelf.
Importantly, the resulting changes are not limited to the coastal seas: added
nutrients and carbon can be transported to the central Arctic Ocean via strong
surface currents. Climate-related changes in Arctic Ocean chemistry may
therefore influence primary production across the Arctic, and ultimately affect
the amount of nutrients reaching the North Atlantic via Arctic outflow. This
project will fill an important research gap by monitoring interannual and
seasonal changes in radium isotopes as proxies for chemical inputs to the Arctic
Ocean that are sourced in sediments, with a focus on the transfer of elements
from the shelf seas to the central Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radium isotopes
are continuously produced at ocean boundaries and are soluble in seawater.
Radium therefore serves as an analogue for similarly sourced shelf-derived
materials, including biologically important elements such as carbon, nutrients,
and trace metals. To test the hypothesis that climate change is leading to
increased delivery of terrestrially-derived solutes to the Arctic Ocean, radium
levels will be measured on bi-annual cruises along the Laptev and East Siberian
Sea margins (to capture interannual changes) and on a first-of-its kind in situ
radium isotope sampler (to capture seasonal changes). These sampling efforts
will be complemented by an international network of collaborators that will
contribute data to create an Arctic Radium Isotope Observing Network (ARION)
that spans the Arctic Ocean and will serve the greater scientific community. The
project will also partner with an artist-explorer to communicate the importance
of this research to the general public through exhibitions at a local
museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.