* 2031806
* EAGER: Investigation of host and viral factors that influence the severity of coronaviral disease
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,09/30/2022
* James Macy, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,999.00

Three coronaviruses (SARS-CoV1, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV2) have emerged from
animals causing severe respiratory disease in humans. Little is known about the
virus-host interactions which control disease severity and transmission, leaving
society unprepared for the COVID-19 pandemic. An animal model that closely
mimics SARS-CoV-2 infection and pathogenesis is needed to better inform and
educate about the science of virus transmission and prevention. Mice are
infected with their own, mouse-specific coronavirus [mouse hepatitis virus
(MHV)] that causes respiratory disease and affects other organs, such as the
heart, liver and spleen, like COVID-19. This proposal will utilize a MHV model
of COVID-19 to understand disease progression and the factors involved using
controlled conditions. The mouse model takes advantage of available mouse
genetic tools, immunologic reagents, and detailed pathologic assessments to
identify host factors, such as the type of immune cell infiltrates and cytokines
produced that are associated with different disease severities. This analysis
will provide insight into protective and deleterious host responses, which can
identify processes to target for therapeutics. The development of this model
system has the potential to be an efficient and cost effective tool to identify
and screen treatment and prevention strategies that warrant escalation to more
specific COVID-19 models, thereby making the best use of the limited
infrastructure resources associated with the ABSL-3 requirements of actual SARS-
CoV2 use. This is a Broader Impact because it will benefit society in the quest
for COVID-19 therapeutics and vaccines. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Models of all
levels of SARS-CoV2 disease in genetically diverse populations are urgently
needed. It is hypothesized that the host and virus factors controlling the
severity of coronavirus respiratory infections can be identified using natural
murine coronavirus infections in diverse, yet genetically defined cohorts of
mice. MHV are natural pathogens of mice that are well adapted to their host and
vary in both their tropisms and their disease phenotype. The range of
pathological lesions and host responses caused by MHV-1 and MHV-A59, with
different virulence in the respiratory tract, will be characterized. The eight
genetically diverse Collaborative Cross founder mouse strains will be used to
represent the genetic diversity seen in large human populations. These studies
will focus on lung pathology, but the heart, liver, kidney and spleen will also
be evaluated. Mice will be inoculated with MHV-1 or MHV-A59. Tissues will be
examined for pathologic changes. Fibrosis and immune cell infiltrates will be
characterized using histochemical stains and immunohistochemistry. Viral titers,
serum chemistry, coagulation, neutralizing antibodies and cytokines will be
measured. Correlations between MHV strain, mouse strain, viral load, clinical
disease, pathological lesions, and immune reactions will be determined. These
studies are the first step to increase knowledge about the biology of SARS-CoV-2
infections. This RAPID award is made by the Symbiosis, Defense, and Self-
recognition Program in the BIO Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, and,
using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.
It was co-reviewed by the BIO Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology Genetic
Mechanisms cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.