* 2031548
* RAPID: Machine Learning Methods to Understand, Predict and Reduce the Spread of COVID-19 in Small Communities
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Tatiana Timofeeva, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 04/30/2022
* USD 185,747.00

The ongoing COVID-19 outbreak has recently reached pandemic status spreading all
around the world. The severity of the pandemic, along with an enormous impact on
world’s economy and society, has forced governments to introduce emergency
measures. It is essential to utilize the available statistical data from trusted
sources in order to model and evaluate the dynamics of the pandemic spread, to
not only better understand such complex systems, but to learn and develop
possible solutions to prevent further spread of current and/or similar future
outbreaks. Thus, this research, devoted to the development of mathematical
models of COVID-19 pandemic spread, addresses an urgent national need. Faculty
and students in computer science, anthropology, and computational chemistry at
New Mexico Highlands University have formed a diverse group for finding a
solution to the complicated problems of the description and prediction of
COVID-19 spread. This multidisciplinary project is expected to yield a better
understanding of the interconnections among many factors that contribute to the
spread of COVID-19. Statistical data will be collected in regions of Northern
New Mexico, including San Juan and McKinley Counties in the Navajo Nation and
Los Alamos county outside of the Navajo Nation. Analysis of the collected
statistical data along with socio-cultural assessment from this project will be
presented to New Mexico (NM) tribal and health authorities. The project will aim
to provide a scientific basis for the prediction of disease spread and will
consider scenarios associated with the possibility of another wave of the
pandemic. Students from this minority-serving institution involved in the
project will obtain valuable experience in the application of advanced machine
learning models and methods in providing fast robust reaction to a national
health, economic, and societal crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study,
machine learning methods will be used to analyze pandemic spread scenarios in
different regions and to glean the most important features of the data
characterizing the spread. The research team will use both traditional machine
learning techniques and advanced methods, such as artificial neural networks,
allowing development of virus incidence model capturing dependencies in both
linear and nonlinear domains. The work will concentrate on understanding disease
spread with regard to multiple socioeconomic factors. The problem can be treated
as a sequence modeling one; so, recurrent neural networks and more complex
models based on their recurrent cells might be one promising direction. The next
step will be to assemble datasets for small isolated communities with different
socioeconomic backgrounds and ethnicities – comparing Navajo Indians living on
the Navajo reservation to Los Alamos County (NM) – and to test the applicability
of the developed model to these regions. The spatiotemporal data available on
the spread is heterogeneous in character. An important goal of this research is
to classify the collected data with respect to the similarity in the epidemic
curve behavior and then build separate models for different regions according to
this classification. The proposed model will be used for prediction of future
incidents and to produce the most effective non-medical recommendations for
suppression and prevention of future viral outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is supported by the Partnerships for Research and Education in
Materials (PREM) program and the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory (CMMT)
program in the Division of Materials Research in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Science using supplemental funds made available by the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.