* 2031471
* The Cleveland Tech Talent Pipeline (CLE TTP)
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Brian Harper, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 10/31/2024
* USD 1,999,998.00

It is critical that all students have a basic understanding of our digital world
to ensure their future success in all realms of college and career readiness.
However, the playing field is not level; the numbers of women students, students
of color, and students with disabilities, for example, remain low. It is
therefore important that intentional strategies and measures that are
specifically aimed at inclusive access (the forAll part of CSforAll). This The
Cleveland Tech Talent Pipeline will build upon several NSF-supported efforts in
Cleveland to develop pathways for students in computer science and information
technology from high school to career, community college and/or four-year
colleges and universities. Through a collaboration between Cleveland State
University and the Cleveland Metropolitan School District (CMSD), a network of
pathways will be implemented through a range of activities, including high
school mathematics and computer science courses, internships, and summer
programs for CMSD students. The lessons learned from this project will be highly
valuable for states and communities across the US working to introduce CS at
scale in K-12 schools and create pathways from high school to and through higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 2013, Cleveland State University (CSU), in
collaboration with Cleveland Metropolitan School District (CMSD) and other local
groups, has been serving students in CMSD to ensure that they have access to
computer science knowledge, skills and careers. Leveraging prior NSF-funded
research on the impact of CS courses on underrepresented students of color in
Cleveland, The Cleveland Tech Talent Pipeline (CLE TTP) will develop pathways
for students interested in careers in CS and information technology from high
school to community college and/or four-year colleges and universities utilizing
high school mathematics and CS courses and summer internships with mathematics
support for students in the CMSD. This Research-Practitioner Partnership (RPP)
will: 1) support the development of summer workshops and internship programs for
high school students from CMSD, 2) incorporate CS and information technology
into the high school curriculum, 3) create a transition for CMSD students to
career, two-year and four-year degree programs, 4) track and provide support for
students from ninth grade through college and career from CMSD who participate
in the CS courses, summer programs and/or internships, and 5) develop a
dissemination strategy to share lessons learned with other districts in the
local, state and national communities. The project team will also conduct
research on the impacts of the workshop/internship programs and the CS high
school curriculum. This project has the potential to inform the CS community
about CS pathways for students in high need urban districts across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.