* 2031674
* RAPID: Electronic Tattoos for Detection of Pre-symptoms of Infection
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Roozbeh Jafari, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) and University of Texas (UT) proposes a smart
and miniaturized patch using graphene-based electronic tattoos (e-tattoos) and a
suite of algorithms to extract core body temperature to be used to detect pre-
symptoms of infection, with significant utility in understanding and controlling
the spread of respiratory and non-respiratory viral infection including
coronavirus COVID-19. Skin temperature plays an important role in detecting pre-
symptoms of infection. The project provides three intellectual merits: 1) It
creates a novel structure that intelligently interfaces a fully flexible
graphene-based e-tattoo to rigid printed circuit board using thin film permanent
or current-controlled magnets to avoid breakage and for improved mechanical
robustness for unobtrusive skin temperature sensing. 2) The project also creates
machine learning and deep learning algorithms that leverage the physiological
times-series acquired from sensors to predict the core body temperature and will
lead to determining pre-symptoms of infection while handling noisy data and
enabling personalization of the computational models for each individual using
the concept of denoising autoencoders and meta learning. 3) The project creates
various techniques to address the real-time operation of the proposed prediction
algorithm based on deep learning on low power microcontrollers (MCUs) including
methods that strictly use fixed point operations. Given the slow rate of change
in the physiological signals and their sparsity, this project will leverage
differential sensing over various time scales. These signals can be processed by
simplified deep neural network architectures with reduced mathematical
operations that facilitates running it on the MCUs for
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project includes a
direct response to the COVID-19 pandemic, aiming at protecting healthcare
workers and patients through creating novel sensors with significant utility to
generate actionable information. Additionally, in light of the growing interest
in wearable electronics, this pioneering research effort at the intersection of
software, hardware and systems on unconventional e-tattoo platforms can result
in breakthrough in data mining and intelligent sensor architecture for mobile
health, fitness and computing enabling a larger number of applications. The
proposed novel sensing paradigm will provide opportunities for semi-conductor
companies to consider new market opportunities and manufacture billions of
chips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.