* 2031558
* Collaborative Research: Template-Free Manufacturing of Regular Microstructures by Ribbing-Enhanced Roll Coating
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jong Ryu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 619,850.00

A technology that can reduce the friction or drag on ship hulls would have a
substantial economic and environmental impact by improving fuel efficiency.
Microstructured superhydrophobic surfaces may retain air pockets that can act as
gas lubrication between the water and the ship hull. Although the
superhydrophobic surfaces have been studied for nearly two decades, it is only
recently that periodic linear-trench structures have been shown to be effective
for marine crafts traveling in open water, which represents sea, oceans, and
lakes. The manufacturing of such well-defined micro-trenches has relied on
silicon-based microfabrication based on semiconductor manufacturing approaches.
These silicon processes are prohibitively expensive and not scalable for large
surface areas, such as ship hulls. To address these challenges, a team from
North Carolina State University and University of California at Los Angeles
would like to utilize roll coating methodology, which is well known for cost-
effective and large-scale production, to form the periodic microstructures on
large substrates. This new process is researched to develop friction-reduction
coatings for ship hulls and study their physical and chemical durability. Hence,
outcomes from this research will benefit a wide array of marine applications,
including commercial and military ships, which play a significant role in the
national and global economies and security applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is investigates the spontaneous pattern
generation by ribbing on polymer surfaces during roll coating in an ordered
manner using a fundamentally new approach to manufacture three-dimensional micro
and nano-scale structures on a large-area substrate. The objectives are to
establish the scientific foundation to control the microstructures formed during
the roll coating, and to fabricate and validate the drag reduction efficiency of
the surfaces in realistic flow conditions of open water and Reynolds number
greater than 1 million. The research team will utilize computational modeling to
predict the deformation behavior of the viscoelastic polymer verified by the
experimental observations. For the proof-of-concept of drag reduction in
realistic flows, a microstructured film and a smooth film will be layered on the
bottom of a motorboat specifically outfitted to reliably compare the fluid shear
stresses on the two. This project will educate the next generation of engineers
and scientists through multidisciplinary research involving manufacturing,
materials science, computational modeling, and fluid mechanics. The research
outcome will be also used to educate K-12, undergraduate, as well as graduate-
level students through various formats such as outreach activities and
innovative curricular efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.