* 2031877
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Investigating Impacts of and Response to COVID-19 in the Technology Innovation Enterprise
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Beth Quinn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 67,862.00

The COVID-19 pandemic is quickly altering the landscape of our personal and
professional lives, and the impacts from the pandemic on the innovation
enterprise are profound. Industry is seeing hiring freezes and layoffs. Teachers
and college faculty have had to quickly shift to online course delivery.
Students have also had to make the shift to online courses, and many face the
loss of communal labs that are set-up to support their work. If we are to be
able to respond effectively to the impacts of the pandemic, it is paramount that
we quickly gather systematic data, in real-time, from the innovation community.
This RAPID award will assess the state of the computing innovation community
from K-12 education to the tech workforce. Through a survey of the short,
medium, and long term effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the community, this
project will elucidate the current state of persistence in computing degree
programs and professions and inform efforts to design and deliver education and
workforce opportunities. This will support the technology innovation enterprise
in mitigating the disruption caused by the COVD-19 pandemic, helping to
stabilize the U.S. innovation ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this RAPID
award, AnitaB.org, the National Center for Women &amp; Information Technology
(NCWIT), and the STARS Computing Corps will gather data related to the short-
and longer-term impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the computing innovation
enterprise. Due to the ever-changing COVID-19 situation, it is paramount to
capture data in these early days and establish a baseline of information that we
will be able to build on as the situation unfolds. The objective of this award
is to understand the impact of the global pandemic on the conditions of work and
educational environments related to factors associated with persistence in
computing degree programs and professions. The team will sample across the
computing ecosystem by gathering data from K-12 teachers; post-secondary program
leaders, educators and students; and individuals in the computing workforce.
They will assess the following research questions to understand impacts at both
the individual and organizational levels: &lt;br/&gt;1. How is the computing
ecosystem (K12, postsecondary, industry, startup) responding to the COVID-19
crisis? &lt;br/&gt;2. What are the short-term, intermediate, and longer-term
impacts of the COVID-19 crisis on the computing community, in terms of the
design and delivery of computing instruction (K12, postsecondary) and research
and the experiences of technologists in industry?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.