* 2031536
* RAPID: Modeling the Severity and Transmissibility of COVID-19 in the USA with Intrinsic Behavior Change
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Peter Riley, Predictive Science Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2022
* USD 199,580.00

As COVID-19 spreads through communities across the world, and particularly
within the USA, a number of questions remain unanswered. Of particular
importance is to what extent different mitigation and containment strategies
affect the resulting number of ICU cases and/or deaths? This question will
become ever more nuanced as communities begin to relax current “lockdown” orders
to varying degrees. Additionally, to what extent do spatial and temporal changes
in weather (temperature, precipitation, and humidity) as well as UV radiation
modulate the disease’s evolution? Through a combination of unique data
collection, model refinement, and scientific investigation, this study can shed
valuable insight on these questions. The codes and derived data will be made
available to the scientific community through GitHub repositories, CRAN
packages, and web portals, and informal training will be provided for
potentially interested stakeholders, such as county public health departments,
the CDC, and DoD agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will use an
existing state-of-the-art modeling and forecasting framework, Dynamics of
Interacting Community Epidemics (DICE), to examine the human ecology of COVID-19
dynamics. DICE is a unique tool that can help reveal the impact of different
containment and non-pharmaceutical mitigation strategies, as well as climate
forcing, on the transmission of COVID-19. Uniquely, it is an arbitrarily scaled
hybrid spatial metapopulation model in which individual communities experience
deterministic disease dynamics, but between which the process of one community
seeding an outbreak in another community is stochastic. DICE can be run at the
county, state, region, or national level, or, various combinations of these sub-
units can be coupled, depending on what data are available. DICE solves the
system of SE1…EnI1…ImRX equations producing a modeled incidence profile and
estimates of the reproduction number as a function of time, R(t), the severity
of the outbreak, and parameters quantifying the efficacy of interventions. DICE
already has the capability of incorporating school vacation data, and uses
climate data from NASA and NOAA, and specific humidity, in particular, which has
been shown to be important in forecasting the evolution of influenza. A range of
methodologies for incorporating interventions, such as school closures, social
distancing, and shelter-in-place orders have been recently tested and explored
using a complementary single-population prototype tool (DRAFT), specifically
developed to rapidly explore refinements that can be incorporated into DICE.
DICE can both simulate possible future scenarios as well as fit to available
data to estimate the efficacy of different intervention profiles, and also
captures joint estimates of severity (Sev) and transmissibility (R(t)). As
COVID-19 spreads across the U.S., community transmission can be evaluated in
R-Sev space, which will provide crucial and strategic information to assist
policymakers in making more informed decisions. Through the use of a Monte Carlo
Markov Chain (MCMC) approach, DICE produces robust estimates of the
uncertainties in the projections. Additionally, DICE is a multi-model algorithm,
allowing the generation of forecasts for more than 32 model variants, which
provides not only an estimate of the impact that various factors may play (e.g.,
climate), but also produces hyper-ensembles of model realizations, which, in
turn provide additional estimates of uncertainty. This RAPID award is made by
the Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Disease Program in the Division of
Environmental Biology, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.