* 2031431
* Exploring Ionic Liquids for Low Temperature and Low Emission Water Desalination
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Brandon Ashfeld, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 330,000.00

The availability of clean water has become one of the most critical problems
facing society and the global economy in the 21st century. Oceans cover 71% of
the planet and store approximately 97% of its water. Therefore, future water
shortages could be alleviated through the development and deployment of more
efficient and cost-effective technologies to desalinate seawater. Current
commercial seawater desalination technologies are energy intensive and their
operations require high-grade electricity. Recent studies have shown that a
solvent-based desalination process, referred to as directional solvent
extraction, can extract and release clean water from high salinity source waters
using readily available sources of heat (e.g., solar energy, waste heat, etc.).
The goal of this research project is to gain a better understanding of the
underlying physical and chemical principles behind the directional solvent
extraction process. The investigators will combine state-of-the-art
computational modeling with the synthesis, characterization, and bench scale lab
evaluation of new materials for the design and development of next-generation
methods. Successful outcomes of this project will benefit society through
efficient and cost-effective technologies to desalinate seawater. Further
benefits to society will be achieved through student education and training
including the mentoring of two doctoral students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
thermal and membrane-based seawater desalination technologies are energy
intensive and costly. In contrast, a directional solvent extraction process
could be operated using heat sources at temperatures as low 40 ËšC and without
the need for a membrane. However, the availability of solvents with the right
properties has remained a major impediment to the development and implementation
of this technology. The comparatively low volatility, minimal toxicity, and
architectural variability of ionic liquids have made them attractive as
potential solvents for use in directional solvent extraction-based desalination.
The goal of this research project is to better understand the solvation and
phase behavior of ionic liquids in high salinity aqueous solutions. By combining
molecular simulations with materials synthesis and characterization and bench
scale desalination experiments, the investigators will identify the key
structure-property relationships that govern the competing solubilities of ionic
liquids with water and natural salt ions. Ultimately, the investigators will
leverage this new knowledge in developing more energy-efficient and
environmentally benign directional solvent extraction
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.