* 2031851
* RAPID: Ethical Decision-Making about Conducting Essential Research in a Pandemic: Experiences of Principal Investigators and Research Personnel
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Alison Antes, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 09/30/2021
* USD 199,388.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has confronted researchers with unprecedented challenges.
One of these challenges is the need to determine whether ongoing or new research
projects are essential to conduct in-person during the crisis, and if so, which
research personnel should conduct this research. Such decisions have been made
all the more difficult by the challenges that plague them, including extreme
time pressures, insufficient or vague guidance, competing personal and
professional trade-offs, and uncertain ramifications for those affected by these
decisions. A thorough understanding of the ethical and practical dimensions of
these decisions is needed to help researchers and institutional officials better
prepare for managing the scientific workforce during future crises. This project
aims to understand how principal investigators have made these decisions during
the current pandemic and identify the factors in their environments that shaped
their decision-making, and how these decisions impact research personnel in
their lab (e.g., graduate students, postdocs, technicians, staff scientists).
Data from this project can help improve understanding about how principal
investigators might approach challenging decision-making during similar future
situations and how research personnel perceive and are affected by these
decisions. Fostering enhanced awareness of and deepened appreciation for the
unique challenges such emergencies pose to essential researchers will be
valuable for researchers and the broader community that benefits from their
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses two primary research
questions: 1) what ethical considerations and practical challenges shape
principal investigators’ decision-making about whether and how to conduct in-
person research projects during the COVID-19 pandemic?, and 2) how do research
personnel ethically appraise their PI’s decisions and decision processes in
light of their relationship and the context of the pandemic? Data collection
will proceed using a mixed-methods approach to synthesize quantitative survey-
based information from principal investigators and research personnel and
interviews with select researchers, graduate students, and research staff.
Initial surveys will be completed by hundreds of NSF- and NIH-funded scientists
and research assistants, and follow-up interviews will be conducted with select
participants. Data will then be synthesized, analyzed, and interpreted. Findings
will be disseminated widely to benefit researchers in future emergencies.
Answering these questions contributes to the research on ethical decision-
making, ethical research cultures, research leadership, and pandemic policy-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.