* 2031314
* Matching Experienced and Novice Teachers for Ongoing Rigorous Support in Computer Science (MENTORS in CS)
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Aleata Hubbard, COMPUTER SCIENCE TEACHERS ASSOCIATION, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,724.00

The Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA), in collaboration with the CSTA
Chapter in Wisconsin and WestEd, will develop Matching Experienced and Novice
Teachers for Ongoing Rigorous Support in Computer Science (MENTORS in CS), a
Research Practitioner Partnership to develop and iteratively improve a high
school computer science (CS) teacher mentorship program to provide ongoing,
rigorous, and job-embedded support to teachers who are new to CS. While novice
teachers often require more intensive support to be effective, there are
relatively few opportunities for ongoing professional development and support in
CS. In this project, experienced CS teachers will guide novice CS teachers in
setting, monitoring progress toward, and meeting individualized growth goals to
strengthen their teaching practices and their ability to effectively serve
students traditionally underrepresented in CS, particularly African American and
Hispanic students and students from economically disadvantaged backgrounds. This
project will reach 60 CS teachers in two years, impacting approximately 7,200
high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MENTORS in CS Key project activities
involve developing the mentorship structures, mentor training, and teacher
matching process; holding frequent mentorship meetings and mentor community of
practice meetings; and using research and evaluation data to iteratively improve
the program and outcomes. The MENTORS IN CS partners expect the following
project outcomes: (1) Increased confidence in teaching CS, as measured by
surveys and interviews; (2) Increased pedagogical content knowledge, as measured
through surveys, interviews, and mentor evaluations; (3) Increased use of
equitable and inclusive teaching practices, as measured by surveys, interviews,
and mentor evaluations; and (4) Growth towards mastery of indicators within the
CSTA Standards for CS Teachers as measured by pre-, mid-, and post-self-
reflections. The partners aim to develop and refine mentorship structures and
protocols first at one chapter (CSTA Wisconsin Dairyland), with an explicit
strategy to scale the mentorship program across CSTAâ€™s growing chapter network
in subsequent years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.