* 2031762
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Molecular underpinnings that define volatile compound signature of the lung
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Abhinav Bhushan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 06/30/2022
* USD 124,887.00

The main basic research objectives of this project are to determine the
molecular basis for the volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that are released by
infected bronchial epithelial cells and to measure them using analytical
devices. The fundamental knowledge of the biological mechanisms that generate
VOC signals in viral infected lung cells is not currently understood and there
is a lack of engineering tools and instrumentation that can capture and analyze
the VOCs to provide accurate analytical information. Expected results from this
basic research project might provide translational guidance for design of rapid
tests that can detect SARS-CoV-2 infection in the US population. Currently,
COVID-19 is confirmed using reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction
analysis of nasopharyngeal swabs. Given the current public health emergency and
the need to prevent further spread of this highly contagious virus, point of
care screening methods are needed that have a high level of confidence, can be
mobilized to screen large numbers of people, and can immediately identify
persons who require confirmatory testing. One promising approach is to use the
pattern of volatile organic compounds that are formed in the body in response to
infection for screening purposes. Such a technology would be invaluable in
rapid, non-invasive diagnosis of viral infections. The multidisciplinary
approach in this project of integrating cell biology, biomedical engineering,
and analytical devices will enhance understanding of the cellular mechanisms
that regulate lung VOCs and may become the foundation for non-invasive diagnosis
of viral infections. This interdisciplinary project will also provide an
outstanding educational and training opportunity at the intersection of biology
and engineering for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, the role of important cell signaling
pathways on the synthesis of VOCs will be examined. These pathways will be
perturbed in the cells after which the cells will be infected with the SARS-
CoV-2 virus. The cellular response such as cytokine release and change in
transcripts will be determined. Second, the cells will be incorporated in a
microfluidic lung-on-a-chip device. This will serve two purposes. One, the
organ-chip will provide the cells with a physiological microenvironment which
will improve their functional response. Two, the small volume of the
microfluidic device will allow pre-concentration and efficient collection of the
VOCs. The VOCs will be analyzed using (1) a high-resolution gas chromatograph
instrument and (2) an e-nose sensor. The gas chromatograph will be setup with
high-resolution dual-column setup with orthogonal column coatings which will
provide a comprehensive identification of the VOCs. In parallel, the VOCs will
be measured using an e-nose sensor that comprises nanocomposite sensors which
change resistivity based on adsorption of VOCs. Machine learning will be used on
the VOC signatures to determine an infectious from a non-infectious VOC
signature. This platform will uncover new science for regulation of metabolic
response which will drive fundamental knowledge of biology and development of
advanced instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the
Cellular Dynamics and Function Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.