* 2031554
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Deep Polar Cap Dynamics Using an Autonomous Instrument Network
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Alex Chartier, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2026
* USD 102,832.00

This award is funded in whole or part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021
(Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Geospace environment comprises a
complex system of the incoming solar wind plasma flow interacting with the
Earth's magnetic field and transferring its energy and momentum into the
magnetosphere. This interaction takes place mainly on the Earth's dayside, where
reconnecting geomagnetic field line might be "open" and directly connected to
the interplanetary magnetic field lines, thus providing direct pathways for the
solar wind energy to be transferred down to the ionosphere and upper atmosphere.
The spatial extent of the polar cap areas controlled by the ionospheric plasma
convection demarcate the so-called "Open-Closed Boundary" where solar wind
particles reach down polar ionospheres. Observations of that boundary serve the
important role in validating geomagnetic field modeling and help studying space
weather. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the compelling Geospace research in
the polar regions, this award will allow scientists to investigate
magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling processes and ionospheric irregularities
inside the polar caps and their space weather impacts by establishing a new
ground-based network that will be deployed in the Antarctic polar cap region.
This will be achieved using three new instrumented platforms (next generation of
Automatic Geophysical Observatories) along the snow traverse route from the
Korean Antarctic Station Jang Bogo toward to the Concordia Station at Dome C by
the Korea Polar Research Institute's (KOPRI) team. Geospace data collected by
these three platforms will be shared by the U.S. and Korean researchers, as well
as will be made available to other scientists. The research involves early-
career researchers, as well as train students who will build and operate remote
Antarctic platforms, as well as analyze collected data to investigate space
weather events and validate models. This project expands the U.S. institutions
partnership with the KOPRI scientists and logistical support
personnel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.