* 2031187
* RAPID: Dynamic Graph Neural Networks for Modeling and Monitoring COVID-19 Pandemic
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Wei Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 114,000.00

The novel coronavirus, COVID-19, has become one of the biggest pandemics in
human history and has generated lasting impacts on public health, society, and
economy. The number of cases in the United States has passed 1 million with a
total number of deaths over 50 thousand. There is an urgent need for research
and development that can bring a predictive understanding of the spread of the
virus, thereby enabling mitigation methods to alleviate the negative effects of
COVID-19. Traditional epidemiological models usually take into consideration
only a small number of features in building a prediction model, which may not be
able to capture potential risk factors and effects of various intervention
mechanisms of this new pandemic. In this project the investigators develop novel
machine learning methods that can simultaneously model and predict the COVID-19
spread, detect and monitor risk factors, and evaluate effectiveness of
interventions over time and space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new model ingests
and integrates heterogeneous and rapidly accumulating data across diverse
sources, such as publications, news, census, social media, and outbreak
observation trackers. It employs a new contextualized language model to
accurately recognize named entities and relations from vast text data and build
knowledge graphs to extract potential risk factors. A dynamic graph is
constructed. Each location node may have a set of static and time-dependent
attributes. Events, individual behaviors, social activities, interventions are
mapped to activity nodes with edges connecting to the corresponding location
nodes at the time. A novel dynamic graph neural network is trained to perform
joint predictions of all locations over time. Activity nodes of significant
attention weights represent major risk factors or effective intervention
mechanisms. The project will result in public dissemination of the prediction
model and all source codes, immediately benefiting the combat against
COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.