* 2031977
* RAPID: Using Smartphones to detect and monitor respiratory symptoms in COVID-19 patients
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Tanzeem Choudhury, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2021
* USD 99,975.00

This project will develop, refine, and evaluate a smartphone-based solution to
reliably track changes in blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) and respiration rate
and volume. Recent analysis of COVID-19 patients have shown some unusual
findings. For example, there is a discordance between the respiratory symptoms
and the blood oxygen saturation levels. This can lead to sharp deterioration of
patient status without the individual experiencing the usual signs of distress.
Existing smartphone solutions do not work in detecting significant drop in blood
oxygenation, which is essential to detect whether the person needs to be
hospitalized. Accurate in-home tracking of respiratory signals and blood
oxygenation levels can help to monitor and follow patients with COVID-19 and
identify those who are stable vs. those who are
deteriorating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable two informative,
scalable, and cost-effective measurements using smartphones: (i) SpO2 and (ii)
respiration rate and volume changes. Although there are many standalone pulse
oximeters on the market which are FDA approved and work well (accuracy of ±2%),
most people don't have them and are unlikely to buy special purpose devices.
Recently, several smartphone and smartwatch based apps have been released that
claim to measure oxygen saturation, but they are not reliable. These
applications simply use the phone's camera to measure the change in reflection.
While these apps can capture pulse reliably, and even capture the blood
hemoglobin concentration to some degree, it does not work for oxygen saturation
as there are no separate signals to compare oxygenated against deoxygenated
hemoglobin. In general, pulse oximetry works by measuring the light absorption
in hemoglobin (transdermally) at two different wavelengths (red: 660nm and near-
infrared: 940nm). Both of these bands can be found in broadband white LEDs, such
as those used for flash on smartphones and can be read by the image sensors
(cameras), as they use infrared for distance measurements in photographs. With
optical filters attached to the smartphone flash, these two distinct bands can
be separated out from the broadband source, captured by the phone's camera, and
be used as a pulse oximeter. For monitoring respiration signal/rate, the project
will build on the investigators' previous work on opioid overdose detection,
which leverages the speakers and microphones of a smartphone to monitor the
chest motion of a person in a contactless fashion. At a high level, the
smartphone transmits inaudible high-frequency custom sound signals using the
device's speaker. These signals are reflected by the subject's chest and
recorded using the device's microphones. The chest motion due to breathing
causes a change in these reflections as seen by the microphones. These changes
can be detected and the respiration signal can be obtained using signal
processing algorithms on the smartphone. This system can now be improved to
detect changes in respiration rates caused due to the onset of viral infections
and difficult breathing conditions like hypoxia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.