* 2031287
* RAPID: Analyzing forced habit change from COVID-19 using large-scale data
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Colin Camerer, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2022
* USD 174,313.00

During the COVID-19 pandemic, people were forced to try new routine at school,
work, and home — “forced exploration”. That is, habits used to guide how we
work, conduct our daily routine, exercise, eat, go to school, and interact with
friends and neighbors, Habits are formed to make the same routines effortless,
to save time and mental effort, when routine choices work well. However, while
the mental savings from habits are a benefit, when people are choosing
habitually, they may not be exploring other options which could be even better—
that is the hidden cost of habit. Forced exploration can actually be beneficial
if it shows people better ways of school, work, and social interaction. This
kind of exploration is like going to your favorite restaurant and finding out
they have run out of your favorite dish — now you have to try something new,
which you would not have explored without the disruption. This wave of forced
exploration raises important questions: What new habits are formed that will
persist— what will be the “new normal”? Consider, for example, wearing a face-
mask outside of the house. This is exactly the kind of “muscle memory” behavior
that usually habitizes— it can be triggered while stepping out of your car, or
entering a store, and quickly becomes automatic and effortless. Whether a lot of
other people are wearing masks or not can also be a trigger that prompts habit
(in either direction).The same question arises across the board: Will people go
back to movie theaters (or stay home with streaming)? Will restaurants fully
reopen or will home delivery take over? Will knowledge firms switch to more
remote “tele-work”? Will schools find better mixtures of home learning and in-
school activity? This project will analyze two different kinds of big data to
test whether or not this kind of forced exploration really does result in new
habits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In social sciences, habits are usually modelled
mathematically using a simple equation in which the more an activity has been
done in the past, the more it is done in the future. This is called a "reduced
form" approach because it reduces a biologically complicated mechanism to
something much simpler. It is a good starting point but cannot answer questions
such as "What if past behavior is disrupted?” This research project uses a new
approach to habits based on animal learning and human cognitive neuroscience.
The starting point is that habits have developed to save effort ⎯— both physical
and mental. The “neural autopilot” framework proposed here predicts that
individuals develop habits for actions which, after repeated decisions, have
proven to be reliably rewarding. Such habitual behavior drains fewer physical
and mental resources. At the same time, when people are habitized⎯- about
exercise, eating, or work — they ignore new goods and activities they would
prefer if they actually tried them. While the neural autopilot approach has been
tested in many lab studies of animal and human habituation, it has never been
systematically explored using a large amount of data about how people actually
behave in everyday life. An ideal test of this model is in a field setting where
choice sets are artificially truncated, so people resort to new choices; and
that is exactly what happened during the ongoing lockdowns. This project will
use data from Weibo chat data and Fitbit fitness and sleep tracking. These large
sets of data contain fine-grained measurements of behavior. Using this data, we
will develop and test a statistical neural autopilot model, to recover values
for the model’s main parameters. The parameters are numbers that measure, for
each person, how fast habits are formed and the threshold to break out of a
habit and explore something that might be better. The estimated parameter values
will be used to make predictions about which habits acquired during the pandemic
will persist, and which behavior will revert to pre-pandemic
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.