* 2031887
* SICB 2021 Conference Symposium: Biology Beyond the Classroom: Experiential Learning through Authentic Research, Design, and Community Engagement
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Alexandria Hansen, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 21,500.00

This award funds a symposium to be held at the annual meeting of the Society for
Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB) on effective teaching approaches for
engaging diverse groups of students in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) disciplines. The meeting typically attracts approximately
2,000 scientists, most of whom are responsible for teaching university courses
and will be able to quickly implement changes in their teaching to better
support students. A total of 16 symposium speakers from a range of institutions
will present their work on innovative teaching approaches, providing essential
training for attendees. This project will also support the facilitation of a
community outreach workshop led by aspiring teenage scientists who will share
their experiences enhancing science understanding in their neighborhoods.
Together, the symposium presentations and workshop will provide essential
professional development for integrative biologists to fill a need among
university-level instructors and ensure more equitable institutions of higher
education. In addition, an “Ask an Education Expert” booth on experiential STEM
learning will be available to all SICB attendees throughout the meeting. Results
will be disseminated through publications and social media, and participants
will submit pedagogical materials to SICB’s Research and Education Resources
online, open-access database, thereby expanding the impact beyond the meeting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides support for an education-focused
symposium at the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology (SICB) to be held in Washington, D.C., in January 2021. Symposium
speakers will showcase innovative approaches for engaging undergraduate and
graduate students in experiential science learning. Specifically, the symposium
will highlight three high-impact practices that allow students to take their
science learning outside of the classroom for increased relevance and
authenticity: 1) Course-based undergraduate research (CUREs), 2) Digital
fabrication in makerspaces, and 3) Service- or Community-based learning.
Although each topic is unique, all provide an alternative approach to
traditional lectures and have proven effective at appealing to diverse groups of
students who are traditionally underrepresented in the STEM workforce. Further,
each symposium speaker will contribute a manuscript for publication in the SICB
journal, Integrative and Comparative Biology. In addition, symposium
participants will contribute to two joint papers, one a review and the other
which will provide insights into grand challenges currently facing the field of
STEM education and recommendations for key shifts that are necessary to broaden
participation in the next decade. The symposium presentations and deliverables
will advance knowledge of effective teaching practices and research methods to
investigate the efficacy of those practices for an audience of integrative
biologists and educators, many of whom have not received formal training in
teaching or education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.