* 2031150
* PFI (RAPID): COVID Rapid Response Innovation Community
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Flaura Winston, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 02/28/2022
* USD 199,950.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation
(PFI) RAPID project is to enable the efficient and effective translation of
innovative technology solutions to meet frontline medical shortages related to
COVID-19. The pandemic triggered critical supply chain shortages. Non-medical
engineers offered design and prototype solutions, but their expertise and
innovations could not be deployed efficiently. These engineering innovators
lacked connections to frontline healthcare decision-makers and were unfamiliar
with the rigorous requirements of and processes related to the delivery of
healthcare devices. Filling urgent shortfalls during a pandemic exemplifies the
need to quickly assure safety while also considering rapid specification,
design, scaling, testing and deployment. Therefore, this PFI RAPID project aims
to develop, deploy, and evaluate the Connected Rapid Innovation System to meet
Identified needs with Solutions (the CRISIS System) in order to satisfy supply
chain shortages in Philadelphia, PA. The CRISIS system will streamline device
development/delivery processes and create impactful, sustained connections
between innovative engineers and local healthcare decision-makers â€“ all with the
goal to deliver technological innovations to solve frontline shortages. Dr.
Flaura Winston and her team will include women and minorities as part of the
effort and will engage the public in science and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project may have an immediate benefit by addressing
frontline medical device shortages related to COVID-19 and serve as a robust,
real-world test case for future expansion to connected, efficient responses for
future disaster and emergency shortages. In order to build, deploy and evaluate
the CRISIS System, the team proposes two aims. In Aim 1, the group proposes to
build the connected system and associated processes to incorporate best
practices in medical device development and enable efficient, purposeful,
systematic innovation. In Aim 2, they will build the back-end for matchmaking
(between device/product needs and technical expertise and resources) through the
application of novel artificial intelligence methods in order to employ multiple
data sources (from public data to private corporate data) as well as real-time
estimations of the degree of matching. Dr. Winston and her team will use
continuous quality improvement methods to learn from each innovation cycle about
how to optimize both the processes as well as the matches. The ultimate goal
will be efficient delivery of technological solutions for COVID-19. If proven
successful on the local level for COVID-19, the lessons learned, library of
innovations, and software will be available for mass scale-up of innovation,
unlocking the potential to meet needs during other
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.