* 2031342
* Collaborative Research: CSforAll:RPP: Jumpstarting Philadelphia CSforAll through a Researcher Practitioner Partnership
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Jamie Payton, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 10/31/2023
* USD 38,688.00

In contrast to its neighbors Maryland, New York, and Ohio, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania does not require a Computer Science course for graduation and has
not offered Computer Science certification at any level. Additionally, there is
no statewide requirement for CS courses in the curriculum, and likewise a lack
of teachers qualified to teach CS courses. These have contributed to a vicious
cycle that is difficult to break, and which causes the School District of
Philadelphia in particular to lag behind in educating students for computing in
the 21st Century. The tide has begun to turn, however. After a suite of policy
changes in the state since 2016, Pennsylvania announced the PAsmart initiative
in November 2018, with statewide available grants available to schools and
school districts for improving computer science and STEM education. The
Jumpstarting Philly Researcher Practitioner Partnership aims to build upon this
progress and efforts of CS4Philly, an affiliate of the national CSforALL
consortium, and the Philadelphia STEM Ecosystem CS Workgroup. The project will
bring equitable, inclusive, and high-quality computer science instruction
aligned with educational standards to all Philadelphia students, and address the
lack of equitable access to certified CS educators in Philadelphia high schools.
An Equity Task Force will study issues surrounding equity, both within the
school structure and the supporting community, and an Academics Task Force will
look at issues and strategies related to increasing access to CS teachers. By
engaging stakeholders across institutions, the RPP builds capacity for
improvement and scaling of efforts to bring CS education to all schools in the
School District of Philadelphia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Jumpstarting Philly
Researcher Practitioner Partnership aims to bring equitable, inclusive, and
high-quality computer science instruction aligned with educational standards to
all Philadelphia students and address the lack of equitable access to certified
CS educators in Philadelphia high schools through a Networked Improvement
Community (NIC). This project partners the School District of Philadelphia
(SDP), high school teachers and administrators, teacher associations, community
and informal education organizations, high school students, parents, and
researchers to address this by: offering multiple pathways to certification;
identifying a diverse pool of potential CS educators; strengthening support and
communities of practice for current and potential CS educators; and working with
public sector stakeholders to develop a more effective policy framework that
encourages a more diverse pool of CS educators. The NIC Steering Committee will
work to develop a common agenda for an integrated approach to address systemic
and institutional barriers to offering high-quality, equitable, and inclusive
computer science education by certified CS educators to high school students
within the School District of Philadelphia. Since organizational change requires
both buy-in from leaders and the people empowered to change policy, pedagogies,
and practices, the Equity Task Force will engage school district administrators,
high school principals, high school teachers, parents, students, community
organizations, and non-profits offering informal CS education opportunities,
through a series of community meetings. By engaging stakeholders across
institutions, the RPP builds capacity for improvement and scaling of change
efforts to bring CS education to all School District of Philadelphia
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.