* 2031717
* RAPID: Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Electrical and Computer Engineering Programs at Minority Serving Institutions Served by the Inclusive Engineering Consortium
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Kenneth Connor, Electrical and Computer Engineering Department Heads Association
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 06/30/2021
* USD 148,720.00

The Inclusive Engineering Consortium (IEC) is a novel collaboration among
fifteen Electrical and Computer Engineering programs at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities and two at Hispanic Serving Institutions.
Participating institutions include Alabama A&amp;M University, Ana G. Mendez
University at Gurabo, Florida A&amp;M University, Hampton University, Howard
University, Jackson State University, Morgan State University, Norfolk State
University, North Carolina A&amp;T State University, Prairie View A&amp;M
University, Southern University, Tennessee State University, Tuskegee
University, University of Maryland Eastern Shore, University of Texas at El
Paso, University of the District of Columbia, and Virginia State University.
Member schools are among the top producers of African American and Hispanic
engineering graduates. These schools have been working to build a support
organization to enable the participating faculty, students and staff to engage
fully in the national education and research enterprise through multi-
institutional collaboration. The unprecedented stress as campus operations moved
online due to the COVID-19 pandemic creates the need to capture the experiences
of the member communities. Lessons will be learned and applied in the summer and
fall as universities work to improve the learning experiences of their students
and continue to respond to the extraordinary disruptions caused by the pandemic.
In addition to enhancing distance education efforts, nearly every tool used and
every idea applied will be a potential candidate to further build the support
infrastructure, programs and processes that can make it possible for the nascent
IEC to realize its vision of enabling its partners to act in concert as a
virtual super department. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project builds on
two successful IEC collaborations funded by the National Science Foundation: the
Experimental Centric Pedagogy (ECP) project and the Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU)/Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Mega Site. The ECP
project prioritized hands-on experimentation in the circuits and/or electronics
courses of thirteen collaborating institutions. With the transition to online
learning, the treatment is now distance delivery and learning and the enabling
technologies include tools for online meetings, forums, homework and quizzes and
other distance delivery compatible tools. The data collection protocols and
instruments developed for the ECP will be deployed to study and improve student
learning under virtual conditions. The Mega Site serves as a national model for
how to broaden participation in engineering by successfully implementing multi-
institution undergraduate research programs, which others can adopt/adapt and
build upon. Now in its second year, the Mega Site will be offered as a scaled
back, online program in summer 2020 and faculty, teachers and students are well
positioned to participate in data collection activities to better understand the
impact on critical workforce development programs that take place outside of the
classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The great distance learning experiment is
sweeping the nationâ€™s colleges and universities. The Minority Serving
Institutions who make up the Inclusive Engineering Consortium are uniquely
positioned to rapidly capture the experiences of minority engineering students
and their instructors. Leveraging the existing network of collaborators from
seventeen universities significantly increases the potential to successfully
develop and test a model for online learning environments in electrical and
computer engineering courses that can be used in times of
crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.