* 2031624
* RAPID: Transcription Factor Profiling for SARS-CoV2 Tolerance/Symbiosis Regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Andrew Emili, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 199,999.00

This research will provide increased knowledge of the molecular factors enabling
different hosts (especially bats vs. humans) to tolerate the recently emergent
SARS-Cov-2 coronavirus. This project will use bat cell line models to
investigate differences in cellular proteins which lead to differences in
immunity profiles of cells from the different species. The proposed research
will identify proteins that are differentially active in different cell line
models, and the effects that immune-stimulating factors and SARS-CoV-2 proteins
have on host cell protein activities. Results from this research could lead to
new insights into why and how certain viruses, in particular SARS-CoV-2, can be
tolerated in some species (e.g., bats) but not others (e.g., humans), and could
provide information for the emergence of future viruses that can cause pandemics
in animal and human populations. The interdisciplinary research team comprises
three experienced lead scientists with expertise in complementary areas of
research. In addition, the research will provide training to two graduate
students who will be able to pursue careers in related areas in academia, the
private sector, or government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is
to further knowledge of the molecular processes that underlie species-specific
infection of cells with SARS-CoV2. This research will provide insights into
transcription factor-based differences between host cells of bat origin, which
can tolerate SARS-CoV2 infection in a non-pathogenic manner, vs human and other
bat cells that do not show this tolerance. The research involves the
collaboration of three PIs with complementary approaches that they will bring to
this project. Five major experimental goals will be addressed: 1)
characterization of transcriptional and nuclear proteomic profiles that
distinguish different bat cell lines; 2) use of a novel protein-binding
microarray to profile active transcription factors among these cell lines; 3)
characterization of candidate immunity transcription factors, such as NF-ÎºB and
IRFs, that are likely different between SARS-CoV2 tolerant and susceptible cell
lines; 4) effects of SARS-CoV2 gene products on identified transcription factors
in the various cell lines; and 5) potential for replication of novel SARS-CoV2
tracer viruses in different bat cell lines. The proposed research will increase
knowledge of SARS-SoV-2 biology. In addition, it investigates the hypothesis
that bat cells have evolved molecular immunity pathways that promote or lead
towards tolerance (perhaps even symbiosis) of bats with coronaviruses. Such
information may lead to the identification of therapeutics for humans and
animals against coronaviruses. This RAPID award is made by the Physiological and
Structural Systems Cluster in the BIO Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.