* 2031279
* Collaborative Research:  Indian Education in Computing: a Montana Story
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Colby Tofel-Grehl, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 02/29/2024
* USD 364,744.00

This project is a partnership among Montana education stakeholders to develop a
new computer science (CS) curriculum for grades 4-8 that integrates with other
school subjects, including Montana’s Indian Education For All curriculum (IEFA).
Because computer science standards are new to Montana, teachers need support to
bring computer science into their classrooms. This project provides support
through two novel approaches to computing--storytelling using the Alice
programming platform and physical computing with textiles that are embedded with
electronics and then programmed by students. Because many teachers and students
believe that computing is difficult, these novel approaches enable more broad
access to computer science. They have been shown to only engage students and
teachers in rigorous computing, but also to make computing fun. This work makes
important contributions in terms of developing a culturally responsive computing
curriculum that makes sense to Montana students, and also addresses broader
questions about the successes and challenges on implementing state-wide computer
science standards, especially in terms of teacher preparation and district
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a culturally responsive
curriculum along with teacher professional development, in order to investigate
how CS learning can be framed for grades 4-8 teachers and students in Montana.
In fall 2020, Montana is adopting new CS standards. Through a research practice
partnership, this project is working directly with the Montana Office of Public
Instruction, tribal entities, teachers, and other stakeholders to develop these
culturally responsive resources, which will be aligned with CS content area
standards that and with Montana’s IEFA curriculum. The project is leveraging
computer science learning through storytelling and e-textiles. By bringing these
two approaches together and aligning them with Montana's new CS standards, the
curriculum is uniquely tailored to the stories and histories of Montana students
and teachers. The project's research is examining how and in what ways bringing
together Montana's IEFA curriculum and the new CS standards leads to the
development of a culturally responsive computing curriculum. To iteratively
improve the effectiveness of the curricular units, a design-based implementation
research approach, using both quantitative and qualitative methods, is employed.
The project is directly reaching 30 elementary and middle school teachers
(grades 4-8) and 380 students. This project is funded by the CS for All:
Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.