* 2031479
* Innovation Pathways to Data Careers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Joyce Malyn-Smith, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,197,286.00

The use of big data as a decision-driver has expanded into every scientific,
industrial, and business enterprise. As fundamental proficiency in data
analytics creeps into this broad range of traditional occupations, there is an
increased need for data fluency and proficiency. From data literacy for all
students, to big-data-enabled specialists, individuals skilled in the variety of
tasks and duties required to collect, clean, and analyze massive data sets are
in high demand. Through a collaboration of Burlington Public Schools, Education
Development Center, and the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary
Education, this project will develop, test, and institutionalize a K-12 pathway
focused on data science and careers. Utilizing a Massachusetts-wide initiative
known as Innovation Pathways, this project will accelerate the expansion of
student access to, participation in, and successful completion of pathways that
culminate in meaningful postsecondary and workforce credentials. Equitable
access, guided academic pathways, enhanced student support, relevant connections
to careers, and partnerships are central to the development of the Innovation
Pathway, and have the potential to broaden the participation of students
entering data-centric careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal design,
develop, test, and institutionalize an innovation pathway focused on data
careers (IPDC). The RPP is an extension of prior NSF-funded computer science and
data projects and leverages a Networked Improvement Community (NIC) approach
that includes high school and community college educators and industry and
community partners. The research questions are driven by practice needs and
focus on (1) what it takes to interest and motivate students to persist on an
IPDC, (2) what characteristics of an IPDC most contribute to the success of the
IPDC, (3) what supports are needed for teachers and other stakeholders to
successfully implement an IPDC, and (4) the role of industry in sustaining a
successful IPDC. Working with project partners, three school systems/high
schools (designated as “development sites”) will form an extended
research/practice team. This team will design, develop, and test curriculum for
a data module to be integrated into high school civics courses and pilot a
Visualization+Data Course and a Python+Data course to complete the IPDC. Working
with teacher leaders/facilitators from the development sites, five school
systems/high schools (designated as “field test sites”) will participate in
professional development during Years 2 and 3. They will integrate the
Civics+Data module in Year 2 and the Visualization+Data course in Year 3 and
commit to implement the Python+Data course in the year following the end date of
this project. Research findings will be used to guide further development of
Innovation Pathways funded by the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and
Secondary Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.