* 2031199
* RAPID: Ionic Modulation of COVID Through Ceramic Surfaces for Deactivation
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Ajay Malshe, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 04/30/2023
* USD 151,093.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The goal of this research project is to actively
capture and decontaminate surfaces from the COVID-19 virus. This project studies
atomically tailored ceramic surface coatings by examining ionic exchange,
dielectric properties, and physical texturing. Surface activated ceramic
particles are interesting due to their biocompatible nature and effective
antigerm activity. The size, shape, and morphology of the particles also impact
antigerm responses. The possible mechanisms for antiviral activity include both
atomic-scale physical and chemical interactions with the virus' body including
spike, coating, and capsid. Chemical interactions include photo-activation of
the particles, the formation of reactive oxygen species, and metal ion release,
while physical interactions include membrane disruption and mechanical damage to
the virus. This research applies advanced indirect and direct techniques to
study the interaction of the ceramic with the virus at multiple length scales.
This project is especially timely for the protection of multiple surfaces, since
the US will reopen in the coming months. The project involves teamwork among
scientists, engineers, educators, and industry experts. Training the next
generation of the workforce with the ability to grasp the philosophy of
convergence is another key outcome of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Coronavirus particles have
spike proteins (S-proteins) that are responsible for the attachment to the host
cells. Specifically, in humans, the SARS and SARS-CoV-2 species have been shown
to interact with the host cell receptor protein ACE2 (a zinc metalloprotein).
This virus-cell binding is controlled by the polar interaction between the
protein molecules. This research project focuses on using polar ceramic-based
structures for the capture and deactivation of the coronavirus. Ionic ceramic
solids show intrinsic polarity due to the unique arrangement of atoms across
different crystalline facets. For example, the alternate basal planes along
[0001] direction contain two separate atoms, which lead to intrinsic polarity.
The central hypothesis of this research is that ionic surface defects and the
polarity on the surface of ceramic particles benefit the effective capture of
coronavirus particles and their subsequent deactivation through ionic
modulation. Characterization techniques such as atomic force microscopy (AFM)
and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) are being used for the analysis of
physical defects. The effect of ionicity on capture and deactivation is being
tested via indirect and direct methods. The indirect testing protocol includes
inoculation of the surfaces with virus particles and then measuring the number
of infectious virus particles. Successful findings are being applied to hard and
porous surfaces for aerospace, automotive, retail, and other critical industry
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being awarded using funds made
available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act
supplement allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.