* 2031144
* Collaborative Research: Micromechanics of Meniscus-bound Particle Clusters
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sachin Velankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 291,968.00

Surface tension phenomena are important in a variety of physical processes
including blending of immiscible fluids, formation of sprays and aerosols and
foaming of plastics. This collaborative project concerns particle-liquid
mixtures that are generally called particulate suspensions. Examples include
slurries encountered in mineral and ceramics processing, particle-filled molten
plastics, and printing inks. In such particulate suspensions, the addition of a
second immiscible liquid induces particle "sticking" and aggregation due to
surface tension and capillary forces. A familiar example is a sandcastle whose
strength comes from small water droplets which bind the sand grains together by
capillary forces. This project will conduct fundamental studies of interparticle
capillary forces in mixing flows. Particle clusters bound by capillary forces
will be placed in well-defined flows and studied using new methods in automated
flow control. This work aims to understand the flow dynamics of particle
clusters and the limits of their stability, which refers to the conditions under
which clusters rupture due to the applied flow. Over the past decade, surface
tension-induced particle clustering has been exploited for a wide range
materials and materials-processing applications including macroporous ceramics,
3D printing, conductive plastics, and printing electronic circuits. The results
of this project will enable rational design of mixing operations that exploit
capillary forces to develop new materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In multiphase
suspensions containing particles and two immiscible liquids, capillary forces
can induce particle clustering. The clusters comprise two or more particles
bound by a meniscus liquid. In this project, the dynamics and rupture mechanics
of particle clusters in simple shear or planar extensional flow fields will be
studied using video microscopy and automated flow control. A feedback-controlled
microfluidic device known as a Stokes trap will be used to precisely manipulate
particles using viscous forces, to create well-defined meniscus-bound particle
clusters, and to subject the clusters to precisely controlled flows. This work
aims to achieve a fundamental understanding of the dynamics and rupture of
particle clusters in well-defined flows. The project will reveal fundamentally
new information, including the criteria for rupture of particle clusters, and
how these criteria depend on the composition of the cluster, viscosity of the
meniscus fluid, and particle roughness. Thedesign of mixing operations for
liquid/liquid/particle mixtures is presently empirical in nature. This project
will establish micromechanics-based design rules for such mixing operations that
exploit capillary forces to develop new materials. The project will form the
basis for training of graduate and undergraduate students. The two principal
investigators will conduct numerous outreach activities at the undergraduate and
pre-college level, including recruitment of underrepresented groups into their
research groups, and mentorship of high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.