* 2031362
* Collaborative Research: CSAwesome: Transitioning Teachers from AP CSP to CSA with Differentiated Professional Development
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Beryl Hoffman, College of Our Lady of the Elms
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2023
* USD 41,670.00

The College of St. Scholastica and Elms College will lead a small, High School
Strand Research-Practitioner Partnership (RPP) to investigate how to best
prepare and support teachers who are new to CS as they transition from teaching
the AP Computer Science Principles (CSP) course to AP CSA Java course. Rising
demand for high school AP computer science (CS) courses, initially for CS
Principles and now for CSA, has highlighted a need for more teachers to be
trained in the more advanced CSA course. However, this task is challenging
because CSA has a steeper learning curve as, unlike blocks-based programming
environments, the text-based nature of Java introduces syntax errors and another
layer of complexity in writing and debugging programs. Well-designed
differentiated professional development (PD) is necessary to meet individual
teachers at their level and successfully build their skills and confidence to
teach CSA. The RPP consists of researchers who are College Board endorsed
providers of the CSAwesome AP CSA curriculum and professional development (PD),
and practitioners who are AP CSA master teachers who are leading differentiated
CSAwesome pilot PD. The RPP team will use a design-based implementation research
(DBIR) RPP model utilizing an iterative approach to refine the CSAwesome
curriculum and professional development to meet the needs of teachers
transitioning from AP CSP to CSA. The RPPâ€™s goal is to Increase the number of
trained teachers (60 over 2 years) who can teach AP CSA and their ability to
recruit and support diverse students in order to broaden participation in
advanced CS courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSAwesome will utilize design-based
implementation research in a researcher-practitioner partnership (RPP) to refine
curriculum and PD to support the transition from CSP to CSA for both teachers
and students. The goals for this project include 1) establishing a sustainable
RPP community of researchers and practitioners focused on supporting the
transition of new to CS teachers from CSP to CSA, 2) developing and implementing
differentiated PD that includes equity-based pedagogical content knowledge for
60 teachers transitioning from teaching CSP to CSA, and 3) improving the
CSAwesome AP CSA curriculum and teacher resources to support the transition from
CSP to CSA using a co-design approach with practitioners and researchers. The
project will study to what extent the differentiated PD and curriculum support
teachers in gaining the content knowledge and pedagogical content knowledge to
teach AP CSA and, in particular, support the needs of low-income and female
students in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.