* 2031096
* RAPID: Covid-19 Forecasting Models for Removal of Social Distancing Measures
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2020
* Aleksandr Aravkin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 11/30/2020
* USD 198,048.00

Given the dynamic and uncertain nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, predictive
models have been used to inform the implementation of harm-reducing social
distancing policies in the United States and elsewhere. Relaxing social
distancing measures too early or too broadly, particularly in states where there
are still many positive cases, will facilitate community transmission with
potential to return to exponential resurgence. This proposal will incorporate
measures of population density and human mobility patterns into predictive
models to project future COVID-19 cases and deaths within US states and the
nation as a whole. As locations ease or end prior distancing policies,
consideration of population density and careful tracking of human mobility and
incorporation of these data into predictive models will provide data-driven
evidence for how these actions could potentially affect COVID-19 trajectories.
As a broader impact this project will develop, refine, and share COVID-19
modeling tools that will forecast disease trends for different scenarios of
relaxed social distancing measures. Results will be made available through an
interactive open-access online visualization tool. In addition to the potential
to directly inform policy, the results of this project will benefit the modeling
community at large by generating data products of utility to all COVID-19
modeling efforts, which will be made available on a website where results, data,
models, and other resultant products are available for open
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new modelling tools and derived data products
produced in this work will enhance forecasting and scenarios of COVID-19
infections and mortality in two formative ways. First, data on population
density and human mobility will be used to examine (i) how voluntary and
mandated social distancing measures affect population-level mobility, and (ii)
the relationship of these measures with Covid-19 infection and mortality.
Second, a modelling framework will be expanded to generate forecasts of disease
reemergence based on different scenarios of relaxation of social distancing
measures that are currently in place. This multi-stage hybrid modeling framework
combines a statistical model on deaths with a new component quantifying rates at
which individuals move from being susceptible to exposed, infected, and then
recovered (known as SEIR models). This modeling platform will be flexible to
allow regular data updates and to incorporate new types of data on the drivers
of coronavirus as they become available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award
is made by the Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases Program in the
Division of Environmental Biology, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief,
and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.