* 2031822
* ADVANCE Catalyst: UCF Intersectional Self-Assessment as Catalyst for STEM Faculty Equity
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Debra Reinhart, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 02/29/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project will examine the issue of STEM faculty members’ perceptions of the
match between their own goals and workplace-related values (organizational
stated goals and values). The importance of the project lies in the fact that
women’s perceptions of departmental and institutional appreciation and
recognition are critical to their job satisfaction and intent to stay, which can
impact inclusive hiring and retention. Research has yet to determine the causes
of perceived mismatches among women and faculty of color and their workplace
goals and values, and how this relates to differing experiences in the nature of
work and broader forms of support. Yet, the inclusion and success of women is
vital to meeting the national science and engineering workforce needs of the
future. Therefore, this project aims to innovatively address these issues by
drawing from the approaches of organizational justice and authenticity. While
proven in other contexts, these theoretical frameworks have yet to be applied to
an academic, intersectional equity study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal
for the UCF ADVANCE Catalyst project is to conduct research that will inform
strategies for minimizing inequities by specifically identifying the root causes
and associated programmatic solutions of intersectional inequities. More
specifically, the project will adopt an intersectional perspective to examine
STEM faculty members’ perceptions of issues related to departmental climate and
perceived faculty “fit.” The project will draw from organizational justice and
authenticity frameworks, aiming to obtain systematic quantitative survey data
from all STEM faculty and qualitative data through focus groups with STEM
faculty at UCF. Findings will measure faculty members’ perceptions of
organizational authenticity and justice, determine if and how these perceptions
vary intersectionally (i.e., by sex/gender, race/ethnicity, age, parental
status, and first-generation status). These results will then be applied to
actionable items for institutionalizing transparent practices that are intended
to improve departmental culture, faculty satisfaction, and equality as embodied
in a five-year STEM Faculty Equity Strategic Plan. Pilot programming will
consist of departmental climate workshops that focus on open, equitable
department dialogue to foster an inclusive climate. Additionally, STEM mentoring
faculty communities will be held as a space to discuss the practices and goals
being developed across departments, along with a mentoring community created to
address needs identified through this project’s research. A Strategic Planning
Working Group and STEM Equity Executive Leadership team will contribute to
developing the strategic plan and overseeing the planning process, respectively.
Findings will be shared with the ADVANCE community and others through a website,
presentations, and peer-reviewed publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE Catalyst awards
provide support for institutional equity assessments and the development of
five-year faculty equity strategic plans at an academic, non-profit institution
of higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.