* 2031512
* Collaborative Research: Directly probing the local coordination, charge state and stability of single atom catalysts â€“ Critical insights from advanced TEM for promoting stability
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2023
* Phillip Christopher, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 10/31/2023
* USD 184,041.00

The drive for atom-efficient catalysts with carefully controlled properties has
motivated the development of single atom catalysts (SACs), where single precious
metal atoms are stabilized on high-surface-area supports. SACs exhibit unique
and potentially useful characteristics for chemical processes ranging from
automotive catalysis to electrocatalysis. However, information about the
structure of the metal binding site on the support and its stability under
reaction conditions is sparse. This is due to a lack of insights into the
uniformity of metal species and their mobility, which are challenging to assess
from sample-averaged measurements. The investigators will overcome these
limitations to obtain atomic-scale and quantitative insights into the working
state of SACs by coupling state-of-the-art atomic resolution transmission
electron microscopy and spectroscopy with careful catalyst synthesis and sample
averaged analyses. The study will focus on the design of catalysts that utilize
expensive and scarce noble metals more effectively, thus opening the door to
more efficient and economical chemical manufacturing and environmental
remediation technologies. The research is integrated with education and outreach
activities to attract diverse junior scientists, including women and
underrepresented minority groups, and train future leaders to address critical
societal challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project leverages unique electron
microscopy facilities at the University of California-Irvine (UCI) with state-
of-the-art catalyst synthesis and spectroscopic characterization capabilities at
the University of California-Santa Barbara (UCSB). The central objectives of the
research are to utilize advanced ex situ and in situ aberration-corrected
scanning transmission electron microscopy and associated electron energy loss
spectroscopy to probe the local coordination, metal charge state, and stability
of SACs and correlate these properties to spectroscopic analysis by in situ
infrared spectroscopy. The study of SACs benefits significantly from in situ
sub-angstrom resolution imaging, as this provides site-specific information
needed to interpret spectroscopic data from sample averaged measurements. This
project focuses on Pt, Rh, and Au SACs on alumina (modified by atomically-
dispersed Re and W), titania, and ceria which present variations in metal
oxidation-state, support-reducibility, and available bindings sites. Detailed
characterization of these systems enables the design of new catalysts with tuned
reactivity and stability for catalytic processes such as CO oxidation, NO
reduction, and alkene hydroformylation. The integration of the research with
education and training of students allows the results from this project to be
disseminated to the diverse student populations of UCI and UCSB during
coursework and internships for undergraduate students, as well as to high school
students from diverse backgrounds through summer school programs, which will
promote their interest in scientific research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.