* 2031455
* Building Capacity in Computer Science Education and Student Near Peer Classroom Mentorship
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Clifford Freeman, Young People's Project, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 995,744.00

Computation has become standard within professional scientific, engineering, and
mathematical disciplines, even serving to connect people across fields for
interdisciplinary work. Yet despite decades-long efforts to broaden
participation, the underrepresentation of people from communities of color
persists in computer science. The reasons for this are profoundly complex. In
addition to inequitable access to learning opportunities, computer science
education often assumes assimilation to the culture and practices of the
discipline, without considering students’ social, cultural, and intellectual
resources. This deficit framing, as if people’s lives have nothing to offer
computer science, serves to further marginalize students from groups already
underrepresented in computing. This project from the Young People’s Project,
Inc. aims to address these issues through a professional development program
designed on culturally relevant pedagogy and integration of computer science
into mathematics classrooms. This work builds on an established near-peer model
developed by YPP’s Algebra Project and the integrative curricular strategy of
Bootstrap. The project has the potential to build the computer science teaching
capacity in Boston Public Schools, and to test a model of computer science
teaching that is responsive to the needs of students from groups
underrepresented in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building Capacity in
Computer Science Education and Student Near Peer Classroom Mentorship is a
Researcher-Practitioner Partnership (RPP) collaboration between The Young
People’s Project (YPP), Boston Public Schools (BPS), Bootstrap, and Boston
University. It aims to increase the number of high school computer science
teachers by designing, evaluating, and iterating on a professional development
model that uses culturally relevant pedagogy and integration into mathematics
classrooms. The goal of this project is to provide professional development for
BPS teachers that uses a classroom model of instruction developed by YPP, the
Algebra Project, and Bootstrap and integrates CS into existing 9th grade
mathematics classrooms. The project promises to build the computer science
teaching capacity in BPS, and to test a model of computer science (CS) teaching
that is responsive to the needs of students from racial/ethnic groups
underrepresented in CS. Greater capacity will include providing learning
opportunities for BPS teachers currently teaching Algebra or other entry level
mathematics courses in high schools as well as an infusion of college students
who work as learners and educators alongside classroom teachers. The infusion of
college students, YPP’s Model of Excellence, and a discourse-based curriculum
supports a culturally relevant approach to CS learning that can provide entry
points for a target population of students not currently offered computer
science education in BPS. To develop teachers’ capacity for CS teaching and
leadership, the project will build an effective research practice partnership
that includes a designed based implementation research process focused on the
design and impact of the professional learning opportunity for
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.