* 2031182
* Collaborative Research: E-Facilitation Partnerships: Developing Scalable Online Professional Development for Expanding CS Teacher Expertise in Equity and Pedagogy with eTextiles
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kirsten Peterson, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2024
* USD 339,958.00

The University of Pennsylvania, the University of Oregon, and the Education
Development Center (EDC) will partner with the Exploring Computer Science (ECS)
teacher community to help keep experienced high school ECS teachers engaged in
the teaching profession. In the last 10 years, ECS has provided initial
preparation to thousands of teachers new to teaching computer science (CS) with
a focus on improving access and participation to CS for students from
underserved communities. Little is known about what this new and growing
population of experienced high school teachers needs to continue to grow and
succeed in the teaching profession—knowledge critical for retaining and
expanding CS teaching force in coming years. The project team will partner with
experienced ECS facilitators and teachers to develop an online professional
development program to train CS teachers in physical computing along with
pedagogy skills that addresses equity into CS teaching. The newly developed,
online professional develop program will then be delivered to interested ECS
teachers over the course of two years. Outcomes from this work will be analyzed
and case studies capturing teacher and facilitator experiences will be
developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project between The
University of Pennsylvania, The University of Oregon, and The Education
Development Center (EDC) seeks to engage the Exploring Computer Science (ECS)
teacher community to determine what experienced high school ECS teachers need to
continue to grow and stay engaged in the teaching profession. The PIs propose to
partner with a core group of experienced ECS teachers to develop a fully online
and time efficient PD model that can handle the challenges of preparing teachers
in physical computing while providing a supportive context for discussing equity
issues. They will leverage the newly released ECS curriculum unit on electronic
textiles (e-textiles), which situates computational thinking within designing
functional circuitry in hands-on, personalized crafts, to develop ECS PD. The
project team is versed in addressing issues of equity and diversity in CS, and
it brings together expertise in teacher learning, computer science education,
online instructional design, and learning sciences. This RPP addresses the
critical goals for CS education: (1) identify needs of experienced ECS teachers
for continued learning and engagement with CS; (2) create and pilot online PD
and facilitation for physical computing with e-textiles; (3) examine how online
facilitation can expand ECS teachers’ pedagogical capacities for addressing in
equitable ways students’ CS interests and perspectives; (4) build and scale
facilitator capacities within the ECS community; and (5) contribute to knowledge
on how professional teacher communities can support CS pedagogical
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.