* 2031505
* Lets Talk Code: Broadening Computing Education among Native Americans by Blending Code with Nature, Art and Culture
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Ashish Amresh, Navajo Technical University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 02/29/2024
* USD 991,322.00

Navajo Technical University leads Project Let’s Talk Code to investigate a novel
approach to introduce Computer Science (CS) to high school students in the
Navajo Nation (NN) tribal region in Arizona and New Mexico. Its name is rooted
in the contributions and legacy of the Navajo Code Talkers, who played a pivotal
role in the Allied forces’ victory in World War II. Just like the Navajo Code
Talkers engineered their own code and created a new way of communicating through
the Navajo language, these students will learn to do the same through a co-
developed culturally rooted curriculum that is contextualized in real-world
problem-solving activities that are intimately connected to the Navajo culture.
The goal of the project is to improve students’ computational skills with a
focus on preparing them to succeed in the Advance Placement (AP) computer
science courses and motivate them to enroll in CS degrees. The project aims to
help math, science and art teachers from NN high schools develop CS based
projects in their existing courses and provide mentorship and guidance towards
offering AP Computer Science Principles (CSP) courses in the subsequent years.
The program will include a two-week professional development program and follow-
up activities. Native Americans (NA) have historically been the most
underrepresented population when it comes to participating in STEM and computing
careers. The Navajo are one of the largest NA groups in the country and
understanding the barriers and developing solutions to increase their
participation will have far reaching consequences on informing the research and
practice on how computing can be taught at NA tribal high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Let’s Talk Code (LTC) is a Research
Practitioner Partnership (RPP) that investigates a novel approach to introduce
Computer Science (CS) to high school students in the Navajo Nation (NN) tribal
region in Arizona and New Mexico. The goal of the RPP is to improve students’
computational skills with a focus on preparing them to succeed in the Advance
Placement (AP) computer science courses and motivate them to enroll in CS
degrees. The project aims to help math, science and art teachers from NN high
schools develop CS based projects in their existing courses and provide
mentorship and guidance towards offering AP Computer Science Principles (CSP)
courses in the subsequent years. The program will include a two-week
professional development program and follow-up activities. Its framework builds
on a widely used AP computer science principles (CSP) curriculum developed by
Code.org and stays true to the principles of writing, editing, compiling and
executing code, while providing additional meaning via culturally rooted real-
world examples that are contextualized in the Navajo culture. The project team
will engage tribal community stakeholders, administrators, teachers and regional
colleges in the design and development of the curriculum and its broader
application in the NN community. The RPP is structured as an iterative evidence-
based design project where the teachers (practitioners) work with a multi-
institutional team of researchers and CS educators to improve the capacity
building needs of its partners (high schools and regional colleges). It includes
a mixed-methods analysis of qualitative and quantitative data collected by
offering professional development training sessions, after school programs and
peer-to-peer mentoring. Frequent and timely analysis feeds into the co-creation
and co-design of the curriculum during the duration of the project. Capacity
building activities during the project such as the creation of communities of
practices will ensure long term sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.