* 2031800
* Understanding Origination and Evolution of Solidification Defects in Aluminum Alloy Manufacture: Integrating Computational Models and In-situ Casting Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2024
* USD 594,074.00

Development of high-performance aluminum alloys for structural components in the
automobile and aerospace industries requires comprehensive knowledge of defect
evolution in manufacturing of these alloys. Solidification defects resulted from
the so-called oxide bifilms (i.e., folded oxide layers) greatly weaken the
mechanical strength of parts manufactured by casting, welding or additive
manufacturing. This project aims to scientifically investigate how
solidification defects originate and evolve during processing by integrating
quantitative computational models with novel experiments for aluminum alloy
casting. The fundamental science revealed on defect formation will better guide
the development and improvement of manufacturing processes using solidification.
The project will also have a strong impact on educating students at different
stages such as introducing K-12 students to computational and experimental
methodologies, involving undergraduate and graduate students in research, and
including new topics from this research in relevant courses at multiple levels.
Further, this project will provide timely scientific data and results to
relevant aluminum industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physics of initiation and
evolution of oxide bifilms in manufacturing of metallic alloys is highly
complex, and yet, their effects on the nanostructures and microstructures
developed during solidification are not fully comprehended. The overall
objective of this research project is to fundamentally study solidification
defects associated with oxide biofilms, e.g., gas porosity, and investigate
their influence to the phase nucleation process and formation of dendritic
structures in solidification of aluminum alloys. Nano-scale interactions of
oxides and oxide bifilms with solidifying melt and the effects on the phase
nucleation process (crystalline, semi-crystalline or amorphous) will be revealed
by performing multi-billion atom molecular dynamics simulations. New discovery
of the oxide bifilms evolution, their interactions with the solidifying
dendrites, and consequent defects formed will be achieved in micro-domain by
large-scale phase-field simulations. Advanced in-situ x-ray imaging and ex-situ
electron microscopy in casting experiments will validate and benchmark
computational models. The integrated computational-experimental approach will
achieve unparalleled findings on the origination and evolution of defects during
solidification of aluminum alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.