* 2031324
* Collaborative Research: An Equity-Focused Approach to Integrating Physical Activity and CS Education for K-8 Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jamie Payton, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2023
* USD 43,443.00

This project brings instruction in computing and data science to an elementary
school with a predominantly Hispanic population through Project SMART, a digital
educational game that uses students’ in-school physical activity to motivate
student learning. Students record their physical activity during the school day,
whether in physical education class, at recess, or at other teacher-provided
opportunities for physical activity. An elementary school class plays
collaboratively; the physical activity of all the students in the class is
converted to a distance traveled along an extended virtual journey. The learning
modules are defined by teachers and directly connected to the core curriculum.
Key to the approach is that the computational learning activities provided
introduce data collection, analysis, and prediction questions using the
students’ own physical activity data. As such, the project explores research
questions that are advancing the field's understanding about how to engage
students in computer science. It also is investigating whether students are more
engaged in, motivated by, and successful at computational thinking learning
objectives if these objectives relate to data that is relevant to them: their
physical activity, their interests, their environment, and, importantly, their
own collected data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project expands and strengthens
the Project SMART researcher-practitioner partnership (RPP), engaging
researchers and teachers in collaborative efforts to identify strategies for
computer science and computational thinking instruction that engages an
elementary student population and addresses instructional challenges. These
challenges include pressures to adhere to state standards that make it difficult
to integrate additional content, a lack of at-home internet infrastructure that
limits out-of-school student engagement, and teachers' lack of experience with
and confidence in computer science content knowledge. Conjectures that orient
the research plan explicate a premise that contextualizing computer science
within the students' own physical activity during the regular school day as an
integrated core subject lesson will help to address these challenges. In
addition to advancing the field's understanding of a contextualized approach to
data science instruction, this project also creates shareable learning modules
that present data science learning activities that use the students' own
physical activity to enable data modeling and prediction; guide students in
hardware-software co-design to create wearable physical activity monitors that
can improve data collection; and enable students to write code that extends the
functions available in the game. This project is funded by the CS for All:
Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.