* 2031215
* RAPID: Higher Accuracy and Availability of COVID-19 Testing and Monitoring via Post-CT Image Boosting and Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Wuchun Feng, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has caused an unprecedented health crisis in the United
States. Given the lack of an effective vaccine or drug in the short term,
testing techniques with high accuracy and availability are needed to mitigate
the COVID-19 outbreak through expansive deployment. However, the current
genetic-based test for COVID-19 involves many different materials (e.g., swabs,
tubes, and chemical solutions), of which certain ones are in short supply at
different times in different places across the United States. Furthermore, the
test is a multi-step process that is error-prone, resulting in low accuracy. To
address these shortcomings, this project seeks to deliver an alternative
COVID-19 test that can be widely available and deliver results in minutes with
high accuracy. By realizing, deploying, and continually improving a high-
performance software tool to facilitate early and accurate testing and
monitoring of COVID-19 via post-image boosting and analysis of computed
tomography (CT) scans, which use computer-processed combinations of many X-ray
measurements to produce cross-section images of the chest (in particular, the
lungs) this research will facilitate accurate COVID-19 diagnosis in real time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project leverages and extends recent advances in
artificial intelligence and high-performance computing to create a high-
performance software tool to significantly enhance the quality of chest CT
images. These enhanced CT images, in turn, facilitate more accurate analysis and
identification of the hallmark features of COVID-19, including consolidation,
bilateral and peripheral disease, linear opacities, “crazy-paving” patterns, and
the “reverse halo” sign. Specifically, we realize a novel deep-learning neural
network that enhances the resolution and reduces the artifacts of chest CT
images. It does so by modeling the image-formation processes in chest CT to
deliver a super-resolution and deblur-based iterative framework for CT images.
The neural network only learns the relevant blur kernels, appropriate weighting
factors, and penalty functions of the regularization terms in the optimal
solution for the CT super-resolution task. All told, this enabling approach will
mitigate the negative effects of COVID-19 on public health, society, and the
economy by delivering a highly accurate and highly available test for the rapid
diagnosis and monitoring of COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.