* 2031960
* RAPID: An in vivo driven SEIRS (susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered susceptible) model of coronaviral infection
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Caroline Zeiss, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The goal of this proposal is to increase the understanding of SARS-CoV-2
transmission amongst naïve, recovering or vaccinated individuals. The current
COVID pandemic is a stark illustration of the global interdependence between
people and other animals. Resumption of normal societal function in the current
COVID crisis will require immunity to SARS-CoV-2 either through natural means or
through vaccination on a global scale. The rate at which unexposed people
(currently most of the human population) become infected or ill is affected by
many factors, including the potential for partial immunity (following natural
exposure or vaccination) and subsequent reinfection. Use of naturally-occurring
related coronaviruses in other animals to emulate this process is a novel and
practical approach, and that is the goal of this proposal here. Rat
sialodacryoadenitis virus (SADV) has transmission features that closely
approximate those of SARS-CoV-2 and a similarly rapid disease course. Animals
can be partly protected using another rat coronavirus (RCV) thus emulating
vaccination. These characteristics allow researchers to perform rapid
transmission studies to produce real transmission data that can be used in
predictive models. Broader impacts include that these models can more accurately
guide regional preventive measures such as social distancing, to minimize SARS-
CoV-2 spread. An additional broader impact is the training of several junior
scientists, and an all-female set of investigators, broadening participation of
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will use sialodacryoadenitis virus
(SDAV), a rat coronavirus with transmission features that closely approximate
those of SARS-Cov2, to generate in vivo transmission estimates in rats informing
a data-driven core SEIRS (Susceptible - Exposed – Infected – Recovered -
Susceptible) simulation model. In Aim 1, rates of infection and recovery will be
determined in susceptible (naïve) rats following exposure to SDAV. Thus, this
models the current global dynamic of the SARS-Cov-2 pandemic. In Aims 2 and 3,
the rates of infection and recovery will be determined in convalescing rats from
aim 1 who receive a second near-term or long-term exposure to SDAV,
respectively. This assesses the potential for individuals with recent naturally-
acquired immunity to shed virus and models the near-term dynamics of SARS Cov-2
(aim 2), and the potential for individuals with waning naturally acquired
immunity to shed virus and models the near to long-term dynamic of SARS CoV-2
(aim 3). Aim 4 will determine rates of infection and recovery in rats vaccinated
with a related rat coronavirus (RCV), a vaccination known to provide partial
immunity against SDAV, following exposure to SDAV shedding rats. This aim
assesses the potential for individuals developing variable vaccine acquired
immunity to shed virus and models the long-term dynamic of SARS CoV-2. Estimates
obtained in Aims 1-4 will be used to construct a core mathematical model in
NumerusMB. This will allow simulation of complex scenarios testing the effects
of vaccination and social mixing on the susceptible population. This RAPID award
is made by the Physiological and Structural Systems Cluster in the BIO Division
of Integrative Organismal Systems, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief,
and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.