* 2031394
* Culturally Relevant Robotics: A Family and Teacher Partnership for Computational Thinking in Early Childhood
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Lori Caudle, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Early and culturally relevant coding experiences nurture the computational
thinking necessary for continued learning and interest in computer science.
Developing interest in and support for computer science is important for
participation in computer science degrees at the post-secondary level. This
project has the potential to improve the teaching of computer science in early
childhood by making explicit what needs to be known pedagogically about engaging
Black and Latinx children in computational thinking. This study could shift the
field to consider the unique needs of Black and Latinx children in computer
science education from the beginning of formal schooling. The project also has
the potential to prompt early childhood curricula to be attuned to STEM
learners’ identities with respect to race and class. Finally, the project has
the potential to improve the social well-being of Black and Latinx learners by
equipping their parents and caretakers to support children as they envision
themselves in STEM across PreK-16 education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose
of this medium research-practice-partnership project in the PreK-8 strand is to
generate an actionable theory of change for promoting computational thinking and
a sense of belonging in computer science through a culturally relevant robotics
program developed in partnership with university teacher educators and
researchers, administrators, teachers, coaches, and Black and Latinx children
and their families. This research practice partnership will study: (1) the
iterative co-development and refinement of a classroom- and home-based
culturally relevant robotic program for Black and Latinx preschoolers and (2)
how Black and Latinx children develop understanding of computational thinking
and a sense of belonging in computer science as they engage in a culturally
relevant robotics program. The proposed project leverages and expands upon
existing collaborations towards culturally relevant STEM education among
University of Tennessee and school partners at two schools – a preschool with
163 children (90% Black) and a primary school (PreK-1) with 221 (63% Black, 24%
Latinx) children. This project includes elements of both design-based research,
by situating curricular interventions in authentic settings, and community-based
participatory research where participants’ voices guide the design and direction
of the program. The project spans four phases where community partnerships will
be strengthened and extended, curriculum will be co-designed and piloted,
program implementation will be adjusted based on ongoing data analysis, and full
implementation will lead to theory building and program development for broader
impact. In addition to presenting and publishing research findings, the
investigators will develop short briefs that can be sent to the local school
board, administrators, community leaders, and the state department of education.
Their final actionable theory of change and models for a family-teacher
partnership for culturally relevant robotics programs will be disseminated
broadly on a website in order to provide free and easy access to other teacher
educators, teachers, instructional coaches, families, and school and community
leaders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the CS for All:
Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.