* 2031217
* RAPID: Responding to extreme heat in the time of COVID-19
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Mary Hayden, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2021
* USD 199,923.00

Responding to extreme heat conditions during the COVID-19 pandemic could place
many vulnerable populations at further risk during the warm summer months when
many people leave their houses to escape the heat and visit cooling centers and
other public spaces. People’s vulnerability is likely to vary over time and
space, shifting with the extent of exposure to extreme heat, differences in
policy and community response, and disease pressure from COVID-19. By assessing
experiences, risk perceptions, behaviors, and perceived ability to respond to
these conditions, the investigators will improve the understanding of how people
cope with and adapt to multiple evolving hazards. The project will contribute to
broader efforts to understand and reduce population health risks from extreme
weather events during a global pandemic. The project’s findings will be broadly
disseminated to researchers, public health and emergency management
practitioners, and the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings
together theory and methods from geography and behavioral sciences to develop
new knowledge about the interactions among people, their environment, and
multiple evolving hazards. This research will build on existing theoretical
foundations and empirical knowledge and will examine how extreme weather
conditions, COVID-19, local policies, and environmental and socio-demographic
characteristics affect the public’s risk perceptions, behaviors, and ability to
take protective measures. The investigators will conduct a series of
georeferenced nationally representative surveys combined with spatially explicit
modeling with questions about COVID-19 and extreme heat risk perceptions and
experiences, self-reported symptoms of heat stress and COVID-19, household
coping capacity, self-efficacy, and protective behaviors undertaken to reduce
vulnerability. The project findings will inform risk communication and public
health intervention strategies aimed at reducing extreme heat and
COVID-19-related impacts that can be generalized for other multi-hazard
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.