* 2031288
* RAPID: SafePaths: A privacy-first contact tracing solution for early interventions of COVID-19 spread during the first wave and to minimize the second wave of the epidemic
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Ramesh Raskar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 04/30/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop and deploy a privacy-first digital
solution for public health coordination including contact-tracing to curb
pandemics like COVID-19 spread. The key is to provide location and context for
citizens and public health experts. Current approaches operate on a trade-off
between privacy and effectiveness, relying on general public broadcasting that
introduces uncertainty in the information extracted or resorting to privacy-
violating technologies that risk individual rights against stigmatization and
surveillance. This project will break past this dichotomy by developing a
technology-based solution for coordinating information on infection and possible
transmission through contact-tracing while protecting the privacy rights of
viral carriers and unexposed citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond assisting the
containment of COVID-19 pandemic by contact tracing, this project will make
empirical contributions to the fields of computing, healthcare, crisis response,
and more. With privacy preservation being the key aspect of this project,
contact tracing is achieved by using encrypted GPS trails and rotating Bluetooth
identifiers. In this approach, redacted information of an infected individual is
only shared while no information leaves the device of a healthy person.
Specifically, this project will advance knowledge regarding: 1.) how
cryptographic techniques can be implemented on ubiquitous platforms like smart
phones through easy to use apps to efficiently use privatized data without
leakage of any sensitive information; 2) how personal-technology solutions to
societal crises can effectively influence behavior and consequently affect the
outcome of such crises; and 3) how “split-learning”, a resource efficient
distributed AI technique can be implemented with personal information on health,
demographic, travel history, spatial context, and real-world engagement to
perform private risk-assessment post contact-tracing to reduce false alarm
rates. The solution is being built by a consortium of epidemiologists,
engineers, data scientists, digital privacy evangelists, professors and
researchers from reputable institutions. This is crucial to reduce disruption in
socio-economic activity and keep panic under rationally controllable levels in
response to future emergencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.