* 2031031
* I-Corps: Smart IoT Medicine Dispensing
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2020
* Lance Sherry, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

This broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to advance
the common pill bottle, delivering benefits related to security of the contents
and adherence-based functionality. This project has the potential to impact
users of medicines, their caregivers, and the medicinal supply chain. Currently
issues of dosage, timelines, access, expiration, security, refilling,
prescription management, and safety are addressed by a complex set of
stakeholders, and for some medications there is potential for abuse. This
project will explore translation to users with special needs with regards to
medicine type usage, security and safety, yielding cost savings and improved
adherence to prescriptions. The value proposition for special needs individuals
is an enhanced level of independence and healthy lifestyle related to their
prescriptions. More generally, this technology represents a modern effort to
address many facets of distribution of prescription medication, such as
monitoring prescription adherence, preventing prescription abuse, and preventing
unauthorized access to prescriptions.

This I-Corps project will advance an Internet of Things (IoT) solution for
mobile secure dispensing systems with innovations in design, testing and
deployment. Advances in IoT sensors, actuators, communication, processing and
power supply provide an opportunity to manage the process with improved
security, safety and efficiency. This project will explore translation of a
novel integration of hardware, such as a new combination of sensors, biometric
scanner(s), a WiFi- and bluetooth-enabled microcomputer, and a customized
locking mechanism through proprietary software. The new architecture and
associated software enable a unique IoT-based prescription container aimed at
preventing unauthorized access and providing users with alerts, reminders and
notifications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.