* 2031826
* A Microfabrication Compatible Method to Fabricate Silicon Nanotubes for Nanoprobe Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Donald Sakaguchi, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 10/31/2024
* USD 400,200.00

Top-down micromanufacturing is the process for fabricating computer chips and
microelectromechanical system sensing chips and is the basis for the current
semiconductor and sensor industries. However, the emergence of various nanoscale
structures and materials can significantly improve the performance of these
chips. However, numerous challenges exist to integrate these nanoscale materials
and structures on these chips seamlessly due to incompatibility of their
fabrication process with standard microfabrication processes. This award
supports fundamental research to develop a room-temperature microfabrication
process to fabricate silicon nanotubes. The new process allows the manufacturing
of silicon nanotubes with other functional elements or electronics on the same
chip without thermal damage. Nanotubes and nanotube-enabled functional devices
fabricated from a wide variety of materials such as semiconductors, compound
semiconductors, and metals have great potential for applications in healthcare,
biomedical, energy, aerospace, and chemical industries. Hence, the outcomes from
this research benefits the U.S. economy and society. This research involves
several disciplines including manufacturing, computation, neuroscience and
material science, thereby helping broaden participation of women and
underrepresented minority students in research and having a positive impact on
engineering and science education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to
develop a scalable, ambient temperature, top-down process to fabricate single
crystal silicon nanotubes. The fabrication of the silicon nanotubes is realized
by simply using a series of integrated circuit (IC)-compatible microfabrication
processes. Specifically, polystyrene nanosphere (NS) beads are first self-
assembled into a close-packed monolayer on a silicon wafer. These NS beads are
then tailored by oxygen plasma reactive ion etching (RIE) to shrink their size.
Using the NS beads as the mask, the silicon nanotubes are fabricated by
inductively coupled plasma (ICP) Bosch process. This research fills the
technical knowledge gap on how to realize the large-scale integration and
arrangement of a single nanotube or an array of nanotubes in a controlled manner
on a chip. The research team plans to perform sharp interface phase-field
nanoscale modeling for fundamental understanding and control of the tolerance
range of the processing parameters for fabricating robust silicon nanotubes. In
addition, the research team plans to develop silicon nanotube-based patch-clamp
nanoprobes for neuronal and cellular stimulation and recordings. Specifically,
arrays of silicon nanotube-based patch-clamp nanoprobes embedded within
microscale cell culture chambers are developed for recording
electrophysiological activity in cultures of adult hippocampal progenitor cells
that have differentiated into oligodendrocyte, astrocytes or neurons as well as
mapping multiple individual synaptic connections between
neurons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.