* 2031427
* Design, Development, Implementation, and Testing of an Accessible Computational Thinking Curriculum for Students with Autism Spectrum Disorders
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Abdurrahman Arslanyilmaz, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2023
* USD 286,526.00

The project will 1) determine accessibility issues students with Autism Spectrum
Disorders (ASD) would face with a computational thinking (CT) curriculum
designed for mainstream students, 2) design instructions to make an existing CT
curriculum for mainstream students accessible to students with ASD, 3) implement
the accessible CT curriculum in one school and the original CT curriculum in
another school for students with ASD, and 4) compare the effectiveness of the
accessible CT curriculum to the original one to evaluate its success. This will
be the first study to design, develop, implement, and evaluate an accessible CT
curriculum for students with ASD. It intends to provide a publicly accessible CT
curriculum resource with learning objectives, instructional design and
information presentation methods, assessments, feedback, learning environments,
and professional development materials to teach CT to students with ASD.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration between expert
practitioners and researchers working together to accomplish two objectives. The
first objective is to identify adaptations and accommodations to make an
existing computational thinking (CT) curriculum accessible to students with ASD.
This objective will be accomplished by 1) analyzing seventh graders’
characteristics at a school for students with ASD, and 2) developing adaptations
and accommodations to make an existing CT curriculum developed for mainstream
students accessible to the seventh-grade students. The data to be collected for
this objective consists of systematic documentation of the adaptations and
accommodations, including learning objectives, instructional design, information
presentation, assessments, feedback, and learning environment. The second
objective is to implement the accessible CT curriculum at one school and the
original one without the adjustments at another school for students with ASD,
and test its effectiveness in improving students with ASDs’ learning of CT
concepts (CTCs) and increasing their development of fluency in CT practices
(CTPs) through two-group repeated measures study. The data to be collected for
this objective will include pre- and post-tests to measure students’ learning of
CTCs and two artifact-based interviews to measure their development of fluency
in CTPs. ANCOVA tests will determine if the accessible CT curriculum was
effective in differentiating the two groups on their learning of CTCs and their
development of fluency in CTPs. This will be the first study to design, develop,
implement, and test an accessible CT curriculum for students with ASD, and will
provide the first publicly accessible CT curriculum repository for students with
ASD. This project is funded by the CS for All program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.