* 2031283
* EAGER: III: Collaborative Research: RUI: In silico Algorithm for Assessing the Effects of Amino Acid Insertion and Deletion Mutations
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Filip Jagodzinski, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 77,464.00

This project proposes to advance current capabilities in predicting the impact
of changes to protein sequence to changes in three-dimensional structure and
function. The investigators focus on amino-acid insertions and deletions. This
expansion is warranted, as changes to DNA include not just mutations but also
insertions and deletions of entire fragments. A timely example of the need for
the capabilities that will be developed in this project is the fast evolution
observed in near real-time in SARS-Cov2. Many of the changes are concentrated in
the sequence of the spike protein that binds to the lung receptors. Recent
reports indicate that such changes are affecting changes to the structure of
this protein and possibly its function. The problem of predicting the impact of
changes to sequence to the structure and function of a protein is a hallmark
problem in molecular biology. In this project, the investigators combine
sequence data, a promising geometric treatment to predict changes to structure,
and informatics techniques for predicting changes to function. The activities in
this project constitute promising exploratory
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project makes two key contributions. First,
an inverse kinematics approach predicts sub-sequence configurations impacted by
the insertion or deletion of amino acids and then accommodates such
configurations via a constrained optimization approach in a physically-realistic
tertiary structure of the entire protein sequence. Second, graph-rigidity
analysis is employed to analyze computed structures and predict rigidity data.
Coupled with evolutionary conservation, the data are employed to train machine
learning models capable of predicting the stability of sequences of interest.
The investigators have a track record of collaborative dissemination. The
developed algorithms will be made freely available to the scientific community.
In addition, the investigators have made increasing student diversity one of
their top priorities. The investigators will continue to expand their efforts in
successful mentoring of undergraduate students, including undergraduates from
other STEM majors. In close coordination, the investigators will actively work
with women and students from under-represented groups through several programs.
One of them builds off an existing NSF award. The investigators will also
leverage outreach efforts such as the Bridges to the Baccalaureate program, the
University of Massachusetts Boston Women in Science club, and the Initiative for
Maximizing Student Development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.