* 2031566
* I-Corps:  A Self-driving Autonomous Electric Scooter
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Derek Paley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a self-driving electric scooter. Electric scooters (e-scooters)
are a vital part of a new urban mobility model, improving sustainability,
accessibility, and equity over cars and buses for short distances. The EPA
estimates that eliminating half of US car trips less than one mile would save
$575M/year in fuel costs. In 2018, 38.5 million trips were taken on e-scooters
in the US, which is twice as many as in 2017. The US micromobility market is
predicted to be worth between $200â€“300B by 2030. Worldwide, investors already
have increased investments in micro-mobility start-ups by $5.7B into since 2015.
This said, large scooter fleets are expensive to maintain and do not guarantee
easy access for riders. E-scooters that intelligently re-position themselves
without a rider may provide value to scooter operators by improving the rider
experience, increasing e-scooter usage, decreasing servicing costs, and aiding
the regulatory process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of artificial intelligence (AI) logistics, operations, and
management solutions easily retrofitted to electric-scooters and other
micromobility platforms to enable self-driving. The proposed solution enables
deployment, recharging, and unit utilization optimization of an electric
scooter. The technology will enable the e-scooter to safely and intelligently
maneuver without a rider for the purposes of ride summoning, automatic parking,
and adaptive re-positioning for increased usage. The onboard components of the
AI system consist of a sensor module for perception and localization, a planning
module for intelligent decision-making, and a motor module for powered actuation
via sensor feedback. Offboard components include machine-learning algorithms for
predicting the spatial distribution of ride demand. To date, an autonomous
driving solution based on novel models of e-scooter dynamics has been developed,
including a perception-based steering algorithm. In addition, an e-scooter
geospatial ride-demand analysis (with data provided by the Maryland
Transportation Institute) has been performed as well as designed human-subject
experiments to understand e-scooter safety and
ergonomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.