* 2031703
* RAPID: A comparison of the 1918 influenza pandemic and COVID-19 in Missouri: implications for current mitigation strategies in rural versus urban locations
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Carolyn Orbann, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2022
* USD 146,794.00

This RAPID project will compare epidemic patterns and Missouri residents’
responses in the 1918 influenza pandemic to those occurring at present during
the COVID-19 pandemic, with primary attention paid to urban-rural differences.
The research will increase understanding of how life situations in urban versus
rural settings affect epidemic disease experiences and will provide knowledge of
important community characteristics that put residents at greater risk during
the current pandemic. The study will also shed light on which characteristics of
a region have been stable over long periods of time and which are aspects of
modern life and perhaps more malleable. The research is therefore time-sensitive
because the investigators will expeditiously communicate project findings
relevant to the current pandemic to the Missouri Department of Health and Senior
Services. In addition, this project will provide student training in data
collection and first-hand experience in conducting research to help deal with an
unforeseen and serious public health event. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new
coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, to which humans possess little underlying immunity, has
been spreading throughout the globe. In this pandemic setting, rural regions may
face challenges that are not present in urban areas. As there is currently no
vaccine, it is critical to devise effective strategies quickly, to protect rural
regions from echo waves of the virus that may circulate over the next few years.
The world experienced a similar situation in 1918-19 when a new, lethal strain
of influenza began to infect humans. Although there are significant differences
between these two pandemics, the viruses have similar modes of transmission and
overall impacts on human communities. Understanding the experiences and
responses of rural citizens to these two pandemics provides important insights
that may lead to new public health strategies that are more tailored to the
needs of rural residents during major disease outbreaks. The project involves
in-depth comparative analysis of mortality and morbidity patterns during the
1918 influenza pandemic and the present COVID-19 pandemic in the state of
Missouri. Analysis will focus on data aggregated at the county level and will
determine county characteristics (e.g., population density, number of hospitals,
household composition, proximity to large urban area, ethnic composition,
mobility patterns) that are associated with death and/or illness rates during
the two pandemics. Historical data from the Missouri 1918 influenza pandemic
will be examined to identify control strategies used in different counties
during the pandemic, determine their effectiveness, and assess whether they
would be of use during the present pandemic. This in turn can aid in the
development of potential strategies that public health authorities can add to
the arsenal already being used in rural counties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.