* 2031526
* Leveraging Computational Thinking to Increase Computer Science within Elementary Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Bentley Sayler, Black Hills State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 997,925.00

While the prevalence of high schools offering computer science is growing
nationally and specifically in South Dakota, many schools are struggling with
course enrollment. Disproportionally low numbers of female students are choosing
to enroll, and both female students and American Indian students are arriving at
high school with less positive attitudes towards computer science (CS) than
their male and non-American Indian peers. Therefore there is a need to begin CS
instruction earlier, to allow students to build on their experiences as they
progress to higher grade levels. Exposure to computational thinking (CT) and
computer science at elementary grades will prepare and inspire students to
engage with more sophisticated CT/CS in middle and high school. While there has
been some research in this area in the past, there exists a need for the
development of effective implementation of CT/CS processes for elementary
teachers in a rural context where resources are sparse and access to training is
limited. This project is a Research Practice Partnership between Black Hills
State University, Technology and Innovation in Education, Sanford University
Research Facility, and 17 schools across South Dakota. The project supports 4th
and 5th grade teachers in providing engaging CS/CT experiences for all students
and does so within the context of their math and science instruction. The
project introduces computational thinking within elementary math and science,
where the investigators have identified the leveraging of CT within math and
science as a strategic way of increasing student exposure to computer science in
elementary grades.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through the structure of a researcher-
practitioner partnership, this project will address two fundamental questions:
1) What strategies are most effective in integrating computational thinking and
computer science into elementary teachers' practice; and 2) To what degree are
students benefitting from exposure to CT and CS in the elementary grades? The
project will seek to answer these questions - and others that emerge through the
RPP - by working in close collaboration with teachers in rural and otherwise
high-need schools across their region, including numerous partner districts from
the investigators’ recent project with high schools and high school teachers.
The investigators will use data from surveys, interviews, classroom
observations, and pre- and post- tests. The research will pay special attention
to differences in student experiences and outcomes across race and gender. The
research will also test project components with an audience of pre-service
teachers in their final year of teacher preparation. The project will document
and make available on its website: curated, developed and tested curriculum
components; a model for integrating CS into existing curriculum at the
elementary level; professional development resources; and papers written for
researchers, practitioners and policy-makers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
is funded by the CS for All: Research and RPPs
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.