* 2031692
* Symmetry-protected spin dynamics in ferroelectric spin device
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Jian Shi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 350,000.00

Award Title:&lt;br/&gt;Symmetry-protected spin dynamics in ferroelectric spin
device (Proposal ID: 2031692)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;To boost the computing power of microelectronic systems,
among many strategies such as device miniaturization, using non-charge-based
logic operation and harnessing non-von Neumann architectures, computing with
electron spin has been proposed as a promising solution. Spin devices such as
spin field effect transistor are considered to have the potential to
significantly advance computing performance and even transform current computing
paradigms. In spin devices, control of electron spin – a computing process – is
achieved by electric field-induced effective magnetic field in the hosting
semiconductor. In most semiconductors, the magnetic field is multi-directional
so coherent control of electron spin precession has been a challenge. In this
project, the PI will address this issue by developing material/device systems
that provide unidirectional magnetic field. In the proposed system, electric
field stems from ferroelectric polarization and unidirectional magnetic field is
a natural consequence of the unique symmetry of the proposed system. The
nonvolatile electric field and the unidirectional magnetic field will make the
proposed spin devices excel in spin control and power consumption. This award
supports the fundamental research of understanding symmetry-spin dynamics
relation in ferroelectric spin devices. The basic knowledge obtained from this
project would help the realization of technologically practical spin field
effect transistors. The results from this award will therefore benefit the U.S.
economy by advancing technological progresses in the field of microelectronics.
The award will also promote engineering education and research training of
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this project is to understand the role of symmetry and the
persistent spin helix on the spin dynamics in ferroelectric semiconductors with
strong spin-orbit coupling for spintronic devices. While strong spin-orbit
coupling enhances spin precession leading to short channel operation, it also
simultaneously suppresses controllable spin transport. Such dilemma has been a
major roadblock for realization of practical spintronic devices such as spin
field effect transistors. In this project, by using semiconducting ferroelectric
materials of selected symmetry with strong spin-orbit coupling, the PI expects
to achieve symmetry-protected long-range coherent spin transport via persistent
spin helix and switchable spin texture upon changing the ferroelectric
polarization. To pursue these goals, the PI will grow high-quality single
crystalline ferroelectric semiconductors carrying strong spin-orbit coupling,
and fabricate ferroelectric spin valves and field effect transistors. The PI
will investigate the spin-polarized band structure and persistent spin helix in
the model materials. The PI will reveal the spin lifetime and spin diffusion
length in ferroelectric spin valves and field effect transistors. The PI will
also study the dynamics of ferroelectric domain structure and effect of
ferroelectric domain orientation on persistent spin helix, spin dynamics, spin
operation and diffusion. This proposed work will advance the fundamental
knowledge needed in resolving the intrinsic dilemma issue between the precise
manipulation and effective preservation of spin in spintronic systems with
strong spin-orbit interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.