* 2031520
* SBIR Phase I: COVID-19 Imaging XNAT Suite (CIXS): An informatics platform for developing, validating, and deploying AI applications for COVID-19 imaging
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Timothy Olsen, RADIOLOGICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2021
* USD 255,874.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to implement an artificial intelligence
(AI) method to assess COVID-19 in medical images, including diagnosis of the
disease, prediction of disease severity, and measurement of treatment response.
Given the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the primary aim of this proposal is to
support frontline clinicians and researchers in caring for patients and
developing effective therapies. Imaging is a critical but still underdeveloped
component of COVID-19 patient care. This project will advance the understanding
of COVID-19 imaging practices, utilizing best practices for training,
validating, and deploying artificial intelligence applications. In addition, the
imaging AI platform developed for creating COVID-19 algorithms will be broadly
useful for a wide range of other radiology applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project aims to implement a platform that is uniquely positioned to enable full
cycle development, validation, deployment, and ongoing tuning of imaging AI
algorithms to improve the care of COVID-19 patients. Technical tasks include:
developing methods to aggregate clinical and imaging data from diverse hospital
information systems, implementing services and user interfaces to conduct
federated learning experiments securely across remote data and computational
systems, and developing mechanisms to publish and subscribe to validated high
quality AI models for deployment in clinical environments. The core platform is
already operational in many large academic medical centers, so translation will
be straightforward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.