* 2031881
* CIF: Small: Mobile Immersive Communication: View Sampling and Rate-Distortion Limits
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jacob Chakareski, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 52,746.00

Free-viewpoint video is an emerging technology for visual communication that
creates the sensation of 3D immersion in the remote scene by allowing the user
to dynamically switch between arbitrary viewpoints. It has the potential to
advance society by enabling virtual human transportation and boost the global
economy and quality of life. At present, free-viewpoint video is limited to
high-end computing environments and studio-type settings, due to its higher
bandwidth and complexity expansion over single-view video. Furthermore, the
fundamental questions of viewpoint sampling (camera location) and resource
allocation across the captured views are largely unanswered, due to the nascency
of the technology, and are addressed using suboptimal heuristic approaches, thus
penalizing system efficiency. These two characteristics would otherwise make
free-viewpoint video impractical and preclude its broader deployment, in
particular on mobile devices, due to their constrained bandwidth, battery power,
and CPU capabilities. However, the latter have become a primary platform for
computing and communication needs, anywhere and anytime, a trend that will only
accelerate in the future. Thus, it is anticipated that only by enabling
ubiquitous and seamless mobile free-viewpoint video may the full potential of
immersive communication be achieved. This project seeks to achieve this goal via
concerted advances in signal representation, wireless video communication, and
user-action modeling that will be integrated holistically. The advances
delivered by this investigation will have broad impact across diverse fields
that involve live video communication via multiple viewpoints, including
telemedicine, telepresence and telecollaboration, remote monitoring and control,
entertainment (3D and free-viewpoint TV), gaming and virtual worlds, people-
centric sensing and connected-community applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will pursue the following technical thrusts: (i) Characterization of the
fundamental trade-offs between viewpoint space sampling, rate allocation, and
signal fidelity in immersive mobile communication; (ii) Derivation of the
optimal sampling policy, at the view and data-unit levels, in uplink
communication; (iii) Design of novel view and rate scalable coding for multi-
view broadcast and derivation of the optimal view embedding policy, as a
function of the broadcast rate, in downlink communication; (iv) Characterization
of the optimal scheduling policy for local ad-hoc communication between mobile
clients; and (v) Integration of energy conservation and characterization of the
trade-offs between battery lifetime and multi-view application performance.