* 2031420
* RAPID: COVID-19 induced cessation of ecotourism and supplemental feeding: Implications for wildlife physiology, reproduction, and the microbiome
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Karen Kapheim, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 184,519.00

Wildlife feeding by tourists is a widespread phenomenon across various species
and environments. While it can provide important economic benefits to countries
and local communities, it also poses significant challenges for affected
wildlife. These widespread practices may induce habituation, cause stress,
impact health, and alter growth and survival, all of which can lead to
population changes. However, the ability to control for extraneous factors in
tourism-related wildlife feeding conditions is often difficult if not
impossible, rendering scientific study challenging. Furthermore, the effects of
termination of wildlife feeding have rarely been considered. The unprecedented
cessation of tourism and food provisioning due to the COVID-19 global pandemic
has created a natural experiment that meets the aforementioned challenges to
directly test the effects of this phenomenon on critically endangered rock
iguanas in The Bahamas. The proposed work will leverage this unique opportunity
to test the effects of widescale resource restriction and dietary change on the
health of free-living animals. The implications of this work reach far beyond
that of the tourist sector and can inform the effects of resource restriction
for natural populations across species on a broader scale. Thus, understanding
the consequences of supplemental feeding cessation will help inform countries on
a broader scale that are working at making tourism practices more sustainable,
which is particularly important for endangered species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic has created a unique situation via
the restriction of human movement and contact resulting in severely reduced
global travel. As a result, in countries like The Bahamas, there has been the
complete removal of tourist stress and feeding pressures on wildlife across the
country. Recent findings by the PIs examining critically endangered iguanas
across an insular landscape in The Bahamas have illustrated significant tourist-
driven effects on physiology and gut microbial composition. This work has also
revealed significant associations among tourism, bacterial abundance, and
physiology. The recent and sudden release from supplemental feeding by tourists
has created a rare natural experiment by which the PIs can directly test the
effects of diet shifts and restriction in natural populations of long-lived
iguanas where pre-pandemic data are already available. The PIs will specifically
focus on the gut microbiome, and test for direct associations and directionality
with physiological systems important to health and survival. Moreover, the
ongoing 40-year demographic study in this system will allow the PIs to relate
this to survival, growth, and recruitment at the population level. The research
group will work to facilitate transfer of results from this study to The Bahamas
via long standing research partnerships and will provide opportunistic clarity
on potential management strategies moving forward. To reach the broader
community, outcomes will also be reported via Shedd Aquarium media and
exhibits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.