* 2031481
* Collaborative Research: CAFECS: Enhancing Culturally Responsive Teaching that Helps Students Build Connections Between Exploring Computer Science and their Lives
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Andrew Rasmussen, Chicago Public Schools
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 10/31/2023
* USD 229,739.00

The Learning Partnership, in collaboration with DePaul University and Chicago
Public Schools (CPS) will address gaps in computer science (CS) course
performance among Latinx students in Chicago Public Schools. CPS uses Exploring
Computer Science (ECS), a computer science curriculum designed to facilitate
inquiry and equity-based instructional practices, yet Latinx students
underperform in CS relative to their peers. Research shows that a learning
environment that emphasizes the connection between students’ lives and academic
content is particularly important for Latinx students, and the PIs postulate
that this could explain the gap in outcomes for Latinx students in CPS. The goal
of this proposal is to adapt the Build Connections program, a new evidence-based
strategy to help teachers and students connect course content to students’
lives, as a complement to the ECS curriculum framework. The results of this
project will contribute to the literature on culturally responsive pedagogy and
further our understanding of the unique professional development needs of urban
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Learning Partnership, in
collaboration with DePaul University and Chicago Public Schools (CPS) seeks to
address variations in Exploring Computer Science (ECS) course outcomes for
Latinx students in Chicago Public Schools, including course performance and
future course taking. Prior evidence from the CAFÉCS coaching program suggests
that teachers are not fully adapting lessons to accommodate students’
backgrounds. Research shows that a learning environment that emphasizes the
connection between students’ lives and academic content is particularly
important for Latinx students, and the PIs conjecture that this might explain
the gap in outcomes for Latinx students in CPS. The goal of this proposal is to
adapt and implement the Build Connections program, an emerging evidence-based
strategy that helps teachers and students connect course content to students’
lives, as a complement to the ECS curriculum framework. The integration of the
Build Connections program will help support teachers in developing the kinds of
culturally responsive lesson adaptations recommended by ECS. The project will
provide online professional development, integrate support for the Build
Connections program into ECS instructional coaching, and mentoring for the ECS
coaches from an expert in improvement science. The results of this project will
provide guidance to researchers on how to test their theories in practically
relevant and meaningful ways, and the research will contribute to the literature
on understanding the unique professional development needs of urban
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.