* 2031675
* SBIR Phase I:  Performant Distributed Ledgers for Cybersecurity Applications
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Anusha Iyer, Corsha, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2022
* USD 255,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to advance a novel, distributed ledger-based
technology to improve Application-Program Interfaces (APIs) security for
enterprises. APIs are the way that machines communicate with each other, where
these machines may be servers, docker containers, IoT devices, sensors, and
more. Enterprises are moving to using hybrid cloud deployments, mixing public
cloud with private and edge networks. Further, enterprises are deploying a wide
range of open architectures that support mobile access, automated deployment
workflows, and application architectures like microservices, IoT enclaves, and
sensor networks. Increasingly as an enterprise turns to APIs to stitch these
diverse network elements together, API security is a critical element of any
enterprise’s cybersecurity strategy. The company’s proposed API security
platform leverages a private and permissioned distributed ledger network (DLN)
at the heart of its product. In fact, this DLN enables provision of the first
implementation of multi-factor authentication (MFA) for APIs. To meet the scale
and latency requirements of API authentication in real-time without sacrificing
security guarantees, the proposed DLN must be highly performant and efficient in
both storage and processing. This SBIR-funded research seeks to advance DLN
technology but is also more broadly applicable to the advancement of enterprise
applications of distributed ledgers that would benefit from pruning, flexible
scaling and orchestration, and heightened performance.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to advance this foundational
blockchain framework by discovering and evaluating approaches to elevate
performance of the DLN in the scope of authentication application. The project
will measure and compare the effectiveness of potential advancements to the DLN
platform, including: 1) Horizontal scaling of the blockchain network, i.e.
varying the number of peers or other components in the network, 2). Pruning of
the blockchain to only keep relevant and necessary portions of ledger data, i.e.
leading to a more efficient ledger access without sacrificing deep verification.
The research work will extend modeling and simulation infrastructure to pattern
and measure real-world, at-scale scenarios. The research proposed here will have
a broad impact to DLT research and serve as a blueprint for production-grade
ledger-based technologies to help enable use-cases where the barrier to entry is
cost, performance, and/or scalability. The company will utilize these research
findings to develop a production-grade model for a performant, scalable DLT-
based security product that can meet scenarios as expansive as high-performance
cloud computing, and as granular as embedded, industrial control systems and
sensor networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.