* 2031770
* RAPID: Rapid and Point-of-Care Electrical Detection of COVID-19 RNA
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Seong Jin Koh, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 11/30/2022
* USD 80,000.00

The current pandemic of Coronavirus (COVID-19) and its reoccurrence is a great
threat to public health, the economy, and national security. To cope with this
emergency, there is a need for a testing method that is rapid, accurate, and
deployable in the field (doctor’s offices, hospitals, airports, etc.) at a large
scale. Typically, a COVID-19 test takes several hours day as it involves sending
the patient’s sample to a limited number of certified labs or the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). In addition, it is extremely alarming that
the current capacity of COVID-19 testing is significantly lower than the desired
capacity. To address this situation, this project proposes a transformative
detection technique that enables rapid, portable, and direct electrical
detection of COVID-19 RNA in less than ten minutes on a silicon chip test kit
smaller than the size of an average human thumb with high sensitivity and
specificity. These silicon chip test kits can be cost-effectively mass-produced
using standard well-established CMOS technology. The success of this RAPID RAPID
project will have a transformative impact in the present COVID-19 pandemic
environment not only in U.S. but also globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed technique offers detection of single COVID-19 RNA molecules directly
and electrically in less than 10 minutes on a one square centimeter Si chip. A
specific sequence T-oligo of 30-mer COVID-19 RNA will be used as the target
molecule. Numerous single T-oligo molecules will be sandwiched between two Au
functionalized metal nanoparticles. One metal nanoparticle will be in contact
with a negative electrode and the other metal nanoparticle with a positive
electrode, providing electrical paths between the two electrodes. A voltage bias
between the two electrodes will produce an electrical current, thereby enabling
direct electrical detection of single T-oligo molecule. This direct electrical
detection of COVID-19 RNA will occur in a circular nanowell of ~100 nm diameter,
which acts as an independent COVID-19 RNA detector. One COVID-19 test kit of one
square centimeter will be made to accommodate two and half billion nanowell
COVID-19 detectors. This enormous number of detectors on a single test kit
enables a highly sensitive and rapid detection of single COVID-19 RNA molecules.
Furthermore, RNA detection has been relying on time-consuming technique of
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). In the proposed
approach single target RNA molecules will be directly detected without reverse
transcription and PCR amplification reaction there by expending the test results
with more sensitivity and specificity. The technique will have extended
applications in other infectious diseases, fundamental biomedical research,
pharmaceutical drug development, and early disease
diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.