* 2031252
* Designing Professional Development to Foster Mastery and Interest for Integrating Computer Science into Mathematics Classes
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Kathryn Fisler, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 12/31/2023
* USD 999,511.00

Roughly half of the US states have adopted K-12 Computer Science (CS) standards
to date. Many districts, however, cannot afford standalone CS classes because
they lack funding, available time in the curriculum, and/or a pool of qualified
teachers to hire from. Integrating CS into existing courses (e.g., math,
science, social studies) is a promising alternative. Rather than computer
science being taught as an elective that not all students take, it could be
taught more equitably in core courses. Moreover, districts could save resources
through this strategy. Integration also showcases how computing is not inward-
looking but can impact other disciplines. Unfortunately, very little research
guides districts on how students learn CS in integrated contexts or how teachers
gain confidence, interest, and skill to teach integrated computing content. This
project, a partnership between Bootstrap and the Oklahoma Department of
Secondary Education, is studying these questions in the context of integrating
CS into Oklahoma's 8th and 9th grade math framework. Because these challenges to
introducing CS to schooling are pervasive nationwide, this project can serve as
a model for meeting these challenges. The project is also producing research
findings on creating effective professional development for teachers new to CS
and how these teachers develop their capacity for CS
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on an existing Research-
Practitioner Partnership (RPP) in Oklahoma that has been studying how to prepare
math teachers to start integrating computing into their classes. This award
expands this ongoing work to prepare teachers to integrate computing in more
depth and more extensively, with 135 teachers. Using design research, results
from educational psychology, and our findings to date, this project is (a)
developing a 2-stage, hybrid professional development program that fosters
teachers' confidence and interest in computing (including a variant specifically
designed to support rural teachers), (b) adapting lessons from the state math
framework to include standards-aligned computing tasks, (c) studying teachers'
process of change in thinking about integration, and (d) beginning to study
impacts on students. The mixed-methods research draws on surveys and
longitudinal interviews with teachers, recordings of classrooms, samples of
student work, and data on student assessments. This project is funded by the CS
for All: Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.