* 2031527
* Arizona K-8 Consortium: Building Computer Science and Computational Thinking Capacity in Rural K-8 Education
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Kalman Mannis, Arizona Technology Council Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,620.00

This project will establish the Arizona K-8 Consortium Hub, a network of
Researcher-Practitioner Partnerships (RPPs) that will work to integrate computer
science (CS) and computational thinking (CT) into rural and tribal K-8
education. The Hub will work with practitioners and researchers to establish
five regional RPPs across Arizona. The Hub’s primary role will be to support
regional RPPs logistically (partnership building, grant writing) as well as by
developing and implementing an integrated Professional Development (PD) and
Professional Learning Community (PLC) platform that builds local capacity.
During the 18-month development phase, RPPs will work with the Hub to:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Assess the current state of CS/CT education and PD in
their K-8 schools, including CS/CT interventions and curriculum and K-8 student
CS/CT assessment tools, and identify gaps and issues to be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Articulate what high-quality CS/CT looks like
in rural schools serving underserved, underrepresented youth, and what PD/PLC
supports and work are needed to support and sustain
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Co-design and support integrated
research/evaluation studies to address gaps and issues along with building
capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) Build strong integrated PD/PLCs that support
RPPs in designing and implementing CS and CT interventions in rural preK-8
classrooms and future proposal development to the NSF CS for All program’s
PreK-8 Strand, among others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goals of the AZ
K-8 Consortium Hub include developing a) an integrated PD/PLC platform that
builds local capacity, and b) an RPP model for transformational change in rural
K-8 education. The Hub will support RPPs in exploring and implementing evidence-
based K-8 CS/CT education interventions that help meet state and federal
education standards and be shared widely with other rural and underserved
regions. Lessons learned from this work will inform future NSF CS for All
medium-and large-scale PreK-8 proposals. Project outcomes include four rural
RPPs, an overview of rural Arizona's current CS/CT interventions and self-
efficacy in rural K-8 educators, and a roadmap for joint research around the
integration of CS/CT education in rural K-8 schools. This project is funded by
the CS for All: Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.