* 2031060
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Providing useable COVID-19 health information to linguistically underserved people
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2021
* Kelly Berkson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 10/31/2021
* USD 68,875.00

This project uses language documentation methodology to explore effective
communication of COVID-19 health-related information to linguistically
underserved populations in the US. Such communities may not have access to
reliable health information in their native languages. Researchers can translate
information from English into other languages, but translation alone cannot
ensure information is presented in ways that are culturally appropriate and
therefore maximally effective. The future path and possible resurgence of this
pandemic remains unknown, so it is critical to learn about group health
perceptions and behaviors in order to create best practices for developing
critical informational materials for these underserved populations. Scientific
investigation of languages for these populations provides the bridge between
health information and cultural context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linguists and
health information experts will work with a linguistically underserved community
to collect personal and group reflections, eliciting highly emotive connected
speech on topics rarely collected in language documentation projects. The
collected speech samples will potentially include rare vocabulary, idioms,
ritual language, songs, and remembered practices that underlie beliefs and
motivate health behavior. In-language interviews will be conducted by first-
generation native speakers who are undergraduate students and community members.
The project will create: (1) video-conferencing technology protocols for
language documentation fieldwork; (2) a unique corpus of interlinear glossed
texts (personal accounts, interviews, conversations) on health and wellness
which can be used in future linguistic research; and (3) increased understanding
of health literacy in the community. We aim to contribute to the development of
broader best practices for health communication message design to underserved
communities, especially during time-sensitive scenarios, as is the case with the
current rapidly-changing pandemic. The documentary methods and resulting
informational materials can be replicated for other non-English speaking groups
within the US and internationally. All materials, including a corpus of
interlinear glossed texts, will be archived and publicly-accessible at the
University of North Texas Digital Library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.