* 2031115
* RAPID: Coordination and Summarization of Studies of Cyberspace during COVID-19 Pandemic
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2020,09/30/2022
* David Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 89,292.00

This proposal describes a task as part of the NSF's rapid response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, and in particular, their response to the question of how the
cyberinfrastructure is dealing with traffic surges, and changing and expanding
patterns of use. The proposed work seeks to integrate the output of a set of
diverse, individually funded Internet and network measurement efforts into a
single comprehensive report that describes how the Internet responded to the
COVID-19 pandemic. This project will facilitate sharing of tools and other
measurement know-how, set up one or more workshops to share methodologies and
interim results, and develop a report that integrates output of the different
measurement efforts, in coordination with the measurement
PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the technical knowledge on the state of the
Internet will be gathered by the individual projects, the technical merit of
this complementary effort arises in the coordination and facilitation, which
will benefit the individual projects, as well as in generating a comprehensive
report. Furthermore, this work will contribute towards efficiency and better
outcomes by cross-fertilizing ideas among them. This effort coordinates results
from technical assessment done by individual network measurement projects and,
as a result, will present a comprehensive understanding of the state of the
Internet performance during the COVID-19 pandemic. Such a comprehensive report
will give policy makers, consumer advocacy groups, and ordinary citizens the
best view of how the components of cyberspace have functioned and evolved during
this time to meet their needs, and for future planning. The results from this
effort will be made available at http://living-
online.csail.mit.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.