* 2031916
* Collaborative Research: Combustion Behavior of Hydrochars from Wet Biomass
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jillian Goldfarb, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 334,295.00

Carbon-based waste from everyday sources, like landfills, agricultural
processes, wastewater treatment, and more, are typically “wet” wastes, which
makes them difficult to convert to biofuels using traditional methods. This work
focuses on a process called “hydrothermal carbonization” (HTC), which converts
these already wet bio-materials into high-grade fuels, which is both more
efficient and cost effective than typical methods. The resultant fuel is known
as “hydrochar,” a carbon-condensed solid often referred to as bio-coal for its
“coal-like” properties. Compared to coal combustion, hydrochars emit fewer
hazardous air pollutants and have a near net-zero CO2 impact. During the
formation of these hydrochars, however, a tar-like substance forms on the
surface, which initial research suggests could significantly change their
combustion behavior. The goal of this work is two-fold: first, understand the
formation pathways and chemical composition of the tar-like substance and
second, understand the impact that the tar-like substance has on important
combustion behaviors like ignition and particle burn-out. The work will include
a close collaboration between different fields, bringing the fields of fuel
synthesis and combustion closer through carefully-designed experiments.
Significant outreach to both technical communities and the industries they
support will support the adoption of hydrochars as a replacement for coal in
energy production. The ability to use such renewable solid fuels for energy
generation can help mitigate climate change and transform the U.S. into a green
energy exporter and job opportunity creator. To fill such high-tech positions,
we need a diverse workforce; the PIs – tenure-track female professors at Cornell
and Penn State – both have strong track records training students from under-
represented groups. At least two graduate and two undergraduate students will be
trained on this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrothermal carbonization is
widely touted for its ability to transform moist biomass streams into renewable
solid fuels that could be used as replacements for coal in energy generation.
Despite the potential benefits of HTC for waste management, a reactive amorphous
secondary char often forms on the surface of the solid hydrochar during
carbonization. This secondary char may hamper the ability of these “bio-coals”
to be used as drop-in fuels for combustion due to the drastically different
reactivity of the secondary char. To date, the renewable fuels literature
characterizes hydrochars only through thermogravimetric analysis of rapid
oxidation, not true combustion behavior. As such, we know little about their
combustion behavior, relying only on basic fuel characterizations to gauge this
renewable solid fuel’s potential. The goal of the work – the first study of its
kind – is to understand the fundamental combustion behavior of biomass-based
hydrochars, a solid fuel with unique burning characteristics. The work will
improve our fundamental understanding of (1) the mechanisms of hydrothermal
carbonization and (2) the combustion behavior of renewable solid fuels with
condensed tarry phases. A key broader impact of the proposed work is to
rigorously connect two (surprisingly) disparate fields – Renewable Fuel Science
and Combustion Science. The closely-coupled work between the PIs will provide
not only a scientific foundation for linking these two communities, but the PIs
will actively participate in each other’s research communities to bridge the
gap. The PIs will work with an HTC technology development firm to disseminate
information to the designers of large-scale HTC processing equipment and
potential customers interested in firing hydrochars for energy
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.