* 2031205
* RAPID: Structural investigation of interactors of SARS CoV 2
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* James Fraser, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 04/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The SARS-COV-2 virus genome encodes a very small set of proteins. Having such a
minimal genome means that the virus relies on host factors to complete its
infectious cycle. Researchers supported by this award will investigate the
mechanisms by which interactions between viral and host cell proteins might
antagonize innate immune defenses and lead to increased virulence. Elucidating
the structural basis for how SARS-COV-2 hijacks and disrupts host cellular
processes may aid in the development of host-directed therapies as a means to
combat epidemics and will provide new insight into how genetic variation of host
proteins can influences differences in infection severity and spread between
populations and species. Data and resources from these studies will be rapidly
disseminated through public WWW-sites, social media, shared data repositories,
and published in peer-reviewed scientific journals.

Protein regions that are structurally dynamic upon changing the data collection
temperature are highly correlated with small molecule binding sites. Studies
supported by this award will test the hypothesis that the regions of viral and
host proteins that are most structurally susceptible to temperature
perturbation, detectable by multi-temperature synchrotron and x-ray free
electron laser (XFEL) experiments, are likely to represent the footprints of
protein-protein interactions and to bind small molecule ligands. The researchers
will use an innovative combination of multi-temperature X-ray data collection of
individual proteins at synchrotrons and XFELs, high throughput crystal fragment
screening, and structure determination of viral-human complexes. Results from
these studies will advance the understanding of SARS-COV-2 biology and may also
yield more generalizable insights into mechanisms of virulence. This RAPID award
to the University of California-San Francisco is made by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security (CARES) Act.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.