* 2031355
* Secure and Upgrade Computer Science in Classrooms through an Ecosystem with Scalability &amp; Sustainability (SUCCESS)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Gay Stewart, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,180,874.00

More than 20% of public-school students in the US attend schools in rural
districts; however, these schools are less likely to offer computer science (CS)
courses than those in suburban areas, contributing to the access divide and
disparities in CS participation and achievement by socioeconomic status (SES),
race, and gender. One of the primary reasons why integration of CS into the K-12
curriculum remains elusive for rural districts is the lack of educators with CS
expertise. Additionally, principals and counselors are often unaware of the
importance and prevalence of CS to careers relevant to their communities. The
SUCCESS team will address these issues by designing an ecosystem, including
district and school level supports, that will ensure that all middle school
students in predominantly rural WV have access to high quality CS education and
an understanding of CS career opportunities. To reach its goal of increased CS
access, SUCCESS will specifically work to increase teacher CS content knowledge,
improve principal and counselor understanding of how to support teachers, and
spread awareness of CS careers for students, teachers, counselors and
principals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Secure and Upgrade Computer Science in
Classrooms through an Ecosystem with Scalability &amp; Sustainability (SUCCESS),
will build an ecosystem to increase access to Computer Science (CS) and
participation of underrepresented West Virginia (WV) middle school students in
CS. SUCCESS builds on an established partnership between West Virginia
University Center for Excellence in STEM Education (CE-STEM), Code.org (Code WV,
in CE-STEM, is their WV Regional partner), the WV Department of Education
(WVDE), and the Raleigh County School District to increase CS access by
addressing the objectives identified as crucial by practitioners. The goals of
this project are to increase: 1) teacher CS content knowledge, 2) principal and
counselor understanding of how to support teachers to ensure all students have
CS access, and 3) the awareness of CS careers for students, teachers, counselors
and principals. The design research partnership approach provides for iteration
and improvement of the PD model and other activities based on research,
including data and input from SUCCESS partners and the ability to increase the
number of educators that the project can serve. SUCCESS will adapt a high-
quality existing CS curriculum and PD program to increase awareness of CS in the
16 Career Clusters established by WVBoE, satisfying two state course
requirements. A video library supporting the career clusters will be created and
all materials made available to all teachers in WV. Other CS training content
identified as needed by partners will be created and delivered through the WVDE
online system for use by teachers throughout the state toward achieving CS
credentials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.