* 2031778
* RAPID: Undergraduate Research in Modeling and Computation for Discovery of Molecular Probes for SARS-CoV-2 Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Mary Jo Ondrechen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2023
* USD 121,691.00

This REU Site award to Northeastern University, located in Boston, MA, will
support the training of six students for 10 weeks during the summer of 2020.
Because of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the recommendation to maintain
social distancing, students will virtually contribute to computational research
projects focused on COVID-19. The Northeastern University REU Site will recruit
a total of six students, primarily from colleges with limited research
opportunities or who are from an under-represented group, to be trained in the
program. Students will learn how research is conducted and many will present the
results of their work at future scientific conferences. Assessment of the
program will be done through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of this undergraduate research program
will be for the students to learn about and use computational techniques that
will be applied to urgent research questions surrounding the functions and
control mechanisms of the SARS-CoV-2 proteins. Each student will be trained in
some of the following skills: molecular modeling, ligand docking, molecular
dynamics simulations, biomolecular electrostatics, and quantum mechanical
electronic structure calculations. Students will analyze SARS-CoV-2 proteins and
screen libraries of small molecules that can bind to and control these proteins.
They will be mentored by three faculty members and six graduate students from
the departments of Chemistry and Chemical Biology and Bioengineering at
Northeastern University. They will contribute critical new knowledge about how
the viral proteins function and how their function may be modulated. The
students will also receive professional development training in areas such as
research ethics, scientific writing, the graduate school application process,
and resume writing. Participants will be selected by the PIs, based on
applications consisting of college transcripts, personal statements, and letters
of reference. Preference will be given to students who were accepted by another
REU program that was subsequently cancelled because of the pandemic. More
information about the program is available by contacting PI Dr. Mary Jo
Ondrechen (mjo@neu.edu) or co-PIs Dr. Steven Lopez (s.lopez@northeastern.edu)
and Dr. Mona Minkara (m.minkara@northeastern.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.