* 2031371
* RAPID:Triaging decisions during catastrophic events: a study of frontline triage nurses
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Priyadarshini Pennathur, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 01/31/2022
* USD 98,566.00

The goal of this RAPID project is to model decision-making among nurses when
they triage patients during the COVID-19 pandemic. Triage nurses act as
frontline gatekeepers and perform a difficult balancing act during a pandemic.
They must not only ensure that patients who need immediate care get it in a
timely manner but must also filter incoming patients to prevent infections and
to reduce undue burden on hospital resources. The complexity and risk in their
decisions are influenced by how the nurses themselves perceive the risk of a
pandemic, and how they associate and project their risk perception with the
information a patient provides. Conventional triage decision making criteria,
protocols and processes based only on a linear, discrete, “single-symptom at a
time” risk screening approach are woefully inadequate to tackle triage decisions
in a pandemic of this scale and complexity. Nurses play a pivotal role in
ensuring safe and timely patient care and in limiting the spread of
COVID-19-like pandemics. The knowledge gained from this project about decision
making and evidence-based practices during crises will benefit organizations
worldwide, by proving data on factors that make decision-making. These data can
drive training and guidelines development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Triage nurses
routinely make triage decisions about patients. But, during a pandemic, they
make particularly complex and risky decisions. Triage decision making criteria
and protocols must reflect a deep understanding of how nurses weigh patient
symptoms, and match them to disease conditions, while also managing a multitude
of complex, interrelated decision constraints, including their own risk
perceptions, and limited, uncertain, confounding information, in the midst of a
pandemic with major safety consequences. To identify the constraints nurses face
when making triaging decisions, and to model the strategies they use when
triaging, the project studies triage nurses from two large academic medical
centers. The project retrospectively analyzes triage phone calls for patient
risk screening, prospectively records screens nurses use as information sources,
and interviews nurses about their constraints, strategies, risk perception and
cognitive workload. The project maps a nurse’s patient-specific decision-making
trajectories to reveal their constraints and how they managed them.
Cumulatively, the data is expected to reveal generalizable strategies for triage
decisions during catastrophic events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.