* 2031989
* RAPID: Glycan coreceptors for SARS-CoV-2 spike protein
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Jeffrey Esko, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic is rapidly spreading, causing severe illness and death, as
well as widespread disruption to all aspects of society. Thus, there is an
urgent need to understand how the SARS-CoV-2 virus, the causative agent of
COVID-19, causes infection. This is the focus of this project. The virus first
gains access through the upper airways through aerosols or through contact with
contaminated materials. The actual infection process involves contact of the
virus with the surface of the cells lining the airways. This surface contains
various types of glycans or polysaccharides, which are strings of different
sugars connected to each other and to proteins and fats that surround the airway
cells. First contact with glycans subsequently leads to virus entry into the
cell. Very little is known about these glycans and how SARS-CoV-2 exploits them
as a portal of entry. This research addresses this fundamental problem. The
viral spike protein will be isolated, engineered and presented in a way that
resembles its disposition on the virus. Its interaction with glycans found in
the airways will be studies and the impact on binding of other glycans that are
part of the spike protein itself will be analyzed. Results will define
structurally how the virus makes first contact and subsequently invades the
airway cells, providing increased knowledge about understanding of SARS-CoV-2
replication. In addition to increasing knowledge about SARS-CoV-2 biology, this
proposal also supports the training of a post-doctoral fellow, broadening
participation in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SARS-CoV-2 infects airway
epithelial cells by interaction of the viral envelope spike (S) protein with the
host cell receptor ACE2. Prior to their integration, viruses first encounter the
thick glycocalyx of glycans and glycoconjugates surrounding all cells and in
mucus. Most viruses use glycans as attachment factors prior to engagement with
their protein receptors. Data show that SARS-CoV-2 spike protein binding to lung
epithelial cells depends on cellular heparan sulfate, and that heparan sulfate
may be acting as a coreceptor for ACE2. This project will characterize the
interaction between the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and host cell heparan sulfate
by determining how the composition of heparan sulfate affects spike protein
binding; by mapping the binding site in spike protein for heparan sulfate; and
by examining the impact of altering spike protein glycans in the proximity of
the binding site for heparan sulfate. The approach consists of recombinant
engineering of the ectodomain of spike protein and the receptor binding domain
of ACE2, binding studies with cell lines with altered heparan sulfate, mapping
the heparan sulfate binding site by mutation of key amino acid residues, and
reconstitution of spike protein into a pseudovirus particle to study its
interaction with heparan sulfate and ACE2. This information is urgently needed
to understand mechanistically host-virus interaction underlying infection by
SARS-CoV-2. This RAPID award is made by the Physiological and Structural Systems
Cluster in the BIO Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, using funds from
the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.