* 2031179
* Collaborative Research: MODULUS:Decoding the Rules of Phase Separation in Bacterial Chromatin
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Moumita Das, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 12/31/2023
* USD 559,684.00

All life depends on compartmentalization, starting with organisms, to cells,
down to organelles within cells. In this interdisciplinary collaboration, the
PIs will elucidate the rules underlying cellular compartmentalization in
bacteria. While compartmentalization within cells is often facilitated by
membranes, bacteria do not typically contain membrane-enclosed organelles.
Instead, bacteria must rely on alternate mechanisms such as phase separation for
spatial and functional organization and regulation of biochemical activity. This
mechanism allows for the formation of distinct phases or domains with different
structures, functions, and material properties starting from a homogeneous
mixture. Recently, soft-matter theories of phase separation of liquid mixtures
have tremendously advanced understanding of the biological organization.
However, the bacterial cytoplasm consists of mixtures of complex, structured
fluids. Their phase separation and regulation by non-equilibrium processes such
as enzymatic activity are not well understood. The PIs will use data-driven
mathematical modeling and state-of-the-art experiments to obtain a quantitative
understanding of the formation of phase-separated condensates and their impact
on the organization of genetic material and protein diffusion in bacteria. The
findings will provide insights into how intracellular phase separation drives
and determines cellular properties and functions, and connects genotype to
phenotype. The PIs will educate and train a new generation of scientists in
mathematical modeling and biology, and promote diversity in the STEM workforce.
They will co-organize Biophysics workshops to stimulate interactions among
scientists and industrial labs and introduce trainees to the local academic and
industrial research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells use
compartmentalization to create spatial organization, allowing them to carry out
biochemical processes and control biomolecular structures within distinct
microenvironments. This collaborative project will test the hypothesis that
bacteria use intracellular phase separation to achieve compartmentalization,
allowing for rapid exchange of molecules with the cytoplasm without the need for
internal membranes. Upon stress, bacterial chromosomes are reorganized by the
Dps protein into a tightly compacted condensate with liquid crystalline
properties. To determine the biophysical mechanisms underlying Dps-DNA
condensates, single-molecule fluorescence microscopy will map the phase diagram
of the condensate system as a function of physiologically relevant environmental
conditions. These experiments will complement active particle and continuum
models that will predict the phase-separated morphologies and the degree of
liquid crystallinity of the condensate. The viscoelastic and mechanical
structure-function properties of the condensate will be measured via active
microrheology; polarized light microscopy will identify any large ordered
domains within the condensate. Mathematical approaches will determine the
structural and orientational order, allowing for the construction of a
microscopic model of the phase separation and phase ordering of the condensate.
To evaluate the hypothesis that small molecules can diffuse rapidly within
Dps:DNA condensates to promote enzymatic activities including transcription, the
diffusion of molecules within condensed droplets will be directly measured by
total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy. Mathematical examination of
the particle trajectories will reveal the accessibility of different DNA regions
and quantitatively characterize the motility of different types of biomolecules,
advancing the understanding of how structure-function properties of biomolecular
condensates regulate cellular activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
being co-funded by the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB)
through the Systems and Synthetic Biology and the Genetic Mechanisms Programs,
and the MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) through the Mathematical
Biology Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.