* 2031196
* RAPID: Epidemic control strategies for COVID-19 in age-structured populations: A multi-model approach
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Bret Elderd, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2023
* USD 199,019.00

The recent COVID-19 pandemic has led to the reliance on epidemiological models
to forecast the potential benefits associated with various mitigation strategies
to control the spread of this novel disease. The mathematical models focused on
COVID-19 vary in their complexity from the relatively simple to more elaborate
models that follow individuals and their movement over the course of the
epidemic. Model performance depends both on model structure and the underlying
data available. During the beginning of an epidemic when limited data are
available, simple models should work best. As the epidemic progresses, more
complex models may then perform better. Yet, most research focuses on a single
model and does not consider comparing across multiple models. This research will
address immediate societal concerns over the course of the epidemic by using a
multi-model approach to ask questions regarding epidemic intensity (for example,
the number of expected COVID-19 cases) and the impacts of mitigation strategies
on these dynamics. While the research will develop models focused on COVID-19,
the models along with the statistical approaches to fit models to data will be
applicable for future outbreaks of novel diseases. Additionally, this project
provides training opportunities for a graduate student and a post-doctoral
researcher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In general, this research will use a multi-
model approach that considers a range of models from relatively simple
compartmental models to more complex models that incorporate age- and/or
network-structure based on social contacts. The models considered will provide
estimates of important epidemiological parameters (for example, R0) along with
their associated uncertainty. Understanding this uncertainty and establishing if
and when epidemic model complexity is a hindrance or utility for estimating
epidemic parameters and epidemic trajectories is a key issue.&lt;br/&gt;This
research will combine data with multiple epidemic models on the COVID-19
pandemic to:&lt;br/&gt;1. understand the relative performance of traditional
compartmental approaches to network-based age-structured models during the
course of an on-going epidemic; &lt;br/&gt;2. quantify the most crucial sources
of variation for estimating threshold vaccination criteria, epidemic
trajectories, and potential mitigation strategies; and, &lt;br/&gt;3. identify
if and when more complex network-based models outperform more traditional
approaches as the epidemic progress over time and data availability
changes.&lt;br/&gt;To meet the above goals, the analyses conducted will use a
Bayesian approach of fitting models to data. A Bayesian approach will allow for
the quantification of model and parameter uncertainty as well as assess the
uncertainty of forecasted epidemic dynamics and mitigation
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Ecology
and Evolution of Infectious Diseases Program (EEID), Division of Environmental
Biology, Directorate of Biological Sciences and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.