* 2031948
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO. SynBioSphinx: building designer lipid membranes for adaptive resilience to environmental challenges
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Eric Klein, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 06/30/2025
* USD 515,953.00

This project will investigate the mechanism of sphingolipid synthesis to produce
synthetic membrane vesicles in a test-tube starting from basic starting
materials. The vesicle synthesis technology is novel, and the vesicles have
potential uses in synthetic biology, new healthcare technologies and industrial
biotechnology and hence the potential to contribute to the bioeconomy. This
project will also contribute to the training of high school, undergraduate and
graduate students and will be used in public outreach efforts. This project is a
collaboration between researchers at Rutgers University (US), Duke University
(US), and the University of Edinburgh (UK). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
overarching goal of synthetic biology is to enable the building of synthetic
cells in a more predictable and reliable manner. Natural cells generate complex
molecules and higher order structures such as the cell membrane that acts as a
semi-permeable, external lipid barrier. Cells also display an ability to alter
their membrane composition in response to environmental changes (e.g. nutrients)
and protect the cell from external threats (e.g. toxins, viruses). Previous work
has focused on membranes formed from simple phospholipids but the SynBioSphinx
project will study sphingolipids since they are found in eukaryotic cell
membranes and an increasing number of important microbes. Eukaryotic
sphingolipid enzymes are membrane bound and this has hampered the in vitro
synthesis of sphingolipid-containing vesicles. In contrast, bacterial enzymes
that assemble the core sphingolipids are soluble and the sphingolipid-producing
organism Caulobacter crescentus is an ideal system to study. Moreover,
sphingolipids in the bacterial membrane lead to increased sensitivity to
bacteriophage, as well as resistance to the antibiotic polymyxin B. A fitness-
based, adaptive resilience, selection screen will be used to identify the
genes/enzymes in the bacterial sphingolipid-producing pathway. Mass spectrometry
will track the incorporation of labelled substrates (e.g. heavy L-serine) into
bacterial membranes and sphingolipids. A high-throughput screening strategy will
identify novel glycosyltransferases that will alter the biophysical properties
of the sphingolipid-containing bacterial and synthetic cell membranes. Combined
synthetic biology/mass spectrometry approaches will identify the optimal genetic
circuits of four target biocatalysts to build a short, efficient sphingolipid
pathway from small molecule metabolites. Lastly, in vitro
transcription/translation of the selected constructs will deliver cell-free
synthesis of de novo vesicles which will be monitored via microscopy
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/UK project is supported
by the US National Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological
Sciences Research Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.