* 2031652
* RAPID: Evolutionary Nutritional Adaptations and COVID-19 Risk among Healthcare Workers
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Katherine Wander, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 10/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This RAPID project will examine coronavirus (COVID-19) disease risk from an
evolutionary perspective, focusing on the intersection between nutrition and
infectious disease. Leveraging the infrastructure of an existing NSF-funded
project, the researchers will test two nutritional hypotheses, that mild iron
deficiency decreases COVID-19 risk and that obesity increases this risk.
Evidence suggests that mild iron deficiency may serve as a nutritional
adaptation to reduce infectious disease risk in the context of an evolutionary
‘arms race’ between human host and infectious agents. Whether mild iron
deficiency is protective against COVID-19 is unknown, as the virus does not have
a long history of adaptation to humans. Evidence also suggests that obesity may
be a later-life consequence of an early-life adaptation to conserve energy in
environments of under-nutrition. In such cases, immune system development may
also be set on a more energy-conserving track, which might increase risk of
infectious disease. The project focuses on healthcare workers because they are
at particularly high risk for emerging infectious diseases, including COVID-19,
particularly as healthcare systems become strained. The project will advance
fundamental understanding of the complex intersection between nutrition and
infectious disease, particularly with regard to emerging infectious diseases.
The research findings may inform public health efforts to protect healthcare
workers and the public against COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
will evaluate the impact of iron status and obesity on COVID-19 risk among
healthcare workers as COVID-19 admissions increase dramatically in their
hospital. Participating healthcare workers (physicians, nurses, and support
staff) will be evaluated at the outset for iron deficiency, anemia, and obesity.
COVID-19 immunity (indicating past infection) will be assessed at the outset,
and then participants will be monitored weekly for COVID-19 virus DNA
(indicating current infection) and COVID-19 symptoms or hospitalization. The
impact of iron deficiency and obesity on the probability that health care
workers contract COVID-19 (and the probability they experience severe COVID-19
outcomes of hospitalization or death) will be evaluated, controlling for
confounding variables (including socioeconomic status, healthcare role and
procedures performed, patient care load, and co-morbid chronic
conditions).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.