* 2031364
* Culturally-responsive teaching for supporting positive computer science identities among Latinx girls
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* K. Virginia Lehmkuhl-Dakhwe, SANTA CLARA COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 03/31/2024
* USD 924,479.00

This project is a research-practice partnership involving the Santa Clara County
Office of Education, Krause Center for Innovation at Foothill DeAnza College,
San José State University College of Science Center for STEM Education, WestEd,
and the Berryessa Union, Milpitas Unified, and Orchard Elementary School
Districts. It is supporting 4th and 5th grade teachers to adopt culturally-
responsive teaching and studying how this impacts the identities of Latinas as
they relate to computational thinking (CT) and computer science (CS). Female
Latina students are one of the populations that presently are among the least
likely to engage in CS or to pursue CS-related careers. Although it is widely
accepted that early interventions are critical to engage underrepresented
students in STEM, there is a dearth of opportunities for students to effectively
engage with CS and CT skills as part of their classroom instruction. The study
focuses on addressing this and developing among Latinas positive identity around
foundational CT skills, particularly algorithmic thinking and abstraction as
they relate to mathematics. The project activities are preparing teachers to
effectively teach abstraction and algorithmic thinking and assess CT practices;
developing CT activities for 4th &amp; 5th grade that are culturally responsive
and that promote positive identity among Latinas; and assessing the
effectiveness of these curricula towards improving positive identity and math
achievement in classrooms serving predominantly minority youth in the 4th and
5th grades. In total, this project is impacting 1400 students and among them, at
least 350 Latina students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central objective of this
project is to apply culturally responsive teaching to computational thinking
practices that will provide an opportunity to support positive identity in STEM
in Latina girls. The first activity in achieving this objective is developing
professional learning for 4th and 5th grade educators using Critical Race Theory
and other culturally responsive teaching methods that use the Framework for
Multicultural Curriculum Design (Sleeter et al., 2005). The strategy is to
integrate CT into mathematics and other curricula through a modified Engage-
Investigate Model-Apply progression. Teachers then use these culturally
responsive methods to create positive identity with the content. Teacher
practice is being assessed on the CT Practices of algorithms and abstraction,
but specifically on abstraction as well as on related ideas in mathematics to
determine if there is a tertiary effect on increasing math scores. A mixed-
methods study is exploring the impacts of the curricula and professional
development through observations, data collection on student work, and
attitudinal surveys. This project is funded by the CS for All: Research and RPPs
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.