* 2031815
* RAPID: The Virtual Field: Educational mitigation for the Covid-19 Pandemic
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Claudia Luke, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 10/31/2022
* USD 238,835.00

The Covid-19 pandemic is causing massive disruption to field education in the
U.S. and internationally and is forecasted to continue to cause field course
cancellations over the next year. The impacts of this disruption on STEM
education is anticipated to be substantial. A 2014 study by the National
Research Council found that field experiences boost motivation, retention,
critical thinking and academic success for students of all backgrounds and
disciplines and are particularly important for recruitment into the
environmental sciences. Building on a grassroots effort of 50 Field Stations and
Marine Laboratories representing 34 field site networks (e.g., NEON, LTER, LTAR,
GLEON), this project will leverage existing collaborations, programs and
initiatives to: establish a field learning portal to advertise and distribute
virtual materials and live-streaming research-based field events to universities
across the U.S.; create novel cross-site virtual field learning experiences that
boost critical observation and research skills; evaluate the efficacy of virtual
field experiences on student learning outcomes. These experiences will help
fulfill graduation requirements and prepare undergraduates and graduates
impacted by the Covid-19 pandemic for future careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
pandemic offers unique opportunities to generate insights for the development of
virtual field experiences as a novel teaching tool. The urgent need for virtual
teaching materials across all disciplines encourages adoption by faculty who
might otherwise never have used either virtual or field experiences in their
courses. The synchronous prioritization of virtual offerings by field stations
and marine laboratories opens the window to creating a broad array of multi-site
virtual experiences around the world. The resulting dramatic expansion in the
availability and use of virtual field experiences can create new opportunities
to assess the effects of this teaching tool on student observation and research
skills and to enhance preparedness for future disruptions. This RAPID award is
made by the Division of Biological Infrastructure using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.