* 2031790
* EAGER: Toward determining the key interactions between the SARS-CoV2 virus components and host cells
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Douglas Barrick, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project will bring rigorous biophysical knowledge to select protein
components of the SARS-CoV2 virus that has catastrophic effects on human health,
activity, and economic well-being. Critical events in the viral infection cycle
include interaction of the virus with susceptible host cells and a variety of
cellular responses post-infection. Experimental studies will be performed to
characterize proteins that participate in these stages. By combining the
extensive thermodynamic and structural expertise of two research groups, key
structural features and molecular interactions will be described and quantified.
The data will provide a framework to test the findings in cell-based infectivity
assays. Two graduate students will be trained, and the results of this project
will be used as the basis for a seminar course on coronaviruses directed at
biophysics undergraduate and graduate students to develop future workforce with
experience in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A critical interaction between
SARS-CoV-2 and host is that between the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the
viral spike transmembrane protein and the S1 domain of the human ACE2
transmembrane protein. Binding is required for infection, determining the host
range that a particular virus can infect. This project will quantify this
critical interaction thermodynamically, determine the virus-host specificity
profile, test various mechanisms for the origin and zoonotic events that led to
the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, and generate soluble mimics with favorable stabilities
and specificities that can be used to limit or prevent infection. In addition,
three accessory proteins, Orf3a, Orf7a, and Orf8, that interfere with or hijack
host cellular processes will be characterized, both structurally and
functionally using various spectroscopic and hydrodynamic methods. To further
probe the evolutionary origins of coronaviruses and their host specificities,
ancestral sequence reconstruction methods and consensus design will be applied
to these targets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award is made by the Molecular
Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, using
funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.