* 2032752
* RAPID: Using a professional code of ethics to promote ethical and responsible research
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Trisha Phillips, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 71,522.00

A scientific society’s code of ethics is an important symbol of the discipline’s
standards, values, and commitments. This project aims to understand whether and
in what way a scientific society’s code of ethics influences its disciplinary
culture and individual behaviors related to ethical and responsible research. On
April 16, 2020, the American Political Science Association announced significant
changes to the Association’s code of ethics, a document formally titled A Guide
to Professional Ethics in Political Science. This change provides an excellent
opportunity to conduct a “natural experiment” to study the relationship between
a professional association’s code of ethics and research integrity. This project
takes seven baseline measurements relating to ethics and research integrity
among APSA members, including their perceptions, publication practices, and
graduate student education in research ethics, so that follow up measurements
can detect whether these indicators of research integrity changed after the
association changed its code of ethics. Findings will be broadly disseminated to
better enable scholars and academic leaders to promote the responsible and
ethical conduct of research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By collecting baseline data
before changes are made to the ethics code of a scientific society, this project
responds to three research questions: (1) How does a professional code of ethics
influence the disciplinary climate of research integrity? (2) How does a
professional code of ethics influence publication and dissemination practices
related to research integrity? (3) How does a professional code of ethics
influence instruction in the responsible and ethical conduct of research?
Scholars have established that honor codes are effective influencing factors for
academic integrity in undergraduate student populations, but little is known
about whether and in what way codes of ethics can influence research integrity
in academic and professional populations. Collecting baseline data related to:
(1) member perceptions of disciplinary climate of research integrity; (2)
author’s awareness of ethical norms and expectations; (3) submission
requirements for journals; (4) author’s disclosure of ethical issues; (5)
attention to ethical issues in publication and presentation forums; (6) RECR
educational programming; and (7) RECR resources allows the effects of this
change to be identified and measured. Understanding the effects of changing
codes of ethics yields broader insights into the influencing power of ethical
codes, and the causal and influencing factors for desirable and undesirable
research practices. This knowledge will help enable academic and professional
leaders cultivate cultures of integrity and achieve greater impact when revising
their code of ethics in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.