* 2032474
* RAPID: New Models for Online Social Experiences Supporting Immediate Needs of NSF REU students, Conferences and the Advancement of Remote Research
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Blair MacIntyre, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 06/30/2022
* USD 100,005.00

The Covid-19 pandemic has dramatically impacted how and where work may take
place, creating a profound demand for technologies and strategies supporting
remote work and education. While video conferencing and chat applications have
been a great help during this time, their limitations have also become clear.
This project explores how 3D virtual worlds can recreate the advantages of being
in shared office and learning environments: awareness of the work of your
colleagues or fellow students, a sense of being part of a shared community, and
opportunities for impromptu interactions. The project promotes the design and
development of more resilient work and learning environments by advancing
knowledge of how 3D and virtual reality technologies enable people to connect
and collaborate at a distance, simulating the physical constraints that
naturally create social situations that are vital to the emergence and diffusion
of new ideas and professional networks. This project will study how 3D and
virtual reality technologies may be effective at recreating the positive aspects
of physical conditions of the real world, while allowing for social interaction
to be more convenient and efficient than video or chat technologies. The project
will also study how virtual reality technologies promote diversity and inclusion
by reducing barriers to remote participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtual
worlds technology will be used to support key social interactions of current and
future scientists in three areas. First, the project will support a network of
undergraduate research students over the summer as a starting point for
exploring more regular sharing of research progress and community building, by
situating ongoing research artifacts in virtual worlds to stimulate conversation
as well as co-construction and review of the research products. The project will
explore ongoing informal collaboration as well as formal presentations. Second,
it will leverage work completed over the summer for exploring new approaches to
online and multi-site models of conferencing in the fall. Third, it will build
on both of these projects and previous work to support and study the transition
of a major academic conference to an online or hybrid form. Throughout, the 3D
and virtual reality technology will be systematically studied and advanced
through feedback from participants and partnership with industry that can scale
these approaches globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.