* 2032039
* NSF-BSF: Composition and evolution of saline fluids in the upper mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Dimitri Sverjensky, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 564,439.00

Connections between the deep Earth and the surface environment where we live are
crucial to maintaining the long-term habitability of the Earth. As an example,
saline fluids inside the Earth in the upper mantle may play an important role in
connecting subduction zones at depth and volcanism at the surface. How this
happens is still mysterious. One reason for this is that there are no
experimental data for how such fluids interact chemically with upper mantle
rocks, even though saline fluids are preserved in diamonds and rocks from the
deep Earth. The proposed research seeks to understand the role of chloride in
saline fluids. For example, the potential for chloride to transport metals under
upper mantle conditions is highly intriguing. How important is this process?
What are the impacts on changing the upper mantle through time, the generation
of melts, the long-term stability of continental roots, and the types of
volcanism at the surface of Earth? Answering these questions will help unravel
the reasons for the special features of Earth and its near-surface environment
that contribute to Earth's habitability as well as helping to provide a basis
for the prediction of the potential habitability of other planets. This is a
project jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s Directorate of
Geosciences (NSF-GEO) and the Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) in
accord with the language in the Memorandum of Understanding between the NSF and
the BSF. This Agreement allows a single collaborative proposal, involving US and
Israeli investigators, to be submitted and peer-reviewed by NSF. Upon successful
results of the NSF merit review and recommendation by the cognizant NSF Program
of an award, each Agency funds the proportion of the budget and the
investigators associated with its own country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
objective of this proposal is to understand the composition and evolution of
saline fluids in the upper mantle. A unique combination of experimental,
thermodynamic modeling, and observational studies are proposed to examine the
origins and roles of Cl-rich fluids in diamond formation and mantle
metasomatism. The Israeli participants bring two vital areas of expertise to the
project, namely the experimental expertise needed to measure the solubilities of
mantle rocks in chloride solutions and the expertise in analyzing fluid
inclusions in diamonds. These two areas of expertise are buttressed by the
resources provided in the experimental laboratory for high pressure-temperature
rock solubilities and the analytical laboratory for fluid inclusion analysis.
Theoretical analysis of the experimental solubilities and published single
mineral solubilities will be integrated with data from lower temperature and
pressure experimental and spectroscopic studies to expand the calibration of
metal-chloride complexes in the Deep Earth Water (DEW) model. Integrating the
results of these studies will enable chemical mass transfer predictions of
fluid-rock interaction for comparison with the compositions of fluid and solid
inclusions in natural diamonds to test alternate scenarios for the origin and
evolution of saline fluids in the upper mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.