* 2032639
* RAPID: Remote Work in the Time of COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Phyllis Moen, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2021
* USD 199,999.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has transformed where work is done. In response to stay-
at-home orders mandated in many states, U.S. workers able to do so have spent
some time working remotely. This sudden spike in working from home, combined
with the closing of childcare facilities and the move to on-line schooling,
represents a sea change in working conditions and family lives, effectively a
large-scale social experiment. To begin to understand this social experiment
unfolding in real time, this RAPID project will collect quantitative and
qualitative data to advance science and inform policy development around three
objectives. First, the project will investigate the experiences of remote work
and technologies enabling it, including disparities by gender, age/life-course
stage, socioeconomic status, and race/ethnicity. Second, the project will
examine the relationships between work demands, work resources, and quality of
life, including strategic adaptations to remote work and the importance of work
resources for certain groups. Third, the project will examine the sustainability
of working from home post COVID-19 in terms of workers’ preferences and
strategic adaptations. Evidence on the work-, family-, and individual-level as
well as technological mechanisms and their relative importance for women and men
at different life stages will help organizations to develop effective
interventions to help workers better adapt to the risks and possibilities of
remote work jumpstarted by the COVID-19 crisis. These findings will lay the
groundwork for future organizational interventions and regulatory response in
developing and implementing new work designs for the 21st century, thus
promoting U.S. economic competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID
project will launch a baseline survey with a nationally representative sample of
2,000 remote workers, while also collecting qualitative data from 500 remote
workers through Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk). Respondents for the online
baseline survey will be drawn from the KnowledgePanel, the largest probability-
based online panel in the U.S. Concurrently, 500 remote workers will be
recruited through MTurk to complete an open-ended interview schedule regarding
their remote work experiences. The multi-method data will promote understanding
of the changing nature of work and technology use, novel tactics employers adopt
to monitor workers, struggles and benefits associated with remote work, and
employees’ strategic responses to the new working conditions. The proposed
designing and fielding of a nationally representative survey, together with the
textual data collected from MTurk, will provide original, real-time, and dynamic
empirical evidence of workers’ work experiences and lives within the context of
the COVID-19 outbreak. Together, findings will inform theories of enduring
inequalities in the social organization of where, when, and how work is
accomplished, as well as theories of social and organizational change. This
study will also illuminate how a social disruption in combination with evolving
communication technologies may act as a catalyst for profound transformations in
mindsets and social change, specifically regarding future work
flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.