* 2032135
* RAPID:Longitudinal Study of Environmental Shedding of SARS-CoV-2
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Joshua Santarpia, University of Nebraska Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 199,999.00

The specific aim of this effort is to develop an understanding of how SARS-CoV-2
can be transmitted by infected persons into their environment throughout the
course of their disease. Because COVID-19 can manifest as both severe and mild
(even asymptomatic) respiratory disease and can progress from upper to severe
acute respiratory distress syndrome throughout infection, the ways in which the
disease is transmitted may vary from person to person and change throughout the
course of illness. Measurements will be made using a suite of aerosol
instrumentation to measure: the size of aerosol particles in the patient
environment, size fractionated viral aerosol concentration and aggregated viral
aerosol load. The relationships between clinical symptoms, patient viral load,
the function of body systems and aerosol shedding of virus will be examined
across all individuals. The combined data set will increase knowledge for SARS-
CoV-2 transmission. For broader impacts, this study provides knowledge for use
of the public health care system to improve safe working conditions for
healthcare workers. It will inform best practices for personal protective
equipment and help effective implementation of quarantines for infected
individuals. For the general public, it will help inform public health
organizations on how to advise people on the proper ways to protect themselves
from infectious disease.

This project will combine size-segregated environmental aerosol measurements of
SARS-CoV-2 around patients throughout their disease with clinical data of
disease state, and renin–angiotensin system (RAS) function. Following initial
diagnosis, patients will be monitored routinely throughout illness using an
aerosol measurement approach developed based on preliminary sampling activities.
Clinical data of viral activity will be obtained from each patient during the
course of disease. In addition, patient serum samples will be analyzed for ACE2
and Angiotensin levels to investigate RAS activity as an independent measure of
disease state. The relationships between clinical symptoms, patient viral load,
RAS system activity and aerosol shedding of virus will be examined across all
individuals. The combined data set will increase understanding of the biology of
SARS-CoV-2 and its transmission over the course of disease progression. This
type of longitudinal study of infectious disease transmission that considers
both an investigation of modes of spread, coupled with quantifiable disease
progression and interaction of the disease with the body’s regulatory systems
represents a new model for understanding communicable disease and how to best
protect healthcare workers and the general public. As such, the basic knowledge
gained here is a broader impact. This RAPID award is made by the Symbiosis,
Defense and Self-Recognition Program in the BIO Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.