* 2032370
* RAPID: Defect-Chemistry Design of Titanium Dioxide for Enhanced Virucidal Photodynamic Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Elizabeth Dickey, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 174,598.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The goal of this research project is to develop
synthesis and processing routes to optimize the efficacy of titania-based
nanoparticles for inactivating SARS-CoV-2 surrogate coronaviruses. The chemistry
and stoichiometry of titania particles are tuned through a novel flow-synthesis
processing route and subsequent thermal annealing to make the material
photoactive in the visible-light range of the electromagnetic spectrum. Such
light activation leads to the production of reactive oxygen species, which are
believed to be central to the antiviral activity of such oxide materials. Being
able to control and optimize the antiviral activity of materials such as
titania, which can easily be coated onto surfaces or integrated into fibers, can
have direct and immediate impact on the production of antimicrobial coatings and
personal protective equipment (PPE). As such, the research results are
proactively directed towards groups researching and developing PPE materials for
the COVID-19 pandemic. The graduate students involved in the research are team-
mentored in a highly interdisciplinary and societally relevant research activity
that spans materials research, photochemistry, virology, and materials
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This research program
aims to develop the fundamental science linking the chemistry of titanium
dioxide, or titania, to its antiviral properties. The research is motivated by
the urgent need to develop coatings and personal protective equipment (PPE) that
can inactivate the COVID-19 virus. In this research, precise synthesis of
titania nanoparticles is achieved via a micro-scale flow synthesis platform with
in situ diagnostics. The high-throughput experimental platform enables the
research team to study systematically the important variables of particle size,
phase, and doping concentrations on the light absorption and photodynamic
properties of titania. An important variable in the study is oxygen
stoichiometry, which is systematically controlled through low-partial-pressure
oxygen annealing. The reduction reaction induces oxygen vacancies into the
titania lattice, which, in turn, lower the optical band gap of the material. The
consequences for reactive oxygen species generation, which are critical for
antiviral efficacy, have not, however, previously been established. Therefore,
this research measures the effects of nanoparticle stoichiometry on the
generation of individual reactive oxygen species: superoxide, singlet oxygen,
hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl radicals under visible light illumination.
Finally, the efficacy for inactivating SARS-CoV-2 surrogate coronaviruses is
assessed, allowing for the development of full synthesis-structure-property-
function relationships for this important antimicrobial photodynamic material.
Moreover, the research translates the knowledge and processing conditions of the
most efficacious materials to groups producing antiviral materials for the
COVID-19 crisis. The participating graduate students are involved in all aspects
of this highly interdisciplinary research activity, which provides them unique
experience in the material design process, while contributing to practical
solutions for the containment of the COVID-19 virus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.