* 2032146
* Emerge: Broadening Participation and Leadership in Freshwater Science
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Amy Rosemond, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,006,746.00

Diversity in the scientific workforce is critical to tackling the world’s most
pressing challenges, including effective conservation of freshwater resources.
Diversity of freshwater scientists in the U.S. is low in all dimensions,
relative to the broader population. This lack of diversity may limit
opportunities to engage the general public in equitable strategies to manage
freshwater ecosystems. Universities play a foundational role when training
students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), but
underrepresented minorities (URM) still face unique challenges in pursuing STEM
careers beyond college. Scientific societies can help fill these STEM training
gaps. Societies publish scientific findings, host technical conferences, and
sustain broad professional networks. Thus, they are central to the collective
pace of scientific progress, as well as the success of individual scientists,
and are uniquely positioned to advance the careers of URM students. The ‘Emerge’
program uses a novel and transformative series of training and mentoring
experiences, orchestrated in collaboration with the Society for Freshwater
Science (SFS), to maximize URM recruitment and retention in freshwater science.
Over the course of the five-year project, Emerge will deliver &gt;700
experiences to URM participants and create a roadmap that institutions and
organizations can use to build a more diverse and inclusive STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerge is the evolution of the ‘Instars’ (named
for the early life stages of aquatic insects) program – already a 10-year
commitment by SFS to provide growth experiences for URM undergraduates at its
annual meeting. The overarching goal of Emerge is to facilitate URM individuals
at multiple career stages gain a robust sense of belonging within the freshwater
scientific community. In other words, to help participants achieve full
‘scientific integration’. Major Emerge program activities include: (i) enhanced
networking opportunities with other URM trainees and established professionals;
(ii) advanced technical training in ecological data analysis (including National
Ecological Observatory Network data) and visual communication of scientific
information; and (iii) collaborative research that facilitates a strong sense of
confidence and accomplishment through year-long projects and near-peer/peer-peer
mentoring. Oversight by an external advisory board of diverse professionals in
freshwater science will ensure Emerge program success and sustainability.
Rigorous external assessment of all program activities will be combined with
records of the professional achievements of individual URM participants to gauge
program effectiveness. Emerge program experiences and lessons will be
disseminated though scholarly publications, shared resources with other
institutions and scientific societies, and a series of documentary
films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.