* 2032737
* RAPID: Supporting Responsible Action through COVID-19 Education
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Michael Clough, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 05/31/2021
* USD 112,004.00

In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, U.S. citizens are balancing information
from many sources to make crucial decisions such as whether to wear a mask or
whether to practice social distancing. In making their decisions, people need to
distinguish legitimate scientific information from pervasive misinformation and
pseudoscience. Such misinformation promotes public distrust in science and
affects decisions of individuals and groups, potentially placing everyone at
greater risk. This project seeks to determine how people think about and respond
to COVID-19 information and to develop educational materials that will prepare
people to respond effectively to an anticipated second wave of
COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing specifically on undergraduate students
enrolled in large introductory biology courses at Texas A&amp;M University, this
project intends to: (1) determine how undergraduate students’ risk perceptions
and decision-making regarding COVID-19 relate to their perceptions and
understanding of science and sociocultural characteristics; (2) create data-
driven instructional materials that promote understanding of the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), COVID-19 disease, and how
science works, and that can also support personal and public health decision-
making regarding the COVID-19 pandemic and the expected second wave; and (3)
generate knowledge regarding the impacts of the instructional materials on
undergraduate students’ conceptions regarding science content, the nature of
science, confidence in science, and personal decision-making and behaviors
regarding the COVID-19 pandemic. Knowledge generation will entail a sequential
mixed methods quasi-experimental approach with emergent design flexibility to
investigate the thinking and decision-making of post-secondary students
regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, and the implications for development of
effective instructional materials. Determining the efficacy of the instructional
materials will entail dividing introductory biology students across three
groups. The first group will experience instruction about viruses through
typical biology undergraduate curricular experiences. The second group will
receive the same in-class instruction as the first group, but their out-of-class
work will be replaced with the COVID-19 on-line instructional materials
developed in this project. The third group will experience an in-class case
study regarding the anticipated COVID-19 second wave along with the out-of-class
COVID-19 on-line project materials. Project materials and research will be
widely distributed, ensuring that the impact of the project products and
outcomes will broadly promote STEM knowledge, how it is developed, acceptance of
STEM results, and more informed and appropriate personal and public policy
decision-making. This RAPID award is made by the Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education (IUSE) program in the Division of Undergraduate Education: Education
and Human Resources Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.