* 2032386
* RAPID: Effect of The Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic on the Psychosocial, Emotional, Academic and Career Functioning of Academic Communities
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Brady Nelson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 198,238.00

The primary goal of this study is to inform existing models of academic and
social engagement, and to develop interconnected theoretical models to capture
the complex psychosocial, emotional, cognitive, academic, and career
consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic in the short and long term. The
unprecedented nature and impact of the present pandemic (e.g., extreme social
distancing measures, campus closures, an abrupt shift to online instruction,
temporary closure of in person laboratory research, cancellation of most
academic clubs and meetings; child and elder care responsibilities, family job
loss, and death), requires a comprehensive and systematic study to assess and
model the complex, evolving impacts on psychosocial, emotional, cognitive,
academic, and career outcomes. Further, the unique impact of the pandemic on
historically underrepresented minority communities highlights the pressing need
for empirical research to help motivate and guide reforms and interventions to
address the needs of historically underrepresented minority STEM academic
communities. With a racially, ethnically, gender, and age-diverse sample, this
project aims to fill important scientific knowledge gaps in understanding and
systematically evaluating the short- and long-term changes in psychosocial,
academic, and career life experiences as well as inequalities in academic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is investigating the following
questions: 1) Are there disparities (as a function of age, disability, gender,
race, ethnicity, socio-economic status, nationality, and sexual orientation) in
academic and psychosocial resource availability, support, and needs reported by
STEM graduate, and postdoctoral historically underrepresented minority (URM) vs.
non-URM scholars during the COVID pandemic? 2) Do the disparities or changes in
academic and psychosocial factors impact core STEM identity and efficacy
differentially for URM versus non-URM scholars? 3) How does mentor quality
relationship and academic social support networks moderate the relationship
between training and learning disruptions and COVID stressors, and STEM
identity, efficacy and career intentions? 4) How does the study of scholars
across the next 11 months inform and refine existing models of academic and
social engagement to account for unique pandemic effects on academic, cognitive,
career, emotional and psychosocial consequences for URM and non-URM STEM
scholars? The researchers will use a quasi-experimental longitudinal design and
data will primarily be collected using on-line survey
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is funded by NSF's Alliances for
Graduate Education and the Professoriate program, which supports STEM education
research to increase the number of historically underrepresented minority
faculty in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.