* 2032705
* EAGER: Amplifying Community Readiness to Increase Public Access to Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Melissa Cragin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 149,999.00

This exploratory project in open science will examine and address uptake of the
NSF Public Access Repository (PAR) for deposition of metadata records for
research datasets that support validation of results in publications, or for
data resources described in publications. In particular, there is interest in
how practices are changing for the use of data identifiers (e.g. DOIs). The
project will partner with domain and technical organizations to extend the reach
of this work. Studying researcher’s current data production, planning for
deposit or exposing those data, and roles of their Data Management Plan (DMP),
will provide insights on how to foster change – away from the view of “DMP as a
box-checking” – toward the use of the DMP as a value-add process for linking
research project planning with increased transparency for the benefit of public
access.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study will begin with two different research
areas: Initial work will focus on the Geosciences, and computationally-based
communities (e.g. Data Science and AI/Machine Learning). For the Geosciences,
there are opportunities to improve data publishing practices, by obtaining DOIs
and increasing data citation. At the intersections of the Geosciences, semantic
technologies, computing and informatics, there are Open Knowledge Networks which
have the potential to generate new data resources to support solutions to
societal grand challenges. Across the Data Science and AI-related communities,
there is a need for better access to high quality datasets, models, and
infrastructure; currently, resources for locating, accessing, and selecting such
datasets are scattered and variable. Utilizing the uptake of the NSF PAR system
for research data may facilitate increased access to datasets for research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.