* 2032678
* Modeling and Radiosonde Data Investigations of Turbulence and Mixing in the Vicinity of the Tropopause
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Marvin Geller, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 359,957.00

The tropopause is the level of the atmosphere that can be thought of as a
dividing line between the lower atmosphere (troposphere) and middle atmosphere
(stratosphere). This level is relevant for several reasons, one of which is that
it can be a turbulent region where aircraft fly. In this award, the research
team will make use of a special set of weather balloon data and high-resolution
numerical modeling to investigate turbulence in the tropopause region. Beyond
aviation safety, the project is also relevant for understanding how water vapor
and chemical constituents move from the troposphere to the stratosphere, which
affects the global climate. A graduate student will also receive training under
this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is aimed at answering questions about
instability and turbulence in the vicinity of the tropopause. The two major
goals of the project are to determine where atmospheric turbulence maximizes in
relation to tropopause height and to derive estimates of effective turbulent
mixing in the vicinity of the tropopause. The main tools that will be used
include the US High Vertical Resolution Radiosonde Data (HVRRD) archive from
2005-on and numerical modeling using direct numerical simulations (DNS). The
specific questions to be addressed include: 1) Why have some previous
investigations of atmospheric turbulence found the maximum turbulence in the
free atmosphere to be below the tropopause, while others have found the maximum
to be above the tropopause? 2) How does the profile of atmospheric turbulence in
the vicinity of the tropopause derived from Thorpe analysis of U.S. HVRRD vary
from station to station? How does it depend on the underlying topography? Is
there a systematic variation with latitude? Are there seasonal and diurnal
variations? Can we explain these variations by gravity wave breaking or Kelvin-
Helmholtz instability and different tropopause configurations? 3) How does the
average turbulent mixing in the vicinity of the tropopause compare to the
“effective mixing”, taking account of the presence of observed intermittent,
thin, turbulent layers?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.