* 2032745
* RAPID: Investigating Public Health and Social Information Disparities During the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Nina Lam, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 232,000.00

Studying differential COVID-19 responses to trustworthy information will
contribute new perspectives and improve our fundamental understanding of the
human aspects of information trustworthiness during a pandemic. Although many
U.S. residents are heeding restrictive COVID-19 orders and warnings from both
official guidance and public health information sources, some individuals are
not following official guidance. Simultaneously, the pandemic has spread through
major U.S. cities and states in an uneven manner. Moreover, COVID-19 messaging
is complicated by evolving guidance and contagion information, and media framing
complicates information transmission, shifting public understanding of official
guidance. Understanding and evaluating how a population is reacting to these
multiple sources of information is a crucial scientific challenge with
implications for improving future public policy and more effective crisis
mitigation. To better understand differential population responses to this
crisis, this interdisciplinary research project will gather Twitter data in
Louisiana and Washington State to analyze differential sentiment and language
use in responses to health information and public guidance, across assumed age
and linked geographic conditions. It will also assess how these differences
change given time, location, health, economic, social conditions, and sources of
information. Assessing the systematic variation of sentiment and language use
across age and then across time, space, context, and information sources will
provide vital insight to targeting effective public messaging by public health
and government officials during a crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
collect three waves of Twitter and associated data to study differential
sentiment and language use in responses to health information and public health
guidance concerning COVID-19. This interdisciplinary project seeks to advance
knowledge about how disparities in information consumption, as represented by
sentiment and language use, vary across sources of information and guidance,
across time, geography, socio-demographic characteristics, and health
conditions. This project will compare sentiment and language use patterns among
a population of Twitter users based on the content of their tweets, and analyze
how these characteristics evolve through the recognition of the emergency, the
peak of the crisis, and the mitigation of the pandemic in the U.S. The project
will use computational methods to understand sentiment patterns and language use
on Twitter and link tweets and relevant entities to corresponding longitudinal
data about trustworthy information sources, including news media sources and
official emergency guidance, policies, and orders. The tweets and entities will
be classified for relevance (individual, organization, or bot) with derived age
and location. Using timestamps and derived location, the project will associate
tweets with daily disease-specific rates and annual demographic and socio-
economic information. Data about the surrounding information context, including
reporting trends and framing of the crisis, sources of health information, and
information-seeking behavior about COVID-19 will provide tools for assessing the
validity and reliability of our inferences about the patterns of sentiment and
language use. Project findings will contribute to the literature on
computational methods, disaster communication, misinformation during crisis
events, and disaster resilience, informing future guidance on policy and
emergency messaging during a crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.