* 2032726
* RAPID: Epidemiology of COVID-19 based on Surveillance of Deceased Donors in the United States
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Jesse Schold, Cleveland Clinic Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 198,244.00

A novel coronavirus, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-
CoV-2), emerged at the end of 2019, causing the clinical illness of Coronavirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19). The symptoms of COVID-19 can vary dramatically in both
presentation and severity. Individuals infected with COVID-19 may be
asymptomatic while still able to transmit the virus. Population-based studies
suggest the rate of asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 may be high, but data is
lacking. In order to evaluate the true prevalence of the virus, characterize
individuals that are affected and express severe symptoms and assess the effects
of interventions to attenuate the proliferation of the spread of the virus, data
regarding both the symptomatic and asymptomatic cases are critically important.
Measurement of rates of COVID-19 are important for surveillance and predictive
modeling in the general population as well as to inform scientific inquiry
regarding the potential biological mechanisms underlying the expression of
symptoms among select individuals. The current project will provide novel
insights about COVID-19 by assessing test results of decedents referred for
tissue or organ donation across the United States in an epidemiological
framework. Broad dissemination of these results will inform ongoing national
policy and will continue to expand the scope and accuracy of predictive
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will provide unique
insights into the epidemiology of COVID-19 in the United States. This will be
accomplished by aggregating systematic test results of COVID-19 among decedents
referred for tissue and organ donation. Organ procurement organizations (OPOs)
are responsible for recovering deceased donors for transplantation in the United
States. OPOs are now utilizing tests of COVID-19 for decedents referred as
potential donors to assess risk prior to allocation to a potential recipient.
Importantly, this includes donor tissue and organs from decedents with and
without symptoms or known exposure to COVID-19. This process provides a unique
opportunity to evaluate the incidence, progression and characteristic of
COVID-19 including decedents from unrelated causes. These data will further be
analyzed via statistics and predictive models to model the trajectory of
COVID-19 in the general population based on demographic and clinical
characteristics of the general population in different regions of the country.
This RAPID award is made by the Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Disease
Program in the Division of Environmental Biology, using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.