* 2032548
* SBIR Phase I:  Empowering Discovery of COVID-19 Vaccine through Large Scale Unsupervised Deeplearning for Electron Microscopy Data
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Vinay Rao, RocketML Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to empower researchers to make bio-structure discoveries by
eliminating computational bottlenecks to shorten drug discovery cycles and time-
to-market, such as those needed during the COVID-19 pandemic. Most modern drug
discovery projects start with protein target identification and verification to
obtain a 'verified drug target'. Structural vaccinology is a rational approach
to generate an effective vaccine. For instance, knowing the structures of the
proteins on the surface of the virus can guide vaccine design, and knowing the
structures of viral enzymes can lead directly to drug treatments that inhibit
replication. Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) is a method to image important
structures. The proposed innovation enables fast classification of images and
creation of 3-dimensional structures by using advanced deep learning techniques.
This will accelerate analysis and discovery by more than 50%.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project delivers an autonomous image processing pipeline for Cryo-EM data sets
in real time at benchmark accuracies. On average, each cryo-EM microscope
produces up to 2 TB of data daily. High-resolution image sizes from Cryo-EM are
typically on the order of 10k x 10k pixels, requiring specialized software to
process, classify and convert these images into 3D structures. Traditional fully
supervised deep learning methods fail due to diversity of biomolecules and lack
of labeled images. The proposed approach utilizes large-scale “deep
unsupervised” learning methods that can train AI systems and deliver accurate
results without labeled data on full resolution image sizes by use of High
Performance Computing (HPC) clusters. The project involves development of cloud
infrastructure software that eliminates GPU memory limitations. Further, the
proposed machine learning approach dramatically accelerates and improves cryo-EM
particle picking, both in 2-D images from single particle reconstruction
workflows and in 3-D images of intact cells in electron tomography workflows at
benchmark accuracies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.