* 2032533
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Low-Cost, Non-invasive, Fast Sample Collection System for COVID-19 Viral Load Level Diagnosis: Point-of-Care and Environmental Testing
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Hossein Kavehpour, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2021
* USD 90,000.00

Pandemics can have a devastating impact on societies: collapsing local
economies, halting trade, weakening national security and overwhelming
healthcare capacity. To combat infectious pandemics, rapid, effective diagnostic
testing combined with contact tracing and quarantine is needed. This will help
officials manage infections while minimizing the effect of the disease on the
economy, on society, and on our healthcare system. Further, effective sentinel
monitoring of local environments can detect the presence of dangerous levels of
virus, preventing mass spreading events. Unfortunately, the COVID-19 pandemic
has exposed a critical weakness in health care security infrastructure: the
deficiency in our ability to conduct rapid, simple, point-of-care diagnostic and
environmental sample collection and testing. The goal in this research is to
develop inexpensive, massively deployable rapid diagnostic and sentinel systems
for detecting respiratory illness and airborne viral threats. Because the virus
is transmitted through droplets in the breath, this system is expected to
collect enough sample from one minute of breathing to be used in existing
testing units. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technology is based on continuous
dropwise condensation (CDC) which is capable of efficiently extracting
particulate (viral) loads from humidified air within a minute. The collection
system and supporting instrumentation is simple and can be readily integrated
with a well-designed patient interface that is non-invasive, compatible with
current rt-PCR sampling and which can be mass produced cheaply. Additionally,
CDC, due to its surface collection method, can be modified readily into either a
point-of-care, rapid diagnostic test, or into an environmental sentinel
sampling/testing system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.