* 2032770
* EAGER: Minimal 3D Modeling Methodology
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Nicholas Rauh, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2022
* USD 65,000.00

Modeling and design are core components of computer graphics and computer vision
research and applications. Traditional modeling consists of having the designer
provide either a detailed (digital) specification of the desired virtual object
or sufficient photographs of a physical object to enable a multi-view stereo
reconstruction, although modern GUI-based tools can help reduce to a certain
extent the number of photographs required. Digital sketching tools provide an
alternative mechanism for modeling objects, but even though some of these try to
assist the user by completing partial sketches a notable effort is still
required to achieve detailed results. This project will explore a modeling
methodology that addresses the following question: What is the least we can
design and still obtain a sufficiently expressive system? At one extreme digital
modeling tools support high expressivity but require high design effort, while
at the other extreme providing a fixed set of model templates incurs very low
design effort but results in low model expressivity as well. Some recent
efforts, such as the PI's sketch-to-procedural-modeling work, fall somewhere in
the middle. The goal of the current research is to determine the point of
optimum balance between design and expressivity, that is just enough design
effort to produce a sufficiently expressive model. The focus of this multi-
disciplinary work will be on computational archaeology, an interesting
application where only fragmented information is available, hence success of the
approach in this domain will imply broad generalizability of project outcomes to
other areas as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been established in the
literature that only a fraction of what we perceive suffices for a person to
create a mental 3D representation of an object. With this observation in mind,
the project will build upon and extend the PI's existing photograph-to-3D
modeling tool by adding new minimalist machine learning underpinnings applied to
urban and archaeological modeling and design, to build software that requests
just enough input from the user and is able to produce 3D models of sufficient
completeness for the intended goal. Various ways of degrading the input detail
and analyzing how the model output is affected will be explored to identify the
most promising for retention and improvement of robustness. About a terabyte of
imagery and point cloud data from two archaeological sites of ancient
settlements on the islands of Dana and Bogsak along the southern coast of Turkey
will serve as a testbed. These islands have structures built using material from
local stone quarries and are a main type of urban landscape to survive from
antiquity but are difficult to study due to size, complexity, terrain, and
incompleteness. Nonetheless, aerial drone-based imagery and LIDAR are possible.
The research will investigate how much must be specified during design to
differentiate among the possible forms and their parameters to express a desired
output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.