* 2032802
* EAGER: Investigating the rapid transition from face-to-face to exclusively online engineering laboratory classes in an Electrical and Computer Engineering program
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Fred Beyette, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The COVID-19 global health crisis has forced educators to rapidly shift to
online instruction methods. While this effort is already difficult for faculty,
it is particularly challenging for instructors who have designed a portion of
their curricula with hands-on laboratory instruction, as in the case for many
STEM courses. To offer the effective education in-person instruction affords, it
is important to maintain the same educational and curricular value of
laboratories while taking advantage of benefits that online education and online
experimentation tools offer. This project will transcend the demands of the
COVID-19 crisis as it investigates the impact of using a full set of online
laboratory modules in an engineering laboratory course. Impacts on faculty
resistance to adoption, student motivation and self-regulation, and user
experience and success are evaluated in this study. Online labs (remote and
virtual) have long been considered promising options to enhance the student
educational experience, but broad adoption has been limited. The current
circumstances allow us to establish a successful use case by re-casting a
semester-long, hands-on, experiential learning component into a fully online set
of instructional labs. Nevertheless, rapidly deploying fully online
experimentation and instruction in engineering challenges our dominant
instructional model, especially in a traditional face-to-face institution in
which both faculty and students may show resistance but also surprising adoption
of online education technology. While associated with considerable challenges,
establishing and empirically investigating such a successful use case offers
high reward opportunities for knowledge generation, as well as benefits for
faculty and students in engineering programs across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage the development and
deployment of online labs and integrated online instruction modules to
investigate the impact of using an exclusively online instructional mode for a
fundamental electrical and computer engineering laboratory course. To reach this
goal, the project will answer the following three research questions: A) How do
faculty experience a top-down mandated, time-constrained, and rapid transition
to exclusively online-based laboratory modules in engineering courses along the
continuum of resistance towards the wholesale embrace of educational
technologies? B) How does exclusively online laboratory instruction and online
experimentation impact students’ learning experiences in terms of engagement,
investigated through self-regulation and motivation? C) What user experience
factors influence the success of introducing exclusively online experimentation
activities into engineering courses and curricula? The research design will
comprise three thrusts: faculty, student, and user experience perspective. All
thrusts will employ a convergent, parallel, mixed-methods research approach
using quantitative and qualitative measures. Informed by theoretical frameworks
including the diffusion of innovation, the propagation paradigm, student
cognitive and emotional engagement, and user-centered design, this project will
develop in-depth knowledge on how online experimentation can be successfully
deployed in engineering education settings. As a result, this project will a)
lead to a framework for educational technology propagation, specific to online
engineering labs and reflecting factors for both efficacies and fit, b) inform a
model for student-centered online experimentation with explicit guidelines for
student support, and c) inform a comprehensive model of success factors for
designing user-centered online experimentation activities. The results of this
research will also expand the reach and impact of engineering disciplines that
have historically required face-to-face facilities to provide integral
laboratory instruction. This project will enable online experimentation
experiences that support core education learning objectives while also meeting
the challenges of a diverse, mobile, and geographically distributed engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.