* 2032663
* RAPID: Folding@home and COVID-19
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Gregory Bowman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 04/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The SARS-CoV-2 virus uses numerous proteins to infect human cells, evade an
immune response, and replicate itself. These proteins have moving parts that are
essential to their function. Understanding the way the proteins move and change
conformation will provide novel insights into viral biology and could
potentially reveal new therapeutic opportunities. Researchers supported by this
award are simulating the SARS-COV-2 proteins using the Folding@home distributed
computer, which pools the computational resources of volunteer citizen
scientists across the globe to run simulations on their personal computers. As a
result of huge public interest and very productive interactions with major
technology corporations, the Folding@home network now provides access to over 23
million CPU cores and 600,000 GPUs, making the network roughly 10-times more
powerful than the worldâ€™s fastest traditional supercomputer. Support from this
award will provide much needed upgrades to the cyberinfrastructure required to
effectively harness this unprecedented computational resource and engage
productively with the millions of people now participating in the effort to
better understand SARS-COV-2. Results of the research effort will be published
in peer-reviewed journals, presented at scientific meetings, and distributed
broadly by social media and popular press.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Folding@home is
one of the largest and most successful distributed computing projects in the
world. Current research efforts on the SARS-COV-2 include a dynamic analysis of
every viral protein and free energy perturbation modeling of more than 50,000
small molecule interactions to identify possible starting points for
therapeutics. Searching for cryptic binding sites is a major focus of the effort
and early results are promising. With support from this award, improvements in
the Folding@home TCP/IP stack, work collection servers, and back-end analysis
servers will be conducted to increase the utilization efficiency of distributed
computing resources. The additional capacity will also enable support for more
projects with basic biological research relevance. This RAPID award to
Washington University in Saint Louis is made by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.