* 2032773
* Mechanisms supporting feature-based attention
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Viola Stoermer, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 550,396.00

Whether attending to the road while driving or trying to find your keys on a
cluttered desk, our ability to select relevant information from other sensory
inputs is critical for everyday survival. Many studies have shown that the
ability to attend to items is highly limited; yet, it is unclear where these
limits stem from and what the underlying neural mechanisms are that determine
these limits. In this proposal we aim to test what constrains our ability to
select information and to examine the flexibility of the human attention system
across different selection demands and sensory environments. We use the human
visual system as a model system to test how attention interacts with perceptual
representations to guide behavior, and to examine how attention modulates neural
activity to enhance perception and memory. Understanding how attention modulates
these neural representations in visual cortex will help to uncover how
variations in these neural patterns give rise to common perceptual and cognitive
disorders like ADHD and schizophrenia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current
research project aims to broadly understand how attention operates in different
sensory environments and task contexts. We hypothesize that the capacity limits
of feature-based attention are constrained by a combination of the organization
of feature representations in the visual system (i.e., perceptual confusability)
and by center-surround selection mechanisms. Furthermore, we hypothesize that
the selection mechanisms are flexible and adjust to current task demands in
terms of magnitude (enhancement and suppression) and shape (e.g., shifts in
tuning curves; size of the inhibitory surround). Our approach includes
psychophysics, computational modeling, and electrophysiological recordings
(frequency-tagged potentials in EEG) that can tease apart perceptual factors
from attentional effects, and allow to directly measure feature representations
in visual cortex. Together, the proposed experiments will provide important
insights into how perceptual organization and attention mechanisms interact to
influence limits of attention, and will examine the flexibility of the human
attention system across different task contexts. The development of novel
experimental designs and neural measures to track perceptual representations in
visual cortex and how they are modulated by attention will be important to test
perceptual and cognitive models and how they influence visual processing more
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.