* 2032033
* ICE-T: RC: Millimeter Wave Communications and Edge Computing for Next Generation Tetherless Mobile Virtual Reality
* CSE,CNS
* 04/20/2020,08/31/2024
* Jacob Chakareski, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 279,706.00

Virtual and augmented reality (VR/AR) technologies hold tremendous potential to
advance our society, having impact on quality of life, environmental and energy
conservation, and the world economy. However, two main challenges stand in the
way of realizing this vision. These applications are hyper-data-intensive and
require ultra-low latency, neither of which can be met by current and upcoming
conventional networking methods and systems. These presently limit VR/AR
applications to an offline operation, synthetic content, high-end wired
equipment, and gaming/entertainment settings. This project envision a novel
system at the intersection of millimeter-wave communication (mmWave) and edge
computing that aims to overcome these challenges to bring us closer to the next
generation tetherless VR/AR societal applications. The project will make notable
contributions to the emerging area of networked VR/AR application systems and
communications, leading to advances in numerous socially relevant applications,
e.g., search and rescue, and disaster response. It will also facilitate
fundamental research in the general application area of high-volume high-
speed/low-latency data transfer in emerging settings. Beyond the direct
scientific and technology impacts and their broader effects on society,
educational, outreach, international collaboration, and scientific leadership
activities will be pursued as an integral part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overcoming the broad performance gap between
present and upcoming networked systems capabilities and anticipated requirements
of next generation applications will require novel holistic approaches to
capture, coding, networking, and reconstruction/navigation of VR/AR data.
Towards this objective, the project will investigate a futuristic 5G
heterogeneous cellular network system that integrates radio frequency (RF) and
millimeter wave communication, and viewport-adaptive space-time scalable VR
signal tiling, for multi-path streaming of 360-degree tetherless mobile VR
applications. In this setting, the project will pursue the following synergistic
investigations: (1) Navigation-aware scalable VR signal tiling to enable
interactive streaming of only the data truly needed by the user during
navigation; (2) Deep machine learning for user navigation prediction to assist
the envisioned resource allocation methods. (3) Space-time scalable rateless
code construction for effective source-channel VR signal representation to
protect against prospective transmission errors. (4) Dynamic rate-distortion
optimized strategies for hybrid RF-mmWave multi-path VR streaming and analysis
of the foundations of the interdependencies between the VR signal tiling design
and the characteristics of the two network paths. (5) Analysis of the
fundamental trade-offs between edge computing and communication that arise here
and pursuit of optimization methods that will leverage them to maximize the
system efficiency. (6) Graph-theoretic analysis of the problem of dynamic mmWave
transmitter to VR user assignment. (7) Network slicing for parallel operation
with other applications. Extensive integration and experimentation will be
carried out to assess, validate, and prototype the enabled research advances in
practical settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.