* 2032668
* Developing a National Research Agenda for STEM Education for Students with Visual Impairments (VI)
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Tiffany Wild, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 08/31/2022
* USD 88,539.00

The conference will convene researchers and other stakeholders to develop a STEM
education research plan that will focus on STEM education of students with
visual impairments. The goal is to identity and prioritize agenda topics that
address the needs of this population, and to build capacity to conduct robust
research focused on those needs. The conference agenda will include an analysis
of gaps in the research, appropriate methodologies for this type of research,
and strategies for translating the research to practice. The project is expected
to advance knowledge and understanding about STEM education for students with
visual impairments by defining a focused research agenda and positioning
scholars who can conduct high quality fundamental STEM education research and
build a community of practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will invite
educators, researchers, parents, students, and technology developers to jointly
conceptualize, design, and plan a research agenda that focuses on enhancing STEM
learning and career preparation for persons with visual impairment. The sessions
will address the challenges in defining research methods for this population and
offer a coordinated effort to develop evidence-based practices and technological
interventions to serve this population. Conference topics will include design
methods, collection and analysis of data, and secondary data analyses that can
be employed. The project is expected to advance knowledge and understanding in
the field of visual impairments and STEM education and establish a community of
practice. The project will highlight the instructional needs and gaps of
students with visual impairments and guide interventions and strategies for
mitigating the disruption of pandemics to ensure that students with visual
impairments have access to STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the ECR: Building Capacity in STEM Education Research competition
of the EHR Core Research (ECR) program. ECR funds fundamental STEM education
research focused on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM fields, and STEM professional workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.