* 2032216
* American Sociological Association Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant Program (ASA DDRIG)
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Margaret Vitullo, American Sociological Assoc
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,999,502.00

Supporting student research at the Ph.D. level is a critical element of
advancing the STEM pipeline. Dissertation research is a stage at which an
injection of funds and a vote of confidence through a funded grant proposal can
propel doctoral students to greater success, especially early in their careers.
By providing support for highly talented students with exceptional research
projects, the American Sociological Association’s Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement grant (ASA) (DDRIG) program will positively impact the composition
and strength of the U.S. future scientific workforce. The ASA DDRIG program will
serve the national interests by identifying talented graduate students with
exceptional projects, establishing structural mechanisms to reinforce strong
faculty-student mentoring, and removing economic barriers to the production of
the highest-quality, rigorous scientific research. Moreover, dissertation
research on issues such as the causes and consequences of poverty, armed
conflict, inequality, and health disparities will contribute to potential policy
solutions in the future, thus contributing to the health, prosperity and general
welfare of our society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Sociology dissertations often
require funds for data collection, data analysis and other costs in order to be
brought to successful completion. The ASA DDRIG project will be launched in the
context of ASA’s programmatic efforts to support departments of sociology and
graduate students, including fostering inclusive excellence, advancing
intentional and reflective advising, and strengthening intellectual communities
within and beyond departments. The program will give up to 25 grants per year of
a maximum of $16,000 each in support of dissertation research that aims to
advance basic knowledge within the discipline of sociology. Topics can include
organizations and organizational behavior, health and medicine, crime and
deviance, social inequality, population dynamics, labor force participation,
family, social networks, gender, race, ethnicity, and the sociology of science
and technology, among others. Projects that use new methods such as
computational sociology, big data, large scale modeling, and the innovative use
of emerging technologies, will also be welcomed. Proposal requirements will be
modeled on current NSF requirements for DDRIG proposals, including a research
sponsor (PI) and research scholar (co-PI). Projects will be reviewed by panels
of Ph.D. sociologists, with emphasis on intellectual merit and broader impacts.
The reciprocity of effort and influence between the new ASA DDRIG program and
the association’s other programming in support of doctoral education will
positively influence the quality of training and the production of knowledge far
more than either initiative could in isolation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.