* 2032415
* Collaborative Research: Scalable Manufacturing Enabled by Highly Tunable Multiphase Liquid Metal Pastes with Solid and Fluid Capsule Additives
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Konrad Rykaczewski, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 12/31/2023
* USD 348,905.00

Liquid metals such as gallium and its alloys have a variety of prospective
applications such as in electronic devices, catalysis, energy harvesting and
biomedical use but face challenges with manufacturing, tunability and cost that
limit them from widespread use. This research project seeks to investigate how
incorporating small-scale solid and/or fluid fillers into the liquid metal, i.e.
liquid-metal pastes, have the potential to extend the range of physical and
chemical properties and increase their economic appeal for additive
manufacturing and other technologies. To overcome the challenges associated with
the high cohesive energy density of liquid metals, the team proposes to use
naturally formed nanometer-thin gallium-oxide shells as a wetting agent (or
surfactant) for encapsulating foreign materials of different phases. The
resultant liquid-metal pastes represent a novel class of materials with
unexplored properties that can advance wearable electronics, soft robotics, and
thermal management of electronics. The visual and hands-on nature of the
proposed research will enable multiplatform community outreach including
engaging K-12 tour groups with a hands-on activity using a video-game controller
to operate a three-dimensional printer in making liquid-metal
parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to realize a generalized way to
encase gases, liquids, and solids inside liquid metals and to understand the
role of the encasing native oxide in doing so, which creates a unique
“surfactant” that forms in situ. These multiphase materials will be formed by
mixing (or bubbling fluids) under controlled conditions and subsequently
characterized thoroughly to establish process-structure-property relationships.
The investigation will elucidate the mechanism by which this oxide “surfactant”
works to create foams and pastes with trapped air pockets and liquids or solid
objects, respectively. The oxide “enveloping” ability will enable a new class of
conductive multiphase pastes with highly tunable density, rheology, as well as
electrical and thermal conductivities. With the new fundamental insight, this
project will also aim to create liquid-metal based materials that can be
effectively three-dimensionally printed onto substrates with almost any
composition and shape for two specific studies. The first one is to achieve a
foam that is up to 10 times more cost-effective and lighter than pure liquid
metals and yet fits for stretchable electronic devices. The second study is to
create a paste that secretes small amounts of secondary liquid when applied and
thereby improves thermo-mechanical contacts of next-generation thermal interface
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.