* 2032576
* RAPID: Understanding and Mitigating the Effects of University Closures due to COVID-19 on Black Students in Physics at the Bachelor's Level
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Thomas Searles, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 12/31/2023
* USD 136,091.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: COVID-19 resulted in campus closures and online
learning at many colleges and universities. These campus closures disrupted
connections to educational support resources, mentorship (informal and formal),
and co-curricular activities that enrich the students’ experiences. This project
studies the impacts of the COVID-19 campus closures (and move to online
learning) on African American (Black) students pursuing bachelor’s degrees in
physics and astronomy. While the data is available, this study will survey
students to examine and document the impact of campus closures to educational
persistence and resilience for this population of students. Findings may provide
insights into how support structures (e.g. mentoring, tutoring, intrusive
advising) can be effectively implemented when students undergo crisis, such as
death of a close family member or friend, disruption to home support structures
due to mass incarceration or deportation of one or both parents, serious illness
involving the student or close family member. This body of work will provide a
basis for examining the methods used to support students from other
underrepresented and marginalized groups during crisis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This study is being undertaken within
the framework of outcomes gained by the American Institute of Physics (AIP) TEAM
UP Task Force’s two-year study. Recommendations from this study enable physics
and astronomy departments to better support African American (Black) students,
many of whom already face well-documented obstacles to completing their degrees
(due to other factors which are independent of COVID-19). Moreover, findings of
this study extend to better understand and support students who undergo personal
crises that require short-term or long-term absences from campus (even during
normal campus operations). The project advances understanding of how to increase
resilience toward degree completion for African American (Black) students during
crises. These understandings could extrapolate to other marginalized populations
of students. The importance of this work is that people's lives will be changed
by increasing the relative percentage of these students who enter the technical
workforce after having completed bachelor's degrees. The future job outlook in
physics in the U.S. is promising, and access to these careers will provide the
potential for a secure and stable financial future. This research lessens the
likelihood that students will be left out of these job prospects due to the
occurrence of crises during their pursuit of the bachelor’s degree. Crises that
students face are more often personal crises, such as death of a close family
member, serious illness to the student or close family member, effects of mass
incarceration on families, or deportation of one or both parents. Likewise,
economic crises resulting in the closures of some physics departmental occurring
due to disasters such as storms, hurricanes, and tornadoes also present a
disruption to physics departments and their students. This study bridges the
learning from a sudden and collective crisis (i.e. COVID-19 campus closures) to
well-designed actions that physics departments can take to address crises of a
personal nature. This study provides useful contributions to better serve
students and to prevent differential effects of crises on underrepresented
minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.