* 2032177
* SBIR Phase I:  Regenerable Antimicrobial Paints Based on Hydrogen Peroxide
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2021
* William Toreki, Quick-Med Technologies, In
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 09/30/2021
* USD 255,999.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to reduce and prevent surface-based transmission of pathogens
and thereby help public and institutional spaces become cleaner and safer,
especially for at-risk populations. Hospital-acquired infections can be
prevented by killing bacteria, molds, and fungi; and inactivating viruses on
surfaces before they are able to pass to another person. The project will
develop antimicrobial paints based on hydrogen peroxide (HP), which does not
have toxic degradation products since it turns into water and oxygen. HP has a
long history of safe use, without allowing generation of resistant strains of
infectious organisms. The paints can improve hygiene, and allow more efficient
cleaning with peroxide-based agents, from which the paints can regenerate their
antimicrobial efficacy, providing durable protection without highly toxic
chemical applications. Competing antimicrobial paints are expensive, have not
demonstrated long-term antimicrobial activity, or have used chemistries that
carry the risk of developing microbial resistance. The proposed peroxide based
antimicrobial paint will be more affordable, and very safe to implement,
allowing regeneration of efficacy during cleaning. This will enable more
widespread use in public health and institutional settings to help protect
against transmissible infections.

The proposed project addresses the technical challenge of developing an
antimicrobial paint that can be regenerated, based on the use of HP in the
formulation to achieve broad-spectrum antimicrobial and virucidal activity with
long-term efficacy. This project leverages new technology to produce paint
coatings that can sequester HP into a coated surface in a dry non-volatile form.
This enables the slow release of HP over time that can be regenerated by
exposure to commercially available solutions containing HP. HP degrades into
innocuous products. Bacteria and viruses are not able to develop resistance to
its disinfecting mechanism. Hence, the resulting product and its regeneration
process will be long-lasting, cost-effective and environmentally safe. Technical
challenges to be addressed in this project include ensuring formulation
stability, antimicrobial and virucidal potency and recharging functionality of
the paint, and the effects of HP on paint integrity. The team will closely
collaborate with specialty coatings experts to develop and test viable paint
formulations. Anticipated technical results include a prototype version of the
technology, and documentation of the research outcomes and further regeneration
requirements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.