* 2032422
* RAPID: Social Factors Influencing Compliance with Quarantine and Distancing in the Prevention of COVID-19 Transmission
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Clara Han, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 162,067.00

The uncertainty created by the spread of COVID-19 has resulted in a range of
regulations designed to control the spread of infections. However, the economic
and social consequences of such measures have differential impacts on vulnerable
households already living in conditions of economic hardship and poor health.
This research examines how social, economic, and health inequalities impact the
capabilities of households to follow regulations that may be necessary to reduce
the spread of infections. The project will explore how short-term household
decision-making impacts long-term consequences for poverty, social marginality,
and susceptibility to higher infection rates. The project contributes to
understanding the social and culture factors that enable and inhibit compliance
with regulations in the context of COVID-19; data and findings being
disseminated to improve containment processes. This project also trains graduate
students in collaborative work and in building a network of scholars across
multiple sites that can strengthen research on responses to disaster management
and implement research methods during periods of crises.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a multi-site study of household decision-making
under conditions of extreme uncertainty created by the spread of COVID-19 and
associated containment regulations, the research assesses the role socioeconomic
factors play in achieving compliance with social distancing and quarantine
requirements. It evaluates how intra-household inequalities, changes in medical
infrastructure, fears of stigma and surveillance, confidence in social support,
and social networks influence decisions. Eighty households across ten different
sites with contrasting sub-populations and differing religious, ethnic, and
racial composition will be selected for analysis. By taking the unit of analysis
to be the household rather than the individual, the project will uniquely
contribute to the understanding of household dynamics and the disproportionate
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on household inequalities. The multi-site
research design will be critical in investigating how models of containment
which appear similar in theory might translate into very different modes of
implementation in different social and political
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.