* 2032222
* STTR Phase I:  Advanced Microfluidic Devices for Point-of-Care COVID-19 Serological Testing
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Charles Henry, Access Sensor Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project may reach millions of people and provide a key
tool in safeguarding the public health through the COVID-19 pandemic. Sensitive,
selective and quantitative detection usually requires complex laboratory-based
methods and instrumentation to achieve consistent results; however, this project
advances technologies to simplify the process. Antibody testing provides
information regarding previous infections; a simple tool to detect presence at
low concentrations enables better testing to manage social distancing needs. The
proposed technology aims to make blood testing for SARS-Cov-2 simple and
quantitative for two types of antibodies. The device will be developed to take
patient samples directly with no complicated sample prep. Unique reagents will
be created for selective detection of the SARS-CoV-2 antibodies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project aims to develop the next generation of low-cost point of care
immunoassay technology with direct application to infectious disease detection.
The technology proposed here combines a new approach to controlling capillary
flow driven systems applied to the steps of a traditional ELISA in a disposable
device. The device developed in this project will detect SARSCoV-2 specific
antibodies in patient samples, and will be able to provide information about the
phase of the immune response of a patient. Additionally, adaption of ELISA-like
enzymatic amplification into a point-of-care device will provide greater
sensitivity and selectivity than traditional lateral flow assays, increasing
assay sensitivity and improving detection of early infections. The immunoassays
will be evaluated with deidentified patient samples and compared to state of the
art laboratory-based detection methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.