* 2032037
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Developing Approaches to Food Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sturt Manning, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 29,685.00

Food is foundational to everything from daily life and the economy to social
connections and religious practices. Archaeological finds of ancient pottery
offer an abundant source of material evidence for the ways people stored,
prepared, cooked, and ate food from prehistory to today. Traces of food
preserved in the pores of pottery provide direct evidence for how people used
their pots in the past; combined with radiocarbon dating of individual molecules
from these food residues, they are a powerful tool for reconstructing the
practices that shaped the food systems which form the foundation of today’s
global food system. Past scholarship has paid little attention to how the
diversity of environments and food sources worldwide might complicate
interpretations of what a pot once held. This project will develop a robust
approach to interpreting the sources of food residues in pottery that is
sensitive to differences in the environment. Through collaborations with
researchers in food science, engineering, chemistry, and soil sciences, this
research offers contributions to fields such as food science, sustainability,
and renewable energy, and unique training opportunities for student research
assistants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will study the complications
caused by regional differences in climate and the environment: different
conditions can create more than one possible interpretation of the food sources
that could have caused the particular collection of molecules observed by an
archaeologist in a pot fragment. This problem arises because many foods are made
up of similar molecules, or can look similar because of environmental processes
at archaeological sites that break down food over time. The researchers will
develop methods to combat this problem, focusing on the Mediterranean, a region
with a distinctive climate and a uniquely rich archaeological and historical
record where key regional food systems developed. By developing a novel
laboratory-based experiment that can incorporate different soils in a simulation
of the breakdown of different food products over time, the researchers will
provide an efficient, region-specific experimental design applicable worldwide,
not only for archaeology but for any field (such as food science or
sustainability) that requires the study of how food breaks down in soils.
Drawing on supercritical fluid extraction, a technique used in renewable
energies research, the team will also produce an optimized method for recovering
food residues that minimizes the loss of interpretative information about a
pot’s contents. The researchers will also evaluate whether environmental
differences pose a challenge to using radiocarbon dating of individual food
molecules to link the archaeology of everyday life to a historical timeline. By
applying these developments to three case-studies the researchers will produce
robust datasets that advance the understanding of past food practices and their
entanglement in politics, religion, and the economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.