* 2032220
* SBIR Phase I:  Voice-based telehealth interface for symptom monitoring and screening for chronic and acute respiratory diseases, including COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Satya Venneti, DEEPCONVO INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 02/28/2021
* USD 255,984.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a novel smartphone-based method for symptom
monitoring and screening for chronic and acute respiratory diseases, including
COVID-19. Current methods of evaluating respiratory diseases are not easily
accessible or do not scale to screen large populations. The proposed technology
will enable detection and monitoring of respiratory diseases to anyone with
access to an internet-connected microphone (e.g., smartphone), using voice as an
indicator. The technology will administer simple tests in minutes and deliver
results in seconds, without requiring specialized user training. The anticipated
outcome is a widespread, real-time screening, monitoring and exacerbation
warning system that remotely analyzes voice signals for patients with chronic
and acute respiratory diseases, including COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
voice-based classifiers that diagnose COVID-19 and monitor the severity of the
disease. Existing algorithms that detect vocal biomarkers in breath and speech
indicative of lung function and respiratory disease will be extended to
incorporate COVID-19 signatures. Audio recordings from patients receiving a
positive COVID-19 test will be collected to extract micro -signatures and
develop algorithms to automatically recognize and map patterns to clinical
findings and reported symptoms. The research objectives include developing: (1)
A binary classifier that differentiates symptomatic and asymptomatic patients;
(2) A multi-class classifier that correlates (in future predicts) changes in the
severity of a patientâ€™s symptoms when provided a series of voice samples (3)
Developing a dashboard for physicians that provides up to date reports and
visualizations of the cross sectional and longitudinal analytics (4) An API
giving lung function metrics and classifiers available for integration into 3rd
party IT infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.