* 2032352
* Three-Dimensional Dynamic Nonlocal Beam Formulation for Simulation of Damage and Failure in Reinforced Concrete Structural Elements
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Petros Sideris, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 259,414.00

Reinforced concrete (RC) structures account for the largest portion of the
nation’s infrastructure. RC structures are typically subjected to complex
dynamic loading conditions from natural hazards, such as earthquakes, hurricanes
and tsunamis, which result in simultaneous loads in three dimensions. Accurate
prediction of damage and failure of RC structures under such complex loading
conditions is essential to developing new designs and quantifying the
vulnerability of existing structures, and has been identified as a key need in
the “NHERI Five-Year Science Plan: Multi-Hazard Research to Make a More
Resilient World”. By providing such a capability, this research will support
performance-based design and risk assessment methodologies, considered in
various steps of decision-making by stakeholders, including Federal and State
agencies and local communities. This research will improve structure and
community resilience in accurately assessing the performance of new and existing
structures against natural hazards, identifying key vulnerabilities,
prioritizing and guiding retrofitting/upgrading efforts, and developing and
refining new designs in order to protect people and property from natural
disasters. This research will train graduate and undergraduate students
primarily from underrepresented minorities, will include outreach to minority-
majority schools, and will allow the development of a new graduate course that
will be shared with the broad engineering community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this research is to advance computational simulation and fundamental
understanding of damage and failure of RC members. In doing so, this research
will establish a computational element formulation capable of holistically
simulating (and predicting) flexural, shear and torsional failures of RC members
subjected to triaxial dynamic loading conditions generating combined axial,
flexural, shear and torsional member loads. This formulation marks a paradigm
shift from conventional beam-column modeling approaches by: (i) accurately
describing the triaxial stress/strain state within members through higher order
cross-section kinematics determined via cross-section sub-domain modeling that
enforces the local equilibrium over the cross-section; (ii) naturally
reproducing strength and ductility size effects by introducing both material-
and member-level characteristic lengths to describe damage initiation and
propagation from the material level to the member scale, and (iii) consistently
simulating loading rate effects through rate-dependent material laws together
with member dynamics. Because member dynamics together with rate-dependent
constitutive laws eliminate the solution multiplicity of quasi-statics and
reduce the problem nonlinearity, this formulation attains improved computational
convergence properties, which makes it particularly efficient for highly
nonlinear problems, such as those of structural damage and
failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.