* 2032525
* RAPID: An Organizational Scale Approach to Privacy-Enabled Contact Tracing in COVID-19
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Pramod Khargonekar, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Contact tracing has emerged as a key mitigation strategy to prevent the spread
of pandemics such as COVID-19. Recently, several efforts have been initiated to
track individuals, their movements, and interactions using technologies such as
Bluetooth beacons, cellular data records, and smartphone applications. Such
solutions can be intrusive, potentially violate individual privacy rights and
are often subject to regulations that mandate the need for opt-in policies to
gather and use personal information which, as several studies have shown, limits
their adoption. This project takes a novel approach to empower organizations to
mitigate spread of COVID-19 at their premises by exploiting connection events
between mobile devices carried by individuals and the Wi-Fi infrastructure.
There are several advantages of the planned approach. First, it takes an
organizational perspective and is intended to help organizations, small and
large, keep employees safe and ensure safety on their premises by exploiting
network data (already being generated by their network infrastructures). Second,
it is decentralized, i.e., instead of empowering/trusting a small number of
organizations such as mobile OS companies, it empowers organizations to assume
joint responsibility to implement safety measures at their premises. Third, it
offers a fully privacy-preserving solution based on computationally and
informationally secure cryptography with strong security properties guaranteeing
privacy of individuals, including those who might be exposed or carriers. This
will prevent misuse of the data collected by any entity against the will of the
individuals. Fourth, it is based on connectivity events already generated by
existing Wi-Fi infrastructure and does not require users of the network to
either download any application and/or give explicit permissions (which is known
to limit adoption). Finally, it offers a path to implement technology not just
for contact tracing but empowers organizations with awareness about
effectiveness of their policies/strategies such as social distancing,
disinfecting/cleaning schedules, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned approach
is built upon several innovations including (a) new algorithms for cleaning
noisy Wi-Fi connectivity data to develop models of occupancy, (b) new
cryptographic solutions to implement privacy-preserving data analytics and
queries over encrypted Wi-Fi connectivity data (collected from mobile devices),
to generate a range of information -- e.g., level of adherence to social
distancing policies, flow of people in spaces, and exposure hotspots, (c) design
of a range of COVID-19 relevant applications that help organizations ensure
safety of individuals on their premises. Such applications include publicly
accessible organizational portals/dashboards and subscription-based alerting
technologies developed in concert with stakeholder (e.g., UCI campus
administration). Deployment and testing of the solution will be done at campus
scale, particularly focusing on how the technology can empower the university
leadership to determine strategies for reopening research labs while maintaining
health and safety of all involved and follow the applicable mandates of the
public health authorities. It is expected that the project will serve as a
vehicle to inform and educate both individuals and scientists about virus
transmission and spread and will contribute to the development of processes and
actions at the organizational level to mitigate spread of
COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.