* 2032310
* RAPID: Biomimicry of SARS-CoV-2 and its consequences for infectivity and inflammation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Gerard Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 06/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This research addresses two critically important questions concerning the severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus that causes the
novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19): Why is this virus so infectious, and why
does it sometimes cause lethal inflammation? It is now well-known that COVID-19
infections can spread from hosts early, before onset of symptoms, which implies
efficient viral entry and egress. The root causes of COVID-19 induced
inflammation are less known, but cognate effects have been seen in other
superviruses such as the coronavirus for the original severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS), and the 1918 pandemic influenza virus. This research
investigates the basic molecular mechanisms of how parts of this virus can mimic
the functions of defensive molecules from the human innate immune system which
restructure membranes and control inflammation, thereby allowing the virus to
achieve both of the above effects. The multidisciplinary nature of the research
will also provide training opportunities for students at multiple levels. The
overall goal of this project is to perform basic research that may help mitigate
the current COVID-19 crisis by using artificial intelligence informed
fundamental biophysics, immunology, and virology. The project objectives are
two-fold. 1: use machine learning methods to identify molecules encoded in the
genome of the SARS-CoV-2 virus that remodel the membrane for viral entry and
viral shedding, and design ways to turn off this activity by mimicking molecules
found in bats, which harbor many coronaviruses and therefore have more evolved
defenses against them. 2: Identify molecules from the SARS-CoV-2 virus that
mimic molecules from the human innate immune system which are known to mediate
potent inflammatory responses, thus allowing potential downstream design of
molecular approaches to alleviate this type of inflammation. These ideas will be
tested using small angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) experiments performed at state-
of-the-art 3rd generation synchrotron radiation facilities in the US, as well as
traditional immunological and antiviral experiments, including those done at
high containment biosafety level 3 facilities designed to handle SARS-CoV-2.
Expected results from this basic research project can provide translational
guidance for design of COVID-19 treatment strategies, even if current vaccine
candidates fail. This RAPID award is made by the Cellular Dynamics and Function
Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, using funds from
the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.