* 2032452
* RAPID: Effects of COVID-19 on Community Solidarity
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* James Hawdon, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 67,146.00

In this project, how health pandemics affect levels of community solidarity, how
these levels differ from other tragedies, and whether solidarity can be
generated and sustained using virtual means are explored. Tragedies, such as
mass shootings and natural disasters, often bring communities together in
solidarity as their residents gather to mourn and comfort one another. While the
COVID-19 tragedy has created an environment ripe for solidarity, coming together
in mutual support – the typical method for generating and sustaining solidarity
– has not been possible because of the widely adopted social distancing
guidelines that has prevented being physically close. Findings promote national
health and welfare by furthering understanding of how feelings of community and
belonging are promoted even when we cannot be in physical proximity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental goals of the project are to explore
whether the solidarity-generating effects of natural disasters are similar to
those of man-made disasters, if and how communicating virtually can promote and
sustain solidarity in a way comparable to interaction in the physical world, and
what role culture-building institutions can play in buffering the effects of a
pandemic. Four waves of survey panel data from students from one particular
university and a national sample of college-aged students are used (1) to
compare current levels of community solidarity in at the university to levels of
community solidarity before and after a tragic event that occurred on the
campus; (2) to document changes in levels of solidarity over time to determine
if trajectories are similar to those witnessed after other tragedies; (3) to
track the various types of virtual communication that are associated with higher
levels of community solidarity and sustained levels of solidarity; (4) to
explore the relationships between sociodemographic variables and feelings of
solidarity; (5) to map respondents’ involvement in and commitment to the campus
culture and their feelings of community solidarity over time; and (6) to compare
levels of solidarity among this university’s students with those of other
college-aged Americans over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.