* 2032919
* RII Track-4: Surviving climate change: The role of adaptation and acclimatization in tropical corals
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Carlos Prada, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 241,424.00

This Research Infrastructure Improvement RII Track-4 grant will study heat
tolerance in coral populations. Corals are suffering thermal stress across the
globe as a result of increases in water temperature of less than 2Â°C. Yet, some
corals live in more extreme conditions. Previous coral research shows that
recurrent high temperatures can induce heat tolerance in reef-building corals.
These results have been derived from small populations of corals in unusual reef
settings with extreme daily variation in temperature. However, it is not well
known whether these environments are much more common than currently believed
and whether daily increases in temperature occur regularly on coral reefs. The
result will provide a model for discovering habitats where heat-resistant corals
may be commonly found. The award will provide the opportunity for an early-
career faculty and his graduate student from the University of Rhode Island
(URI) to establish a new collaboration with professors at the Huck Institutes of
the Life sciences at Pennsylvania State University. Additionally, the project
will generate a new workshop called DIVERSE and a K-6 coral reef science kit
aimed at increasing the interest of underrepresented minority groups in STEM.
Thus, this fellowship will help to promote diversity in STEM fields and
strengthen URI's and Rhode Island's aim to build capacity in bioinformatics and
computational biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the
hypothesis that some reef zones repeatedly experience warmer temperatures and,
as a result, harbor heat-resistant corals. The study will monitor temperature
patterns across a wide range of reef habitats and locations and measure heat
tolerance in one of the most threatened corals, Orbicella faveolata. To
understand heat tolerance in corals and gain knowledge of where to locate heat-
tolerant coral populations, this study will use a replicated Caribbean reef
system and test physiological hypotheses about the mechanisms of heat tolerance.
The project will specifically address the following objectives: (1) determine
profile variation in temperature across ten reef systems with a variety of reef
habitats and test which habitats and sites harbor heat-tolerant corals; (2)
analyze the performance of colonies in reciprocal transplants and examine the
role of acclimation in heat tolerance; (3) establish the degree of heat
tolerance across corals from different habitats and determine the genes
underlying thermotolerance in corals using genomic tools. The experiments will
be designed to test if phenotypic plasticity, widely viewed as an important
trait in evolutionary ecology, is key for coral's ability to cope with warmer
oceans. Through manipulative trials, the project will also quantify the extent
to which habitat-adapted populations are also interchangeable across habitats.
The research will provide valuable information on the general rules about where
to locate heat-tolerant corals, which may result in the ability to conduct a
Caribbean-wide search for these habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.