* 2032857
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Development of a Method for Paired Potassium/Argon Geochronology and Strontium-Neodymium-Lead Radiogenic Isotope Geochemistry of Dust in Ice Cores
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Bess Koffman, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 126,498.00

Atmospheric dust and sediment serve as valuable tracers of past Earth and ocean
processes because their geochemical compositions reflect their bedrock parent
material. Scientists use the compositions of sediments and dust as a
‘fingerprint’, linking materials at downstream sites, such as ice and sediment
cores, back to their sources. Through geochemical fingerprinting, scientists
have gained insight into the causes and impacts of abrupt climate changes, the
stability of ice sheets and their potential contributions to sea level rise, and
the mechanisms by which ocean and atmospheric circulation patterns change. This
project aims to harness the capabilities of two different techniques used to
determine sediment provenance. The approach will allow the team to address
critical questions regarding past wind patterns around Antarctica, the roles of
different dust sources in supplying nutrients to the Southern Ocean, and the
behavior of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet during the last interglacial warm
period. In addition, the method has the potential to be applied to
extraterrestrial materials such as from the Mars Mission and Moon rocks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geochemical tracing of dust and other sediment sources is
a powerful approach that aids in reconstructing past atmosphere, ocean, and ice-
sheet dynamics. However, in some regions such as the Southern Hemisphere, even
multi-variate approaches such as those using strontium, neodymium, and lead
isotopes yield ambiguous results due to overlapping source-area compositions.
The team has found that lead isotopes add great value in distinguishing sources
and that combining these with potassium/argon geochronology provides significant
additional constraints on sediment provenance. The added value is due to the
relative ease of resetting potassium/argon ages during subsequent geologic
events such as crystallization of new minerals during diagenesis, or by heating,
with resetting occurring at lower temperatures than other isotopic systems. The
team will develop and test the proposed approach using rock and mineral
standards and fine-grained sediments, then apply it to ice-core dust samples
from deaccessioned ice cores and dust from the Last Glacial Maximum at key
sites. Beyond the broader scientific impact of this new approach, the project
will provide opportunities for Colby College undergraduates to experience
complete immersion in the world of discovery, working both in Dr. Bess Koffman’s
geochemistry lab at Colby and at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of
Columbia University, where they will engage with a wider cohort of students from
around the country and have access to state-of-the-art analytical
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.