* 2032147
* RAPID:Investigating the Impact of COVID-19 on the Future of the U.S. STEM Workforce
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Gerald Marschke, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,132.00

This RAPID project addresses the need to maintain resilience in the STEM
workforce during a pandemic. The researchers aim to assess which STEM jobs in
which industries are more or less able to telework in the near term during the
COVID-19 pandemic. The project also will examine the distribution of STEM
occupations and wages within firms and compare across industries to gain insight
into how disruptive COVID-19 will be at the workplace level. The research team
will use large-scale population data, linked employee-employer data, and
business establishment and firm microdata to model the 2008-2009 Great Recession
and subsequent recovery and estimate the likely effects of COVID-19 recession on
STEM workers and the STEM labor market. The research will provide policymakers
with information and estimates that can shape policies to ameliorate the effects
of the COVID-19 pandemic on the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research goals are to (1) measure how much of the STEM workforce is able to
continue work in which occupations and industries during the COVID-19 pandemic,
(2) model the likely effect of the COVID-19 work disruption and economic
recession on STEM workers and the STEM labor market, and (3) inform policies
that can ameliorate the effects of pandemics on STEM workers. The research team
will merge Occupation Information Network (O*NET) and American Community Survey
(ACS) data to assess which STEM workers are potentially able to continue work
during the COVID-19 pandemic and to what extent. To estimate the likely effects
of COVID-19 recession and recovery on STEM workers, the team will construct a
longitudinal dataset of workers and firms and augment the data with occupations
that can support telework. The researchers will use the experience of the
2008-2009 Great Recession and subsequent recovery to evaluate the wider economic
recession effects of COVID-19 to document factors that mitigate or exacerbate
effects of recession on STEM employment. The research results can help guide
policies that support telework and other changes in the structure of work and
workplaces to enhance future workforce resilience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project responds to the COVID-19 pandemic. It is supported by the ECR: Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research competition of the EHR Core Research Program
(ECR) that funds fundamental research focused on STEM learning sand learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM professional
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.