* 2032211
* AGS-PRF: Peroxy Radical (RO2) Reactivity through Functionalized Organic Iodides
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2023
* NONE NONE, Rivera-Rios, Jean C
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/28/2023
* USD 190,000.00

This project involves laboratory experiments to better characterize the reactive
chemistry of peroxy radicals in the atmosphere. Peroxy radicals are key
intermediate species in the production of secondary organic aerosol and ozone,
which are detrimental to human health and affect climate. A flow tube will be
used in the laboratory to study peroxy radical reactions under many different
environmental conditions. A better understanding of this chemistry has
implications for modeling air quality and for informing policy decisions on
mitigating air pollution levels that may be harmful to human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are: (1) to
determine the effects of molecular structure and degree of functionalization on
isomerization rates and dimerization products of peroxy radicals (RO2); (2) to
determine the organic nitrate yield and alkoxy radical fate of functionalized
RO2 species; and (3) to determine the branching ratio of hydroperoxides (ROOH)
and OH in RO2-HO2 reactions where the RO2 radical is functionalized. The first
objective involves probing RO2 unimolecular reactions and RO2-RO2 reactivity and
determining the relative importance of each process. The second objective
includes probing RO2-NO reactivity and evaluating the relative rates between
these reactions and the isomerization reactions described in the Objective 1.
The third objective will help to assess the hypothesis that the yield of OH
increases as the degree of functionalization increases in RO2- HO2 reactions. In
clean environments, where bimolecular lifetimes are long, multiple isomerization
reactions might lead to RO2 species that are very functionalized and more likely
to yield OH when reacting with HO2 than to form peroxides. The results from
these experiments will provide fundamental experimental data on isomerization
rates and branching ratios of bimolecular reactions of RO2 necessary to
understand atmospheric oxidation. The success of this research will lead to the
improved modeling of oxidation processes, under the conditions of both “high”
and “low" NOx environments, thereby helping to improve predictions of both air
quality and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.