* 2032774
* RAPID: Immune Responses to CoV Infections in African and North American Bats
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Ken Field, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Bats appear to have co-evolved with coronaviruses (CoVs) for millennia. The CoVs
that bats carry include the closest relatives of SARS-COV-2, the causative agent
of COVID-19. The relationship between the bat host and CoV virus appears to have
selected for immune tolerance that enables bats to control CoV replication and
yet avoid immune damage. Although some novel CoV hosts (humans) are able to
manage and clear the virus without significant consequence, many do not, falling
victim instead to a pathological inflammatory response that results from overly-
exuberant immune signaling. Understanding how bats avoid this deleterious path
may provide insight into new disease mitigation strategies. The researchers
supported by this award will leverage a large existing set of bat samples to
better understand how bats respond to infection with CoVs. Beyond these direct
COVID-19 societal benefits, this project will benefit society by training young
scientists in disease ecology and in bioinformatics, preparing them for future
careers in the transdisciplinary STEM workforce. Data from this study will be
published in peer-reviewed journals, presented at scientific meetings, and
shared through public data repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
this study is to identify immune mechanisms associated with tolerance of
Coronavirus (CoV) infections in bats. Gaining information on bat responses to
CoV infections will shed light on the mechanisms of effective immune control.
Parallel study of (1) the CoV virome, and (2) the accompanying gene up- or down-
regulation in response to infection will reveal immune system signatures of
viral tolerance and advance fundamental understandings of antiviral immunity. By
comparing responses in the African little epauletted fruit bat (Epomophorus
labiatus), which host beta-CoVs, and the North American little brown myotis
(Myotis lucifugus), which host alpha-CoVs, the common mechanisms of tolerance to
both alpha- and beta-CoVs will be determined. A powerful dual RNA sequencing
approach will be deployed to simultaneously sequence the virome and the host
transcriptome. Using weighted gene correlation network analysis, gene expression
counts will be used to determine gene networks in the host that are most tightly
correlated to each CoV infection. These correlated gene networks will be
analyzed functionally to determine which immune pathways are associated with CoV
tolerance by either blocking inflammation and immune activation or by dampening
tissue damage. Finally, the functions of these co-regulated genes will be
compared to those documented in novel hosts (human and other animals). This
RAPID award is made by the Physiological and Structural Systems Cluster in the
BIO Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, using funds from the Coronavirus
Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.