* 2032181
* Collaborative research: Transport of magma in the near surface at small volcanoes- Experimental intrusion of basaltic melt into unconsolidated sediments
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Susan Sakimoto, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 111,806.00

This project deals with the interaction of magma and the materials through which
it rises to feed small-volume volcanoes (the most abundant volcanic landforms on
Earth). When magmatic interaction involves loose sediments that contain variable
amounts of water or ice, the magma may behave in a variety of ways - passing
through the material, causing explosions or even stopping before reaching the
surface. These different behaviors influence how a volcano will erupt, and this
project will enhance the ability to anticipate the behavior of future eruptions,
which is vital for saving lives and protecting infrastructure. This project
involves experiments that will inject 30 liters (8 gallons) of basaltic melt
into different types of loose sediment - dry, wet, and frozen. The experiments
provide the opportunity to characterize the conditions of magma and sediment
interactions that result in these diverse behaviors. Characterization of
conditions, which are limited by physical experiments will be expanded using
computer simulations and comparison with natural products from an eroded
volcanic field (71 Gulch, Idaho, USA). These experiments are the first of their
kind and provide valuable constraints on the flow of magma into sediments and
will help better interpret natural deposits of past volcanic eruptions and
provide inputs for models of future activity. This project will involve the
training of undergraduate and graduate students with results and facilities
shared with the scientific community. At the same time, the novel nature of the
experiments will provide ample opportunities to engage public interest in
science and volcanoes through videos and public facing blogs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The behavior of magma in the near surface directly
influences the potential for eruptions and their resulting eruptive styles. To
reach the surface, magma commonly must travel through unconsolidated sediments.
This interaction influences the transport of magma, the stability of volcanic
piles, and the potential for phreatomagmatic explosions. Meter-scale experiments
of basaltic melt-sediment interactions will be integrated with computational
simulations and field work to bridge the scale from experimental results and
small natural deposits to a wider range of natural scenarios. The scale of the
proposed experiments (mm to m) is large enough to overlap with natural systems
(mm to 10â€™s of m). The experimental products, created using an automated
plunger-driven magma extrusion device, will be both modeled numerically and
compared with similar-sized natural magma-sediment deposits at the 71 Gulch
Volcano, Idaho, USA. This field area contains deposits at both the experimental
scale and larger, making it an ideal natural laboratory to investigate the
scaling behavior of magma sediment interactions. The experimental and numerical
results will be used to determine how long magma is available for mechanical
mixing and thermal interactions, contributing to an understanding of how
eruptions progress, and what conditions are necessary for explosive magma-
sediment interactions. Specifically, the project will test two hypotheses: 1)
The flow rate and temperature of the intruding magma is more important than the
sedimentary host conditions in determining whether basaltic magma will pass
through, mingle with, or be arrested by an unconsolidated sedimentary host at
near surface conditions. 2) The textures and geometries of natural deposits of
mingled basaltic magma and unconsolidated sediments can be used to estimate the
flux rate and time scale at the time of formation. Experimental and numerical
results will enable detailed quantitative interpretations of the forces and
thermal history recorded in natural deposits in ways not previously
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.