* 2032810
* The Electronic Structure of the FeSe / Ti1+xO2 / SrTiO3 Interface
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Hunter Sims, Francis Marion University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 01/31/2023
* USD 101,854.00

The promise of transmitting electricity without loss makes superconductivity at
standard temperature and pressure one of the most tantalizing goals in materials
science. However, a comprehensive explanation of high-temperature
superconductivity remains elusive. To chart a path forward, scientists must
study individual materials to try to understand how they work and what they have
in common. This project will provide computational tools for the study of how
superconducting materials react to changes in their atomic structure.
Understanding these changes allows researchers to predict ways to increase the
operating temperature of a superconducting material, allowing experiments to
focus on the most promising candidates. These tools will be applied to the case
of iron selenide (FeSe) deposited on strontium titanate (SrTiO3). A single
three-atom-thick layer of FeSe grown on SrTiO3 remains superconducting up to
temperatures almost 10 times greater than larger crystals of pure FeSe. The
methods implemented in this project will clarify the properties of this material
and may suggest how to design new superconductors. The project will also allow
students from a small undergraduate university to accompany the principal
investigator to a national laboratory where they will gain computational
research skills and further develop their identity as scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monolayer FeSe on SrTiO3
has been actively studied since the discovery of its enhanced superconducting
temperature Tc of 60 – 80 K, compared to around 8 K in bulk FeSe. Theoretical
investigations have focused on a pure FeSe / SrTiO3 interface, but atomic-
resolution scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) images have revealed
the existence of an additional titanium-oxide layer between the SrTiO3 substrate
and FeSe. The P.I. recently published computational results that demonstrate
that this layer exhibits a titanium excess that can participate in electron-
doping the FeSe monolayer. This doping is thought to be important in increasing
Tc in this system. While these density functional theory results provide a good
description of the atomic structure of this material, there are technical and
fundamental limits to such methods’ ability to accurately describe a realistic
heterostructure. After extracting material-specific model parameters from these
calculations, the P.I. will perform more sophisticated calculations that will
clarify which of the properties of the system are most important to the
superconducting state. The effect of disorder or different ordering in the extra
interfacial layer will be explored by constructing multiple structural
configurations and averaging over their band structures. Further, surface Green
functions will be computed to determine the electronic structure of the
monolayer and interfacial layer on a more realistic semi-infinite substrate.
Such results can also provide insight into how similar increases in Tc might be
engineered in other materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.