* 2032482
* RII Track-4: Fast, Mass-Manufacture-Ready Prototyping of Microfluidic Water Purification Systems
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Caitlin Howell, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 01/31/2024
* USD 154,556.00

Access to clean water is an urgent problem that is expected to worsen as
droughts become more common and severe weather events stress the water
infrastructure in the U.S. Membrane filtration is traditionally used to purify
drinking water but requires electricity and can be slowed or even stopped by
blockages. Alternative solutions, such as pulsed-electric-field sterilization,
are available, but are expensive to manufacture. In this Track-4 EPSCoR
Fellowship, the Maine-based team will collaborate with the Wyss Institute for
Biologically Inspired Engineering, one of the world’s premier research
institutes for microfluidics, to develop a new, low-cost method of quickly
prototyping a portable, microfluidic pulsed-electric-field sterilization system
that does not need an outside power source and is not prone to blockage.
Importantly, in this new method of prototyping the final design can then be
produced directly on industrial-scale papermaking equipment, allowing for rapid
fabrication of high numbers of devices at low cost. In addition to creating an
accessible solution for water filtration, the connections established between
the EPSCoR jurisdiction of Maine and the technology hub of Boston through this
work will provide a foundation for future projects using paper and papermaking
capacity in biotechnology, increasing both inclusion and sustainability in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to clean water is a significant problem in
disaster-stricken or resource-limited environments. Membrane filtration is
traditionally used to remove particulates and pathogens from drinking water but
requires electricity and is impeded by blockages. Alternative solutions, such as
pulsed-electric-field sterilization, are available, but are impeded by high
costs of prototyping and manufacturing. In this project, the PI and her student
will collaborate with the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering,
one of the world’s premier research institutes for microfluidics, to develop a
new, low-cost method of quickly prototyping a portable pulsed-electric-field
sterilization system with a direct route to mass-manufacture on industrial-scale
equipment. The method is based on a 3D print-direct to roll-go-roll prototyping
process previously developed by the PI for use on industrial-scale papermaking
equipment. With the assistance of Wyss researchers, the team will learn a broad
range of microfluidic fabrication, assembly, and analysis techniques needed to
apply this method to water purification. Through the project, the team will
develop methods to address the problem of scalability and mass-manufacturability
at cost-effective levels that are currently slowing the translation of advanced
microfluidics from lab to field, and bringing these skills and knowledge back to
her EPSCoR jurisdiction of Maine. Acquiring a skill set in advanced
microfluidics from the experts at the Wyss Institute will allow the PI to add
new depth to her ongoing research collaborations both in Maine and across the
U.S. while also working to help address the critical problem of water
purification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.