* 2032262
* RAPID: Algorithms and Heuristics for Remote Food Delivery under Social Distancing Constraints
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Stephen Smith, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 06/30/2021
* USD 100,000.00

This goal of this project is to optimize processes for remote delivery of meals
to persons in need. The COVID-19 pandemic has fundamentally disrupted processes
of food delivery to economically depressed and vulnerable segments of the US
population. With the closing of schools and the advent of social distancing
practices, over 13 million low-income students who have historically relied on
their school to provide daily meals are now without important nutritional
support, and centralized school summer meal distribution programs are no longer
viable. Similarly, low-income adults and seniors that depend on centralized
distribution of meals at shelters and food banks are now being forced to cope
with virus mitigation procedures that severely limit their access. Both short
and long term solutions to food security for all in this new normal depend on
greater reliance on remote food delivery, and although vehicle routing and
pickup/delivery problems have been studied for close to 50 years, the
constraints imposed by contemporary public health and social distancing concerns
present new optimization challenges. This research will contribute new problem
formulations and solutions to these important classes of remote food delivery
problems, and through existing relationships with the Allegheny County
Department of Human Services, Southwestern Pennsylvania United Way, Allies for
Children and the Greater Pittsburgh Food Bank, the project will apply research
results to inform their ongoing pilot food delivery efforts. More broadly, these
results will stimulate future research on these problems and influence remote
food delivery problems nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize these results
and impact, this project aims to develop new algorithms and heuristics that
address the unique constraints and objectives presented by these geographically-
dispersed food delivery problems, to provide a theoretical basis for more
efficient operational practice. With respect to school bus student meal
delivery, algorithms and heuristics for solving several problems will be
developed and analyzed. First, the project will consider the coupled problem of
assigning stops to students requiring meals and generating efficient routes to
accommodate these students within a global meal time window, while enforcing
social distance constraints on number of students that can be assigned to any
one bus stop. Second, the research will investigate an extended formulation that
additionally allows the use of smaller passenger vehicles or vans, to better
service students that have difficult access to bus stops and/or long walk times.
To ensure relevance, the project will utilize demand and bus route data from
selected school districts in Allegheny County, PA to evaluate performance.
Finally, with respect to remote distribution of food to low-income seniors, the
algorithms and heuristics developed for student meal delivery will be extended
and adapted to this more capacity constrained setting, where food must be moved
exclusively in smaller volunteer passenger vehicles. Data obtained from the
Greater Food Bank of Pittsburgh will be used to evaluate these extended research
results. All data sets used and solutions results obtained will be made
available to stimulate future research in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.