* 2032011
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Immunological adaptations in bats to moderate the effect of coronavirus infection
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* angelique corthals, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 21,310.00

All aspects of society have been upended by COVID-19. While most research has
understandably focused on clinical applications, how the ancestors of SARS-CoV2
survive and circulate in nature is vital to both prevent future epidemics and
help health professionals develop therapeutic treatments. Because some bat
species are natural carriers of many coronaviruses, including the closest known
relatives of SARS-CoV-2, the team supported by this award will identify
consistent differences between bats and other mammals likely involved in
moderating infection by regulating virus entry and mounting an effective immune
response. This project will address how bats escape illness despite carrying a
wide range of viruses. As part of this work, the research team will develop
educational displays related to the bat immunology for public display at the
Museum of Texas Tech. Results for the study will also be published in peer-
reviewed journals, presented at scientific meetings, and posted to shared data
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers supported by this award
hypothesize there are consistent differences in the genes involved in the immune
response pathways of bats compared to other mammals, such that: a) bats show
disproportionate numbers of unique genomic adaptations; b) there is higher
expression of immune system genes in bats than in comparable mouse and human
tissues, and c) expression of genes involved in coronavirus cell entry in bats
differs in RNA profile, limiting the extent pathogenesis when compared to humans
and mice. To test these hypotheses, the team will analyze genome structure
across diverse bats species, and differential expression analysis of different
tissues, in the context of viral tropism and immune response. Resulting data
will inform researchers and clinicians as they anticipate and treat these
respiratory syndromes. This RAPID award is made by the Physiological and
Structural Systems Cluster in the BIO Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.