* 2032419
* ELOKA Phase V: Collaborative Data Stewardship and Knowledge Mobilization for Arctic Community-Driven Research and Observing
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Ann Fienup-Riordan, Calista Education and Culture, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 01/31/2026
* USD 133,435.00

The Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA) partners
with Indigenous organizations and researchers to facilitate the collection,
preservation, exchange, and use of Indigenous knowledge and community-based
observations. These contributions to Arctic science are critical for
understanding how the region’s Indigenous peoples and communities observe,
understand, and respond to rapid environmental and social changes across their
territorial landscapes that have been occupied for millennia. This collaborative
award supports ELOKA’s work with partners in Alaska, Canada, Greenland, northern
Europe, and Russia to ensure that information from community-based research and
observing is protected and preserved while also made discoverable, accessible,
and useful for Arctic residents, researchers, managers, and policy makers. This
project will build data management capacity at the community level, develop
digital tools to store and share data and knowledge, and identify ways to better
evaluate the use of data and knowledge to address management and decision-making
needs, for example, related to climate adaptation and community planning,
environmental and wildlife management, and cultural and place-based education.
ELOKA’s collaborative project activities will contribute to improved Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) training, education, and
leadership opportunities for Indigenous peoples, an underrepresented minority in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In its fifth phase, ELOKA will collaborate with
researchers and Arctic Indigenous communities to develop a community data
management (CDM) system focused on enhancing the usefulness of community-based
research and observing while supporting data sovereignty. As the first of four
goals, ELOKA will co-develop a framework to assess the use and usefulness of CDM
digital data infrastructures by convening two thematic working groups focused on
place names and long-term observing. Working group members will co-develop use
cases to document, examine and explore enhancements for how data management
tools are used by communities and other end users. These will be synthesized to
create a framework for developing useful and usable CDM applications. Second,
this project will co-develop tools, including enhanced and new digital
applications, to make community data more usable and useful for natural resource
management, land use planning, teaching and curriculum development, language and
cultural preservation, and long-term observing of Arctic change. Third, ELOKA
will build capacity for data stewardship and Indigenous data sovereignty by
providing trainings in partner communities, offering mini workshops at Arctic
science meetings and conferences, and extending the use of ELOKA-developed
atlases and databases in community institutions, including schools, wildlife
management and hunter/harvester organizations, and community and regional
planning offices. Fourth, this project will co-develop and implement a
monitoring and evaluation (M&amp;E) framework to guide project assessment and
learning. ELOKA will contribute to understanding and advancing knowledge co-
production through collaborative sharing of data and information that engages
both Indigenous and scientific knowledge. An Indigenous co-production of
knowledge leadership team will oversee the development of a research protocol,
implementation of the project, and dissemination of results. ELOKA research will
advance practices for community-driven and user-informed design of data
management systems across the Arctic, with the potential to contribute to Arctic
observing networks and to significantly improve prediction, planning and
adaptation in the face of accelerating social and environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.