* 2032129
* Collaborative Research: Biologically-driven island-building during sea-level rise and its implications for promoting resilient coastlines
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Irina Overeem, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 421,379.00

Coastal regions are at high risk for flooding and erosion due to climate change.
Mangroves help protect coastlines by trapping small sediment called mud. The
accumulation of mud layers counteracts sea-level rise. This project will examine
sediment trapping by microbial mats, layered communities of microorganisms.
Microbial mats are common in mangrove ecosystems and previous research has shown
that microbial mats can trap larger sediment than mangroves. The PIs hypothesize
that microbial mats may be playing an important but under-appreciated role in
trapping sand-sized sediment. This will be tested using field observations and
modeling to understand whether microbial mats helped build emergent land in
three study sites. Results will be used to evaluate whether it is useful to
consider microbial mats in coastal management practices more broadly. A short
educational film featuring the key conclusions of this project will be shared
with local communities and the broader public. This project will also provide
training to high school and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will
test the hypothesis that microbial mats can augment grain-trapping effects of
mangroves, resulting in the accumulation and early cementation of coarse
sediment that makes coasts resilient to sea-level rise and increased hurricane
intensities. The primary study site is Little Ambergris Cay (LAC), an
uninhabited island in the Turks and Caicos Islands that accreted over
approximately the last 10,000 years, characterized by thick microbial mats,
carbonate-cemented hardgrounds, and mangrove thickets with underlying sediment
dominantly composed of ooids, carbonate sand grains that form via precipitation
from seawater. The project will apply a multidisciplinary approach to examine
how biology contributed to the construction of emergent topography during sea-
level rise and evaluate how the processes involved could be applied to enhance
coastal resiliency in other areas. The project will consist of four components:
(1) real-time observations of rates and mechanisms of sediment stabilization by
microbial mats; (2) analysis of a 10,000 year, Holocene, depositional record to
assess rates and spatial variations in sediment accumulation; (3) sediment
transport modeling to reconstruct island development to test whether local
hydrodynamics and inorganic cementation are sufficient to create the emergent
topography observed or, alternately, if biological influence is required; and
(4) comparing LAC microbial community and sediment accumulation patterns with
two contrasting coastal systems (one in the Florida Keys and one in Belize) to
identify how the unique ecology of LAC relates to other coastlines. In addition
to evaluating whether the interactions of microbial mats with mangroves and
sediment transport dynamics affect sediment accumulation in coastal regions at
risk from rising sea-level, this project will also contribute to understanding
of the diversity, activity, and morphology of mangrove-associated microbial
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.