* 2032264
* RAPID: COVID-19 comparative modeling and analyses of outbreaks using mechanistic and ensemble machine learning and the development of a platform for projection and management
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Wayne Getz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Numerical projections of reliable infection and disease mortality rates within
cities, counties, states, and countries, as well as identification of the
factors most responsible for these rates are critical to rational management of
the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic. In the absence of effective therapeutics and
vaccines, a deeper understanding of the impact of societal measures (distancing,
contact tracing, quarantining, etc.) on local Covid-19 outbreaks are needed by
administrators and healthcare professionals in making decisions that affect the
tradeoff between the physical health of individuals and the economic health of
communities. The aims of the proposal are twofold. First, to use cutting-edge
statistical models to uncover the factors that most affect SARS-CoV-2
transmission and mortality rates. Second, to provide decisions makers with a
simple-to-use, extensive instruction supported, data and scenario analysis
(DASA) platform for evaluating the implications of different policy measures,
including the implementation and relaxation of social distancing behavior,
surveillance, contact tracing, patient isolation, and vaccination (once suitable
vaccines are available). Additionally, this DASA platform will be suitable for
training students at the undergraduate and graduate levels in public health and
allied programs, as well as providing an analytical tool for students carrying
out epidemiological research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The epidemiological model
that underpins the Numerus Model Builder DASA Covid-19 platform includes
modifications of the standard SEIR (Susceptible, Exposed/Latent, Infectious,
Recovered) formulation to incorporate an explicit contact (C) class, as well as
dividing infectious individuals into pre/asymptomatic (A) and symptomatic
infectious (I) disease states to yield a SCLAIV model (where V refers to
naturally vaccinated/recovered class). Individuals in the C class can either
thwart (return to the S class) or succumb to (move onto the L=E class) pathogen
invasion after making contact with the SARS-CoV-2 pathogen. The formulation also
includes a parallel series of Sr, Cr, Lr, Ar, Ir and Vr classes that correspond
to individuals moving into these reduced-exposure SCLAIV-response classes at
rates determined by the driving actions of Covid-19 policy measures that have
been put in place. The values of the SCLAIV+reponse model parameters are
influenced by various factors that will be identified using statistical machine
learning methods. In particular, “superlearners” that are a mix of parametric
and nonparametric ensemble machine learning methods will be used to identify the
factors responsible for observed spatio-temporal patterns across different,
regional Covid-19 outbreaks, using appropriate data scraped from the worldwide
web. This RAPID award is made by the Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Disease
Program in the Division of Environmental Bioloy, using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.