* 2032434
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Implications of Social Distancing Policies on Water Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Kerry Kinney, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 04/30/2022
* USD 169,591.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will demonstrate how drinking water
services provided by water utilities have been impacted by the social distancing
policies undertaken by much of the nation during the 2020 coronavirus pandemic.
By design, social distancing policies have caused immense change in human
behavior, as families shelter in place and industrial and commercial sectors
pause operations. One of the many consequences of these changes is a significant
spatial, temporal, and volumetric change in water use within municipal water
distribution systems. These changes have the potential to substantially impact
water age and water quality both within the distribution system and within homes
and other buildings. In addition, utilities are facing unprecedented workforce,
financial, and logistical challenges because of the pandemic as they respond to
the unknown and emerging consequences of social distancing policies. As such,
this research has the potential to prevent infrastructure asset damage and
negative public health impacts in communities with piped water that have
undertaken social distancing. Accordingly, and, as warranted by results, this
project will create technical guidance for utilities to proactively mitigate
these potential negative consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research,
existing water meter data and new interview data will be used to identify
changes in water use patterns associated with various social distancing regimes.
Next, the impacts of these changes on the pressure and water quality in
distribution systems will be evaluated via hydraulic modeling and water quality
sampling and analysis. The hydraulic modeling will identify and locate potential
water distribution problems in a university campus, a residential neighborhood,
and a primarily commercial, urban downtown. These data, coupled with physical,
chemical, and microbiological water quality analyses, will provide vital new
empirical knowledge of water infrastructure performance under social distancing
conditions. Interview data from utilities around the nation will further
validate findings and enable the generalization of results and potential
mitigation strategies. In partnership with collaborating water utilities, these
combined datasets will be integrated to create a range of possible future Impact
Scenarios of social distancing for water distribution systems. The empirically
validated hydraulic models will be used to determine the implications of each
Impact Scenario on distribution system performance, and to test mitigation
strategies that utilities can implement during anticipated future waves of the
pandemic and social distancing. Broadly, this research builds engineering theory
to link human patterns of water use to the performance and resilience of water
distribution infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.