* 2032292
* SaTC: EDU: Educating STEM Students and Teachers about the Relevance of Social Engineering in Cyberattacks and Cybersecurity
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Aunshul Rege, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 01/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Social engineering (SE) is a technique employed by cybercriminals that uses
psychological manipulation to obtain sensitive information and gain unauthorized
access to restricted areas or systems. Nearly 70% of U.S. organizations
experienced SE in 2017, resulting in a $2.76 million loss in operational
downtime and revenues. The human factor is often regarded as the weakest link in
cyberattacks, making SE a major concern for cybersecurity. Despite the
significant threat posed by SE attacks, education, training and general
awareness of SE as a tool for cybercrime is low. This is because SE is
considered to be outside the scope of the technical domain and thus should be
addressed by other disciplines, including psychology, criminology, and
sociology. The engineering and computer science disciplines are already
investing heavily in cybersecurity education programs that have a primarily
technical focus. While this technical approach is important, the resulting pool
of students is too small and homogeneous to support the holistic development of
the solutions needed by our technologically dependent society. Enlarging and
diversifying the pool of students learning about (and teachers educating on) SE
will cast a wider net to recruit the most talented students as well as fostering
their creative potential as they enter the cybersecurity workforce. Furthermore,
the project will reflect the National Science Foundation’s commitment to
broadening participation along two fronts identified in its Strategic Plan: (i)
Expanding efforts to broaden participation from underrepresented groups and
diverse institutions across all geographical regions, and (ii) Preparing a
diverse and engaged STEM workforce. Thus, this project will promote diversity,
and develop and share resources and sustainable tools for future SE education
and research in a safe, ethical, and engaging learning
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three objectives. First, it
will educate students via hands-on course projects and a yearly intercollegiate
SE Capture the Flag competition and training event. Second, the project will
educate educators by hosting online and in-person training workshops across
multiple STEM disciplines. Finally, the project will disseminate free resources
such as SE course projects, datasets and analytic frameworks for research and
education. The project will also develop a new set of assessment tools (surveys
and focus groups) with the Center for the Advancement of Teaching to measure
student and educator learning specific to SE. This project proposes to enlarge
and diversify the pool of students and educators by recruiting across multiple
STEM disciplines at community colleges and universities in the U.S. with varying
demographics. Minority serving institutions, historically black colleges and
universities, and military/veteran friendly schools will be specifically
engaged. In addition, the project team will actively seek participation from
faculty belonging to underrepresented groups at these institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy
Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and
privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program
aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan
and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing
social and economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.