* 2032020
* EAGER: STEM Identity &amp; Computer Education: Overcoming the Intersectionality of Culture, Poverty &amp; Disability
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Crystal Emery, URU THE RIGHT TO BE INC
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2022
* USD 292,467.00

Information technology and coding can be made accessible to people with various
types of physical disabilities as a path to higher-wage employment. Companies
need computing and coding talent. These skills can be applied to a variety of
careers, provide advantages in a competitive job market, and offer opportunities
for creativity and innovation. People with disabilities are underrepresented in
STEM fields including computer science and this creates a barrier to their
inclusion in careers in STEM. The goals of this project align with the NSF goal
of increasing education and diversity by connecting disabled youth to STEM
professionals who will serve as mentors and introducing students to various
careers and opportunities. The project intends to identify specific barriers
that prevent underrepresented disabled students from fully engaging in STEM
education (specifically computer science) and will identify the most effective
methods and tools for teaching coding to persons with various
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes to engage students who
live at the intersection marginalized identities such as race, gender, and
disability status. The project will select 24 students in grades 8-12 with
congenital or acquired physical disabilities from an urban school district in
Connecticut to participate in the project, which will consist of a series of
introductory discussions, exercises (computer-based and unplugged), projects,
and concurrent mentoring with STEM professionals with disabilities. A
combination of in-class lectures, training videos, online tools, and practical
exercises will teach the foundations of computer science and programming,
emphasizing logical thinking and problem-solving
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.