* 2032539
* Investigating Fundamental Toughening Mechanisms in Nanocellular Foams
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lucas Meza, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 875,753.00

This award supports research that will combine numerical and experimental
investigations at the nano-, micro- and macroscale to uncover the mechanisms for
creating tougher, lighter-weight foams using nano-sized bubbles. The light
weight and energy-absorbing capacity of polymer foams makes them ideal for
applications in aircraft composite panels and protective equipment like helmets,
but they suffer from a fundamental problem: reducing their weight greatly
reduces their strength and toughness. Recent research has shown that when the
pore sizes of foams are reduced by ~1000x compared to the pores in traditional
foams, their toughness can significantly increase, sometimes even exceeding that
of the bulk material. This research will provide deep insight into this
unexpected phenomenon by studying materials at the nano- and microscale and then
using that fundamental knowledge to build models that predict and reproduce the
physical properties of the foams at the macroscale. This work will have profound
implications for advanced applications of polymers in bulletproof armor,
synthetic leather, and tear-proof agricultural mulch films. This project also
supports outreach efforts to create a Nano-Engineering of Materials and
Structures (NEMS) program focused on bringing academically talented, low-income
students from community colleges into a month-long program to teach them about
nanomaterials and inspire them to pursue a career in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this project is to provide a
comprehensive understanding of how molecular and nanoscale architecture can
couple with material size-effects to influence the macroscale properties of a
nanostructured polymer. The toughness of a foam is thought to scale with the
square root of its cell size, meaning nanopores would have a reduced toughness,
but this theory is inconsistent with recent experiments on nanocellular foams.
To provide insight into this phenomenon, the PIs will use in-situ nanomechanical
experiments along with coarse grained molecular dynamics to characterize cell-
level and molecular-level plasticity mechanisms. These will be incorporated with
micropolar finite element models to elucidate the fracture processes occurring
in nanocellular foams at the macroscale. This project seeks to answer
fundamental questions of: 1) how nanoscale porosity and nanoconfinement affect
molecular level plasticity, and 2) how pore-size and architecture affect
fracture process zone sizes to improve toughness. Through this research, the PIs
will develop a combined experimental and numerical multiscale approach to reveal
the mechanics of toughness across length scales. This will lead to novel
developments in tough, lightweight commercial thermoplastics and emerging
engineering materials like nanocomposites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.