* 2032107
* RAPID: Energy-Efficient Disinfection of Viral Bioaerosols in Public Spaces: Vital for Lifting of the “Stay-at-Home” Orders during the Covid-19 Outbreak
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Jelena Srebric, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This project will provide an analytical framework to assess potential reduction
of infection risks from COVID-19 viral bioaerosols in public spaces, including
school buses, classrooms, and retail stores. Viral bioaerosols may cause
infection for occupants staying both near and far away from infected people,
whether staying indoors at the same time or not. Upper-room germicidal
ultraviolet (UR-GUV) light can provide a real-time air disinfection solution
with a relatively small energy footprint if its light effectively interacts with
the bioaerosol both in the air and on surfaces. This project will develop and
disseminate an open-source numerical analytical framework including assessment
of UR-GUV disinfection and make it publicly available online to provide a free
resource useful for helping to control the spread of airborne COVID-19
infections in public spaces. An effective, real-time, and sustainable
engineering solution for air indoor space disinfection is an important
precaution to help prevent the spread of COVID-19, particularly in the context
of efforts to restart the nation's economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will develop numerical methods based on Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) to
reproduce the processes for viral bioaerosols spread by indoor airflow, removed
by exhaust, inactivated by UR-GUV, inhaled by the occupants, and deposited onto
surfaces in public spaces of varied spatial scales, ventilation systems, as well
as population size and density. This project will also optimize the application
of ceiling fans to improve UR-GUV disinfection efficacy. The investigation will
provide new insight on infection risk due to viral aerosols and infection
control by UR-GUV for surfaces contaminated by viral bioaerosols. In addition,
the project will consider two UV-C sources, one by traditional mercury vapor
UV-C lamps (UV-C-MV) and another by UV-C-LED for their energy efficiency. The
comparison of the two UV-C sources in terms of disinfection, energy
efficiencies, and operation cost holds promise for a sustainable UR-GUV solution
for minimizing infection risk in public spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.