* 2032315
* NSF-BSF: Unraveling the molecular determinants of protein oligomerization
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2025
* Eric Gaucher, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 01/31/2025
* USD 873,540.00

The complexity of life is predicated on the ability of biomolecules to organize
themselves into higher-order functional structures. This project will
investigate how evolutionary processes shape the ability of individual proteins
to self-assemble into complex structures that then generate new biomolecular
functionalities than possible for the individual proteins themselves. Insights
gained from this research will be useful for protein engineering attempts to
create de novo or expanded functionalities of enzymes and other structural
proteins. The project will also provide support and resources for K-12 teachers
to enhance STEM participation in a socioeconomically challenged section of
Atlanta (Clayton Co.). We anticipate that stronger research literacy at the
teacher level will generate greater interest and participation of K-12 students
in STEM activities such as science fairs, resulting in better preparation for
post-secondary education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will specifically
focus on methionine S-adenosyltransferases (MATs), an essential homo-tetrameric
enzyme of central metabolism characterized by high variability in quaternary
structure integrity among its homologs. The research will assess thermodynamics
and kinetics of MAT folding and (dis)assembly, folding dependency of individual
MAT subunits on molecular chaperones, aggregation propensity of intermediate MAT
sub-complexes, and the intracellular turnover and activity of assembled MAT
complexes. Comparative analysis of extant sequences will be complemented with
ancestral sequence reconstruction of the intermediate steps linking ancestral
and derived states. The project will generate bacterial strains in which genes
encoding the endogenous MAT homomers are replaced with extant or ancestrally
reconstructed orthologs, subject the strains to laboratory evolution in a
variety of environmental conditions, and identify the genetic, structural,
functional and systems determinants of adaptation as best possible given the
constraints of laboratory evolution. Through this multifaceted approach, the
project will enable a genotype-phenotype-fitness connection for homomer
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms an.d Molecular Biophysics programs of the Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel project is
supported by the US National Science Foundation and the Israeli Binational
Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.