* 2032407
* RAPID: Understanding the Process of Social Change through the Transitional Period of the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Katherine Mason, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 19,015.00

Effective management of COVID-19 requires public adherence to directives reliant
on behavior change. This research will investigate how diverse groups of
individuals understand, process, and react to risk and uncertainty posed by
COVID-19, at both a personal and a collective level. It examines how social
changes are impacted by the complex, often contradictory and emotion-laden
communications about the pandemic. Special attention will be given to impacts of
a perceived change in the projected course of the pandemic amidst concern about
the future. Under these conditions, how do people modify their life projects or
demonstrate resiliency? Results from the work will be communicated directly to
health experts to ensure that insights will be relevant to current and
subsequent waves of the pandemic. The research will provide training for a
graduate and an undergraduate student in social epidemiological research.

This research augments processual models of social change through the addition
of large-scale data from a diverse population during the pandemic. This theory
posits a sequence of changes involving a period of break-down, followed by a
transitional period that is navigated through human relationships, and
culminating with the establishment of new social orders and structures. Using
media analysis, and repeated waves of ethnographic observation and interviewing,
the researchers will collect data that address how individual variation in the
consumption of knowledge, affective states, and ideologies affect the timing and
sequential elements of social change, and how such variation ultimately drives
the behaviors that affect disease transmission (e.g., wearing masks, observing
social distancing). The work provides a novel test of this sequence in
communities displaying varying levels of commitment to collectivist ideologies
and social order.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.