* 2032700
* RAPID: Accelerating Phylodynamic Analyses of SARS-CoV-2
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Michael Cummings, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2022
* USD 187,871.00

Evolutionary analyses using genomic data are an essential component of the
scientific response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which is caused by Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome Corona Virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Inferring the evolutionary
history, or phylogeny, of virus samples with sampling time and location
information allows scientists to estimate the divergence of viral lineages in
time and place. These analyses provide time estimates that predate sampling
events. Information about mutations, and the rate of mutation, is inherent to
these phylogenetic analyses such that specific viral linages with accelerated
mutation rates, if they exist, can be identified. Furthermore, molecular
phylodynamics includes not only evolutionary history but also information on
viral genetic variation and viral population dynamics, again all in the context
of geography and time. The software from this project will be used in SARS-CoV-2
research on: patterns of movement and migration; time of outbreak origin; rate
of mutation and detection of significant mutations with potential health impact;
prevalence in populations at different geographical scales; reproductive number
and impact on policy; and infection-to-case reporting rates. Perhaps of most
immediate impact is that software from this project will accelerate tracing and
dating the origins of outbreaks in specific geographic regions where contact
tracing is not effective. Contact tracing and phylogenetic analyses work on
different scales, and thus are complementary. Together they provide a more
comprehensive view of the transmission patterns for the current
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phylodynamic analyses are particularly rich in
terms of inferences, albeit at a considerable computational cost. This project
will greatly accelerate phylogenetic and phylodynamic analysis of SARS-CoV-2
data sets, and facilitate their computation on National Science Foundation
supported computing resources, academic computing centers, as well as cloud
computing environments. Specific activities include designing new strategies for
efficient parallel computation of large data sets from viral outbreaks focusing
on SARS-CoV-2, developing strategies for removing the barriers to easy use of
highly performant parallel phylogenetic and phylodynamic analyses, developing
algorithms for implementing these new strategies on graphical processing units
(GPUs), and working with others to improve the time to results for analyses of
SARS-CoV-2 data sets. This RAPID award is made by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.