* 2032536
* RAPID: Modeling COVID-19 in the context of optimizing quarantine policy
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Yaneer Bar-Yam, New England Complex Systems Institute
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 101,770.00

While large scale quarantine has been the most successful short-term policy, it
is not efficient over long periods as it exerts economic costs. That is why
countries which have been able to partially control the spread of the
coronavirus disease are now thinking about policies to reopen businesses.
However, healthcare systems strongly warn against reopening too soon. Thus, it
is urgent consider a flexible quarantine policy that balanced these demands. The
novelty of this work is in suggesting a multi-level quarantine process based on
the mobility patterns of individuals and the severity of COVID-19 contagion in
different areas. Broader impacts of this research will be recommendation to
long-term policies on coronavirus control, which explicitly takes state
cooperation into account, as neighboring states are not necessarily
disconnected, according to mobility patterns. Additionally, this research will
provide professional development opportunities for early career researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research provides a more adaptive isolation and
quarantine process based on actual individuals' mobility patterns. Specifically,
it advances the state of knowledge regarding 1) how to define the borders of
high-risk patches considering the location and movements of confirmed patients,
2) what is the risk of each patch based on the strength of connectivity between
these patches, 3) how this information enables policymakers to make better and
faster decisions across the scales, and 4) how models can better simulate the
epidemic spread within and among societies. Social fragmentation will be
analyzed by applying the Louvain method with modularity optimization to the
mobility network. In a multi-scale community detection process, high risk areas
will be defined. At the smaller scales, for communities with a higher number of
confirmed cases the influence of contact tracing and quarantine policies will be
considered. A stochastic transmission model will be built to study how the
coronavirus spreads in society and how it affects individuals' health. To
develop the model, parameters such as incubation time distribution of asymptotic
patients, daily test capacity, and the number of mild, hospitalized, ICU
hospitalized, recovered, and death cases will be
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Ecology and
Evolution of Infectious Diseases Program in the Division of Environmental
Biology, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.