* 2032781
* QEM Outreach Forum on Building Research and Education Capacity in Engineering at Minority-serving Institutions
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* IVORY TOLDSON, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2023
* USD 197,300.00

Public Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network
will conduct a series of capacity building workshops to help Minority-serving
Institutions (MSIs) successfully compete for research funding from the National
Science Foundation (NSF) Engineering Directorate. As engineering education
continues to become more influential for US national prosperity, ensuring that
students from MSIs (Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Hispanic
Serving Institutions, and Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander-
Serving Institutions) are adequately prepared to compete in this landscape is
imperative. MSIs play a vital role in developing the future STEM workforce in
the United States. The United States is becoming more racially diverse and will
be comprised of a majority people of color by 2044. Simultaneously, jobs in the
United States are becoming more technical and will require education, training
and skills that are currently not being offered at scale, especially to
underrepresented minorities. With the current racial gaps in the attainment of
engineering degrees, coupled with the demographic changes in the United States,
if existing gaps remain, future jobs could remain unfilled, leading to a loss of
global competitiveness for the United States. The nation’s more than 700 MSIs
enroll almost 5 million students, nearly 30 percent of the nation’s
undergraduates and produce one-fifth of the nation’s STEM bachelor’s degrees.
These capacity building initiatives will enable MSIs to be more competitive for
awards in the NSF’s Engineering directorate, and thereby allow MSIs the
opportunity to build a critical infrastructure and create more sophisticated
programs that will help facilitate the next generation of diverse leaders in
engineering research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QEM will conduct two
workshops (virtual and live sessions) to assist 150 engineering faculty and
administrators (deans/chairs) in preparing proposals specifically for the NSF’s
Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) and other divisions within
the Directorate for Engineering (ENG). Workshop participants will be recruited
from MSIs with programs in engineering, engineering education, 3+2, and 2+2 dual
degree pathways. The overall purpose of the project is to broaden the number of
MSIs funded in EEC and other engineering programs and to build collaborations
among engineering researchers at MSIs. The conceptual framework for this project
is rooted in institutional theory, which can clarify how MSIs address limited
financial resources against their mission to serve underrepresented students.
The project’s goals are to: increase institutional awareness of EEC and other
ENG divisions’ competitive funding resources to build engineering capacity at
MSIs; (2) broaden participation of faculty at MSIs in engineering research; and
(3) promote collaborative efforts at MSIs. In keeping with these goals, the
specific objectives of the project are to: (1) Plan and conduct an initial two-
day Virtual Information Sharing and Funding Opportunities Forum for 100 MSI
faculty to increase their awareness of EEC and other engineering divisions’
funding opportunities and advance the understanding of MSIs on how to
effectively develop institutional administrative support to compete for funding
opportunities at the university and/or cross-campus levels; (2) Conduct a two-
day Live Proposal Development Workshop for 50 MSI engineering Faculty interested
in submitting proposals to EEC and other engineering divisions; (3) Provide
additional guidance to participants through post-workshop, consultant-led,
individualized technical assistance sessions to encourage their submission of
engineering-focused proposals; and (4) Develop the Engineering Educators
Minority Innovation Network, a broadening participation network of MSIs to
facilitate mentoring, networking and collaboration efforts among and between
engineering faculty at MSIs as well as with current EEC PIs and Program
Directors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.