* 2032598
* RAPID: Assessing Ethical Challenges in Conducting Do-it-yourself (DIY) Science During the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Lisa Rasmussen, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 06/30/2022
* USD 149,495.00

The United States works to ensure that the research it sponsors is conducted
ethically by requiring oversight of certain kinds of research, such as that
involving humans or animals. However, do-it-yourself (DIY) scientific research
conducted by individuals in their homes, garages, or community labs often is not
subject to these research ethics regulations. The ethical challenges that
participants in DIY communities may encounter are particularly salient in the
COVID-19 pandemic, which has spurred an international group of DIY researchers
to come together in pursuit of diagnostics and treatments. Because DIYers
participating in these efforts are primarily communicating via publicly
accessible online outlets, the pandemic offers an excellent opportunity to learn
more about ethical issues in DIY research in a concentrated and accelerated
setting. The project aims to assess how unregulated DIY research communities
negotiate ethical challenges during an ongoing pandemic. It will lead to a
better understanding of how DIY scientists identify, approach, and resolve
ethical issues in their work in crises, and to practical understanding of what
barriers or facilitators of ethical research exist in unregulated domains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through online observations and interviews, this project
examines how participants in open-source COVID-19 projects negotiate three
central ethical issues: biosafety and harm, validation and replication, and
authorship and credit. Phase 1 consists of analyzing digital communications
amongst project members on an international DIY science platform called Just One
Giant Lab (JOGL), where thousands of individuals are collaborating on open-
source COVID-19 projects. Phase 2 involves conducting follow-up interviews with
approximately 40 JOGL participants to probe participants’ ethics-related
comments, how ethical challenges were resolved or were unable to be resolved,
and whether there was agreement with and satisfaction about eventual outcomes.
The interviews will explore participants’ views regarding barriers to—and
facilitators of—unregulated ethical research, and what tools they would have
found helpful in that context. This research will significantly advance our
understanding of how and where ethical issues arise in unregulated research
during times of crisis, and how participants in open science communities
negotiate these challenges. This project will result in recommendations for
developing better tools and approaches to help ensure the ethical conduct of DIY
research, and will assist regulators and policymakers with the development of
more informed approaches to ethics in unregulated
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was funded through the ER2 program
by the BIO and OISE directorates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.