* 2032136
* Collaborative Research: Worm Algorithm and Diagrammatic Monte Carlo for Strongly Correlated Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Anatoly Kuklov, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 11/30/2023
* USD 208,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research with an aim to advance fundamental understanding of
materials in which electrons interact strongly with each other. These materials
exhibit unusual properties and phenomena which may lead to future device
technologies. The PIs will use advanced computational approaches they have
developed to perform computer simulations of electrons in this class of
materials, and to explore the properties of a conceptually related system of
strongly interacting particles - helium atoms at very low temperatures and
modest pressure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will use simplified models to
investigate how superconductivity can occur in materials with strongly
interacting electrons. Superconductivity is a quantum state of matter where the
electrons act in concert. A consequence is that electrons in a superconducting
state can flow without resistance, unlike those in copper and the metals from
which heating elements are made. The team will also investigate novel states of
electrons that emerge due to their interaction with the vibrations of the
crystalline lattice. The team will further pursue the consequences of
interactions of strongly interacting electrons with crystalline lattice
vibrations and investigate novel states that emerge when crystals are
illuminated by light. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another focus of the project is
helium, the second lightest element, which is in gas phase at room temperature.
At extremely low temperatures helium becomes a liquid that can be thought of as
a strongly interacting system of electrons, but without charge. At pressures
above 25 times the atmospheric pressure, it becomes a crystalline solid and,
like the liquid, displays intriguing properties consistent with the principles
of quantum mechanics applied to systems of many interacting particles. At
sufficiently low temperatures, liquid helium enters a state, called
superfluidity, which is the analog of superconductivity. The team will explore
striking properties of imperfect crystals of helium that arise as a consequence
of quantum mechanics and the light mass of helium atoms. These include the
frictionless transport of helium atoms through the solid and puzzling plastic
phenomena observed in experiments for which no satisfactory theoretical
explanations currently exist. The research team is well positioned to advance
knowledge in these challenging problems of fundamental and technological
interest, in part because the computational tools they have developed are well
suited for the investigation of systems with strongly interacting particles,
such as electrons in some classes of materials and helium atoms at extremely
cold temperatures and modest pressures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also
supports training graduate student and post-doctoral researchers in advanced
numerical techniques, quantum statistics, topical problems of condensed-matter
and atomic physics, and high-performance computing. This project also helps to
advance the Precision Many Body Physics Initiative which is aimed to facilitate
international collaboration in cutting edge research directed toward
understanding collective properties of matter, including quantum matter.
Activities planned within this context include: two major international
workshops, Focused Sessions at American Physical Society March Meetings, and
topical mini workshops at UMass Amherst.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research aimed at achieving a fundamental understanding of electronic and
transport properties of a variety of condensed matter systems through the use of
two state-of-the-art first-principles approaches to correlated quantum many-body
systems: Worm Algorithm (WA) and Diagrammatic Monte Carlo (DiagMC); both
introduced by the research team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the
project are: (i) DiagMC studies of Cooper instability in prototypical models of
correlated electrons: systems with Coulomb and electron-phonon interactions and
the repulsive Fermi-Hubbard model. (ii) DiagMC study of novel polaron states.
(iii) WA-based study of disorder-induced quantum physics in solid He-4. (iv) WA-
based study of novel exciton-photonic cooperative
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also supports training graduate
student and post-doctoral researchers in advanced numerical techniques, quantum
statistics, topical problems of condensed-matter and atomic physics, and high-
performance computing. This project also helps to advance the Precision Many
Body Physics Initiative which is aimed to facilitate international collaboration
in cutting edge research directed toward understanding collective properties of
matter, including quantum matter. Activities planned within this context
include: two major international workshops, Focused Sessions at American
Physical Society March Meetings, and topical mini workshops at UMass
Amherst.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.