* 2032097
* SBIR Phase I:  AK-423: A broad-spectrum antiviral and immunomodulatory agent (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Sherine Abdelmawla, Akanocure Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project stems from the development of an efficient
broad-spectrum antiviral agent addressing the current COVID-19 pandemic. The
approach can also address future outbreaks of other viruses. The project is
targeting the group of COVID-19 patients who will develop severe illness
featuring multiple organ dysfunction. Those patients need ICU units and
ventilators in amounts that can overwhelm the health care system. This project
will develop an antiviral agent to mitigate the social distancing measures and
improve quality of life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on the development AK-423, a potential
efficient antiviral and immunomodulatory agent against COVID-19. The technical
objectives focus on testing AK-423 (in-vitro and in-vivo) against COVID-19.
Recent reports suggest that the multi-organ damage that occurs during COVID-19
infection is characterized by an exaggerated inflammatory response indicative of
cytokine storm, auto-immunity, and a sepsis syndrome caused by complex abnormal
immune reactions. An ideal treatment would not only suppress viral replication
but would also regulate the abnormal immune response. AK-423 targets a host
metabolic process that the virus hijacks. It is also a key process in the
differentiation of lymphocytes. Inhibition of such process is proven to dampen
the immune response, minimize immune response-induced tissue damage, inhibit
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, and efficiently shut down viral
replication. This strategy will deliver an efficient broad-spectrum antiviral
agent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.