* 2032082
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Integrative Modeling of Intervention Serology and the Role of Shield Immunity in Reducing COVID-19 Epidemic Spread
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Joshua Weitz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 99,430.00

Developing intervention strategies that can reduce transmission and alleviate
the impacts of social distancing is an essential goal of near- and long-term
public health responses to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. This project combines
epidemic models of COVID-19 with serological testing modules to develop
actionable policies to robustly identify recovered individuals who have
protective antibodies to SARS-CoV-2019 as a means to (i) reduce infection
transmission; (ii) facilitate interaction substitution that can reduce
transmission risk (the basis for ‘shield immunity’); (iii) enable safer return
to normal economic activity. Findings from shield immunity modeling studies will
be released via open-source software, disseminated via policy-making documents
that guide the design, interpretation, and action-taking from serological
testing initiatives, and communicated with local, state, and national decision
makers (e.g. CDC) via rapid response reports. The project will help assess
feasibility of scaling up targeted serological testing and shield immunity-based
interventions for the public good and economic re-engagement. Additionally, this
project will provide training opportunities for graduate students and a
postdoctoral scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mitigation and suppression have
emerged as the primary means to control and contain local spread of COVID-19.
Public health interventions including lockdowns and shelter-in-place orders both
reduce infections and raise questions of sustainability and long-term tactics,
given the drastic consequences for socio-economic health and well-being. This
project expands intervention approaches by extending the conceptual and
practical foundations for ‘shield immunity’, i.e., the identification and
deployment of recovered individuals as focal points for sustaining safer
interactions via interaction substitution of otherwise risky contacts between
individuals of unknown disease status. This project evaluates the practical
potential of shield immunity by combining realistic scale-out of test capacity
and reliability into an integrated framework with explicit consideration of
individual status both with respect to disease status and with respect to
serological test status. Altogether, the research integrates epidemiological
dynamics, nonlinear dynamics, and statistical test analytics. The analysis of
combined effects of interaction substitution, test scale, and test reliability
will help inform efforts to prudently leverage information on seroconversion and
immunity to help control COVID-19 spread while facilitating the safer return of
individuals back to economic and social activities. This RAPID award is made by
the Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Disease Program in the Division of
Environmental Biology, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.