* 2032735
* RAPID: Healthcare Workforce Resilience in the Time of Covid-19
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Harris Solomon, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 102,272.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has created disaster conditions for healthcare in the US,
and has intensified the need for adaptive practices in healthcare work. The
pandemic has brought high patient loads, rapidly-changing expertise, and
shortages of personal protective equipment to hospitals, and consequently it
poses significant adaptive challenges for healthcare workers. This problem is
especially acute in intensive care units (ICUs), where the healthcare workforce
must alter how they interact with their peers and with patients' families while
working in close proximity to a contagious agent. Such changes are broadly
understood as "resilience." However, the specific conditions of adversity and
the creative responses healthcare workers may employ to adapt to them remain
underexplored. Understanding how these workers adapt, and how these adaptations
might promote resilience against adversity is critical to preventing the
transmission of COVID-19. A social scientific study of an ICU's pathways to
resilience can help researchers and policymakers understand what might promote
resilience, which is important for addressing the current conditions of the
COVID-19 pandemic, and for preparing for future possible
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in an intensive
care unit in a hospital in North Carolina, where the COVID-19 pandemic is now
beginning its localized peak. This is a key setting for research, because unlike
larger cities but similar to many smaller cities and rural areas, the severity
of cases in this study setting is predicted to maximize during the course of the
research activities. This will offer the researchers the opportunity to gather
detailed data about the dynamics of adaptive processes. The research will focus
on different groups of workers in the ICU, and will examine possibly unique
aspects to changing healthcare worker resilience practices, and how these social
practices might be affecting how people relate to the transmission and spread of
the virus. The study methods will include: (1) Semi-structured interviews
conducted with ICU staff that address perspectives on the pandemic, to
understand how workers perceive effects of the pandemic on their daily work
activities and on their relationships with patients and families; (2) Open-ended
interviews with a purposive sample of key decision-makers in the hospital, to
understand how and to what extent care worker perspectives factor into
guidelines and protocols; (3) Participant observation in the ICU to describe and
understand practices of care work; and (4) Discourse analysis of best-practice
materials circulated to staff in the hospital and in the ICU to track how
changes in the pandemic register with official protocols and media sources. The
multidisciplinary research time of an anthropologist and intensive care
physicians offers a uniquely diverse approach to document this under-examined
phenomenon of resilience among ICU workers, and to detail the social and
workforce aspects of the COVID-19 pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.