* 2032131
* RAPID: Using an abrupt and complete cessation of tourism to test the relationship between species traits, movement and connectivity for large carnivore guilds in three ecosystems.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Matthew Becker, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2023
* USD 207,194.00

Due to habitat loss, many wild animals now live in small, isolated populations.
Large predators are especially vulnerable because they always live in small
populations and often come into conflict with humans. Understanding how they
move in response to humans and how well they travel between populations
(“connectivity”) are high priorities for their conservation and management.
Scientists know that connectivity depends on features of the landscape -- for
example, where predators on the move can find food and temporary shelter.
Connectivity also depends on differences in behavior between species; some are
bolder or more aggressive than others. This project tests a new idea about how
movements of lions, hyenas, cheetahs and wild dogs are affected by human
activities and by interactions with one another. These species are well-suited
to test the new idea because they compete intensely with one another, occur
mainly in isolated protected areas, and can travel long distances between those
areas. Because COVID-19 has stopped all tourist activity in three protected
areas where these species occur, researchers have a unique opportunity to
collect data on how a large change in human presence affects these animals. The
researchers will compare the animals' behavior before and during the pandemic.
Documenting how differences between species affect their ability to move will
help to develop policies to maintain critical connections between populations in
an increasingly fragmented world. An additional benefit of this project is that
it will provide students with mentoring and international experiences in field
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In combination with existing long-term data, this
project will provide an unusual pseudo-experimental "difference in differences"
test of how a change in human activity alters previously observed differences
between species in their patterns of movement, and how these changes differ
between ecosystems. Tests with multiple species at a range of temporal scales,
across a set of ecosystems that differ in their pre-COVID intensity of human
use, will advance our understanding of the manner in which species’ traits
interact with human-affected landscapes to allow or prevent movement. Because
virtually all species are affected by interspecific competition and by
anthropogenic effects, our results will provide broad and generalizable advances
in the integration of species’ ecology into models of
connectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project comes from the
Population and Community Ecology program in the Division of Environmental
Biology and from the Behavioral Systems program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.