* 2032276
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Rapid Production of Geospatial Network Inputs for Spatially Explicit Epidemiological Modeling of COVID-19 in the USA
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Andrew MacDonald, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 02/29/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Dynamical computer models of disease transmission are used to understand and
predict how infectious diseases spread through host populations. Maps of
population distribution, mobility, and travel corridors are critical components
of many of these models. However, accurately determining the spatial
distribution of people is difficult because most sources of data (e.g., census)
indicate only approximately where people reside, rather than where they work and
go. Census data, in particular, are also aggregated in a way that provides fine
spatial detail only in densely populated urban areas. In suburban and rural
areas, census maps provide only the total number of people living in each census
unit (e.g., a U.S. county), but do not show where people live and work. This
research will fuse detailed satellite images of night light emitted from cities,
towns and travel corridors with census counts and mobility data to produce more
detailed population maps for epidemiologists to use to more accurately simulate
the transmission of communicable diseases like COVID-19. The proposed
collaboration will bring together expertise from geospatial dynamics and remote
sensing with disease ecology and epidemiology to produce boundary spanning
science with potential to advance both fields. Further, the proposed project
will support two early career scientists as well as undergraduate student
involvement in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When air and vehicle travel are
significantly reduced, the accuracy and detail of population movement and
spatial connectedness assumes greater importance for modeling epidemic spread.
Spatial networks derived from co-analysis of geospatial data (settlement and
infrastructure density from remotely sensed night light and population density
from census enumerations) can provide more accurate spatial domains than the
administrative units (e.g., counties) used to aggregate and analyze health data.
In addition, the structure and connectivity of these spatial networks can be
used to quantify fundamental parameters of network structure that influence
disease spread. This research will develop a progressively refined suite of
network maps for use with epidemiological models. The research team, composed of
geoscientists, disease ecologists and epidemiologists will develop a
standardized protocol with analytic procedures and tools for production of these
maps structured so as to be suited for quantitative spatiotemporal analysis of
SARS-CoV-2 infections in the U.S., including detailed analyses of the New York
and Los Angeles metro areas. Network flow parameters among population centers
will be estimated using agent-based modeling, establishing a complete geospatial
network consisting of population and mobility constraints within cities, and
population fluxes among cities. Population and network flow estimates will be
input directly into spatially explicit COVID-19 transmission models, and will be
abstracted into boundary conditions that can streamline future epidemiological
models. This RAPID award is made by the Ecology and Evolution of Infectious
Disease Program in the Division of Environmental Biology, using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.