* 2032273
* EAGER: Coronavirus infection of human lung epithelium and leukocytes: mechanisms and treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Rabindra Tirouvanziam, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2021
* USD 199,999.00

COVID-19, classified as a viral pandemic on 3/11/2020, has rapidly spread
globally and caused over 250,000 deaths worldwide by 5/5/2020. COVID-19 symptoms
range from mild fever and sore throat, to acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) and death. SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, avoids detection
by the body’s immune system and enters the epithelial cells lining the airways,
where it replicates and recruits a flood of immune cells, leading to what is
called a “cytokine storm.” This “storm” can inflame the tissues surrounding the
infection and eventually shut down breathing entirely. To date, basic studies on
virus entry, propagation, and drug testing use non-human, non-lung models, like
the Vero African green monkey kidney cell line, which severely limits efforts to
understand COVID-19 disease and develop therapies. To address this problem, the
objective of this project is to develop a platform emulating the human lung
environment to study how SARS-CoV-2 interacts with the lung epithelial cells and
with immune cells recruited to the lung and how therapies may modulate these
interactions to benefit patients. The approach makes use of a model that the
investigators have validated for studies of Cystic Fibrosis and Acute
Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS). The model features cultures of human
airway epithelium grown on scaffolds that enable virus exposure, immune cell
attraction and administration of existing drugs being considered for COVID-19
treatment. The platform developed will open broad opportunities for research not
only on SARS-CoV-2, but also on other conditions (e.g., respiratory viruses or
environmental exposures) that impact human lung physiology and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to engineer and
validate a novel technological platform emulating the human lung environment to
study how SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent of COVID-19 disease, interacts with
epithelial cells lining the lung and with leukocytes recruited to the lung in
response to infection, and how therapies may modulate these interactions to
benefit patients. Unique features of the life-like platform include: (1) the use
of human airway cells (both alveolar and bronchial epithelium) at ALI (Air-
Liquid Interface) to propagate the virus over several days which enables the
system to acquire the receptors and pathways relevant to human lung infections;
(2) the use of human blood leukocytes transmigrated at chosen timepoints during
infection, which is a key advantage over in vitro setups that use blood in lieu
of lung leukocytes or animal models; and (3) due to the inclusion of all key
components in the disease (virus, epithelium, leukocytes), the ability to assess
drugs for their effects on the whole system, regardless of their primary target.
The underlying hypothesis of the project is that SARS-CoV-2 causes pathology
upon infection of the human lung by delaying interferon signaling, allowing the
virus to infect monocytes, after which a breakdown in innate control occurs
resulting in a cytokine storm, and in turn, overwhelming neutrophil recruitment
and ARDS (Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome). The research is organized under
two Aims: (1) Determine the ability of the SARS-CoV-2 virus to enter and
replicate in human lung epithelial cells and lung-recruited leukocytes and (2)
Identify key pathways in human lung epithelial cells and lung-recruited
leukocytes that can be modulated by existing drugs to prevent disease, e.g.,
remdesivir, baricitinib, anti-lL-6, anakinra, as well as a combination of
remdesivir and baricitinibs which should impact both the virus and the
inflammation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.