* 2032469
* RUI/Collaborative Research: The Relative Importance of Alarm and Safety Communication Networks in an Amazonian Bird Community
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Ari Martinez, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 512,459.00

It has long been known that animals obtain information about threats from other
species, but there is a growing awareness that they also may obtain information
about safety from other species. Some Amazonian birds live and forage together
in close associations and are an ideal system to quantify the relative
importance of alarm and safety signaling. By capitalizing on ecological
gradients created by logging and development, which have reduced the number of
birds living together, this project will be among the first to compare and
contrast interspecific threat and safety networks and while doing so determine
how robust they are to anthropogenic challenges. These insights are
foundationally important to manage populations in an era of human modified
environmental changes, and these results will identify key behavioral mechanisms
that may ultimately be drivers for species interactions in diverse biological
communities. While doing so, this project will train students at the
undergraduate and graduate level and will generate a local academic bridge for
students from diverse backgrounds at California State University Long Beach, a
primarily undergraduate institution, and the University of California at Los
Angeles. Additionally, this project will generate inquiry-based lesson plans for
public schools in two California school districts as part of an ongoing outreach
effort stemming from research activities in Peru and present students with a
broader representation of diverse people as role models in science and to
demystify the scientific process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing
awareness that animals often benefit from the public information contained in
alarm signals produced by members of other species. While much research has
focused on mixed-species groups of related or similar species, some recent
examples illustrate how signals are also used between quite distinct taxonomic
groups. Despite the emphasis on eavesdropping on alarm signals, animals also
acquire information about safety by eavesdropping on the non-threat-related
sounds produced by other species. Understanding the interplay between alarm
signals and cues of safety within the public information landscape is essential
to understand the role of communication in shaping species interactions within
groups and how this influences the larger community. This project will study the
roles of mixed-species flocks of Amazonian birds in community-wide alarm and
safety eavesdropping networks along a gradient of forest degradation. Results
will identify the relative importance of these networks and how robust these
systems are to the loss of individual species. These insights are foundationally
important to predict how biological communities may change across human modified
environmental changes, and these results will identify key behavioral mechanisms
that may ultimately be drivers for species interactions in diverse biological
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.