* 2032664
* Collaborative Research: ECO-CBET: Methane Conversion by Merging Atmospheric Plasma with Transition-Metal Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ryan Hartman, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,058,136.00

Methane is the primary component of natural gas and represents an abundant,
alternative chemical feedstock to petroleum. Methane is also a potent greenhouse
gas, so excess natural gas from oil fields is flared in order to avoid releasing
methane into the atmosphere. Converting natural gas and excess methane into
liquid fuels and chemicals would be an efficient way to use natural resources
and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. This conversion is challenging, however,
when utilizing conventional thermal processes. Low temperature plasma reactor
technology is an enticing tool for natural gas methane valorization to fuels and
chemicals given its capability to activate hydrocarbons at much lower
temperature than thermal processes. Not only does this bring potential to
improve rates, but also opens the door to more desirable product selectivity.
Despite its allure, practical implementation has been impeded by the complexity
of the chemical, physical, and transport processes underlying the technology.
This research project studies the valorization of natural gas using catalytic
processes conducted in atmospheric plasmas. Little is known about the catalytic
conversion of methane in plasmas, so understanding this process could translate
into more sustainable chemical routes for methane conversion. The research
project will be integrated with educational activities that train students to
engineer solutions for sustainable energy, a future without pollution and waste,
and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project
aims to combine two technologies, plasma-promoted methane activation and
transition-metal catalysis, to address methane valorization. The physical
properties and chemical reactivity of atmospheric methane plasma are not well
understood, nor are subsequent reactions of plasma products with transition
metal complexes. Microfluidics techniques will be employed to generate plasmas
with controllable properties. Then, experiments will be performed to probe the
reactivity of plasmas with organic radical acceptors, to understand how plasmas
interact with both organic radical acceptors and organometallic complexes, and
to explore carbon-carbon and carbon-nitrogen bond formation in methane plasmas.
The ultimate objective is to quantify the reactivity of plasmas with organic
radical acceptors and transition metal complexes in order to convert methane
into larger alkanes, substituted arenes, and amine compounds. Scale-up and
intrinsic energy efficiency present potential challenges to the implementation
of plasma-assisted chemical conversion processes. This study will uncover novel
approaches for increasing methane reactivity and product selectivity to levels
needed for translating fundamental findings into industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.