* 2032712
* EAGER: Rapid Identification of Anti-diabetic Agents Which Influence SARS-CoV-2 Entry in Adipocytes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Rajesh Khare, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2022
* USD 160,000.00

The emergence of COVID-19, the disease caused by CoV-2 (coronavirus-2), has
created a large global outbreak and an unprecedented health crisis. Without
effective vaccines or therapies, there is an urgent need for strategies for
prevention or treatment of CoV-2 infection and for minimizing, when possible,
the effects of health related issues that make a person more likely to have
severe symptoms and complications. One high risk group are those with type 2
diabetes (TB2 = adult onset diabetes) and obesity (approximately 85% of people
with TB2) who are taking anti-diabetes drugs that may be increasing their
COVID-19 susceptibility by stimulating the receptors (ACE2) on the surfaces of
adipose/fat cells that allow CoV-2 entry. Some, but not all, anti-diabetes drugs
increase ACE2 expression, and the effect of all anti-diabetes drugs on ACE2
expression is unknown. Thus, the goal of this project is to use computer
simulations and experiments to determine the effect of key anti-diabetic agents
on ACE2 expression and to test the hypothesis that the anti-diabetes drugs that
increase ACE2 expression facilitate CoV-2 entry. While the obesity status of
COVID-19 infected individuals cannot be changed rapidly, their diabetes
medication can rapidly be switched to a safer option, which may save many lives.
This project will also provide an outstanding interdisciplinary
training/learning opportunity for a graduate student from Chemical Engineering
department and for a post-doctoral fellow from Nutritional Sciences, and the
investigatorsâ€™ access to patients with obesity and diabetes and health care
providers will enable a portal for societal outreach to disseminate relevant
findings of this study in the West Texas region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to determine the effect of key anti-diabetic agents on the
expression of ACE2 (Angiotensin Converting Enzyme 2) receptors, which control
the entry of C0V-2 (the virus responsible COVID-19) into adipose cells and to
test the hypothesis that anti-diabetes drugs that increase ACE2 expression
facilitate CoV-2 infection. The project is motivated by several key
observations: 1) that COVID-19-related mortality is greater in people with
obesity and type 2 diabetes (T2D); 2) that ACE2 is present in adipocytes as well
as lung alveolar epithelial cells (the preferred target of CoV-2); 3) that
overexpression of ACE2 can facilitate CoV-2 entry and subsequent severity of
infection; and 4) that some, but not all, anti-diabetes drugs increase ACE2
expression. The Research Plan is organized under two aims. The FIRST Aim is to
use molecular modeling to test the efficacy of CoV-2 infection in the presence
of anti-diabetic agents. The base model system for these simulations consists of
the Spike protein located on the surface of CoV-2 and the ACE2 cell surface
receptor to which it binds to enable viral entry. Models will be developed to
compare the energetics and the mechanism and to characterize the rate of
CoV-2-spike protein to ACE2 receptor binding in the presence of different anti-
diabetic drugs. Of particular interest are those drugs known to upregulate ACE2,
e.g., pioglitazone, SGLT-inhibitor, and liraglutide. The SECOND Aim is to test
cellular validation of molecular modeling in the presence of anti-diabetic
agents. The drug targets identified by molecular modeling in Aim 1 will be
validated using human adipose-derived stromal/stem cells (hASC) and human lung
epithelial cells (A549 line) as a positive control. Studies are designed to
identify anti-diabetic drugs that do or do not promote CoV-2 infection in cells
and to test the anti-diabetic efficacy of the drugs that do not promote CoV-2
infection. Results obtained from this project are expected to provide new
insights into how certain anti-diabetic drugs increase the expression of ACE2
receptor and promote cellular entry of CoV-2 virus as well as identify anti-
diabetic drugs that do not promote CoV-2 entry into the cells and maintain their
anti-diabetic efficacy despite the presence of the
virus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.