* 2032910
* RII Track-4: Improving Understanding of River Flood Dynamics by Relating Flow and Sediment Movement to Shapes of River Dunes in three dimensions
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Robert Mahon, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 224,104.00

Much of the world’s population and commerce exist along river corridors. The
sustainability of human settlements and the impacts they have on their
environments are inextricably tied to river flood and sediment dynamics.
Bedforms, migrating mounds of sand such as ripples and dunes, are a primary
feature observed on the bottom of dynamic river systems. Their geometries and
motions are closely tied to river flow and sediment transport and each one
influences the other in complex feedback loops. Direct measurement of all
components of these coupled feedbacks is challenging in modern rivers and
difficult to interpret in their ancient sedimentary deposits, hindering
complete, understanding over long timescales. Over a century of study has
attempted to relate bedform shapes, motions, and ancient deposits to the flow
and sediment transport conditions that form them. Much of this effort has
focused on two-dimensional frameworks. This project establishes a new set of
experimental and field techniques in a collaborative setting for collecting
coupled measurements of flow, sediment transport, and bedform evolution in three
dimensions. In so doing, this work will expand the physical and intellectual
capacity of the University of New Orleans to address problems in sediment
transport research that extend beyond the scope of this project. This expanded
capacity will broaden participation and serve the diverse university community
as well as the southeastern region by establishing a highly capable sediment
transport facility with state-of-the-art methods at a highly diverse public
university in New Orleans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bedforms are a primary
observable feature of sediment transport systems. Their geometries and
kinematics (motions) are closely coupled to the dynamics (forces) of flow and
sediment transport. As such, bedforms and their stratal elements are key to
understanding river conditions, past and present. Flow and sediment transport
conditions in sand-bed alluvial systems are tightly coupled to the kinematics of
bedforms. Bedforms serve to transport bed material sediment, and their forms
extract momentum from the flow in alluvial river systems. Understanding their
geometry and behavior can inform models that evaluate bed material flux and
shear stress partitioning in modern river systems, as well as enhance
interpretation of ancient fluvial strata. This project seeks to build capacity,
establish lab protocols, and collect data to address three independent
hypotheses: First, that cross-stream, relative to downstream, bedload particle
excursion length and velocity increase with increasing turbulent energetics of
the flow; second, that increasing probabilities of cross-stream particle
collisions enable the establishment of three-dimensionality of bedform
topography; and third, that turbulent characteristics of flow, namely shear
velocity, can be inverted from three-dimensionality of bedforms and the
curvature of cross set bounding surfaces in stratigraphy. A complete assessment
of these hypotheses will enhance the ability to forward model bedform geometries
and kinematics based on flow and sediment transport conditions. This will
bolster inverse models used to quantitatively interpret past sediment transport
and flow conditions based on observations of stratigraphy. In collaboration with
researchers at the University of California, Santa Barbara, this fellowship will
address both regionally and nationally relevant problems of river flood
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.