* 2032819
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapidly Deployable Virus Adsorbing Face Mask Coating to Reduce COVID-19 Transmission
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Gregory Newbloom, Membrion, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of the Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) project is the reduction of viral transmission of the novel
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) and other viral pathogens. The ongoing COVID-19
pandemic has killed hundreds of thousands with widespread disruption to economic
and healthcare systems. Face masks have been shown to play a critical role in
reducing coronavirus transmission. However, cloth masks do a poor job protecting
the wearer from exposure and effective alternatives (i.e., N95 respirators) are
in short supply for front-line workers and the public, creating an urgent need
for a low-cost, safe, effective, and simple coating technology that reduces
virus transmission. This project will develop a coating that can be applied
directly to a face mask or mask insert. Beyond COVID-19, future coating
compositions could be tuned to address new viral outbreaks. Furthermore,
respiratory protection via coatings or filter inserts are likely to be in high
demand given the increased awareness from the current crisis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop molecular
coatings with amphoteric properties to enhance virus adsorption from water-based
aerosols. Ion exchange (IEX) materials are commonly used in aqueous environments
as effective virus adsorbents because of pH tunable electrostatic affinity.
However, these design principles have not been translated to a face mask coating
because commercially available IEX materials: 1) utilize hazardous chemicals
that require complex and centralized production, 2) lack tunability for
adsorption in a fixed pH environment (i.e., human breath), and 3) typically
absorb water which is detrimental to the respiratory protection of a mask. This
project will overcome these limitations through the design of a heterogeneous
surface coating. The coating composition will be optimized to promote
electrostatic virus adsorption under breathing conditions (i.e., pH ~ 7.7) while
simultaneously enhancing hydrophobicity to minimize aerosol penetration through
a porous mask. The key technical hurdles addressed by the proposed research are:
1) formation of a single phase coating solution, 2) coating application and
optimization of amphoteric properties for selective adsorption, 3) achieving an
increase viral protection factor of 2× or higher, and 4) assessing cradle-to-
grave safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.