* 2032054
* RAPID: Understanding the Effects of Glycosylation on Spike Vulnerabilities and the Host Range of SARS-CoV-2
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Rommie Amaro, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,910.00

The COVID-19 pandemic is caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, a virus whose structure
has not been fully characterized. The spike protein of the virus is believed to
play a key role in infection. In this work computer simulations will be used to
understand the role of sugar molecules that normally are present on the outside
of host cells on the binding to host cells and the infectivity of the virus.
Simulations will examine host cell membranes from species that include humans,
cats, ferrets and other non-human primates in order to better understand the
differences between virus transmission in different species. These simulations
will provide information that is not currently accessible through experiment.
The simulations and data sharing capabilities developed in this work will
improve responsiveness against future pandemics. Additionally, the project will
provide a training for two postdoctoral fellows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will use MD (molecular dynamics) computational methodology together
with experimental data, to build and simulate biologically realistic conditions
for the SARS-CoV-2 virus spike protein, alone, and also in complex with various
forms of the ACE2 receptor and host cell membrane components. The aim is to
determine areas of spike protein vulnerabilities as well as understand the
effects of glycosylation on the structure and function of the SARS-CoV-2
infection machinery. The simulations will include ACE2 receptors in cats,
ferrets, and other nonhuman primates to understand the molecular underpinnings
of virus host range and transmissibility. The proposed research will provide a
more complete understanding of the SARS-CoV-2 infection machinery and the
molecular constituents with which it interacts at different host cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Molecular Biophysics
Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, using funds from
the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.