* 2032653
* SBIR Phase I:  Antiviral Activity of Novel Nitrogen-Doped, Carbon Supported Catalysts Against Covid-19 Surrogates
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Franchessa Sayler, ThruPore Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project would be to slow the spread of viruses indoors,
mitigating the need for social distancing. Microbes and viruses do not survive
on specific surfaces. This project will explore if special nanoparticles can be
used to kill viruses, such as that which causes COVID-19. This would help slow
contagion and protect indoor spaces. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project proposes to determine if carbon supported nanoparticles can
destructively deactivate SARS-CoV-2 under biologically realistic conditions.
This project will explore novel nitrogen-doped carbon supports loaded with
catalytic nanoparticles to destructively interact with SARS-CoV-2. Nitrogen in
carbonaceous materials interacts with viruses and can increase performance in
catalytic chemical reactions; however, to date this has not been leveraged at
scale. In this project, three different types of nitrogen-doped carbon supports
will be produced and compared against two state-of-practice carbon supports.
Each support will have four different catalytic nanoparticles attached and then
will be tested for efficacy. These catalysts will be compared on their ability
to destroy coronavirus surrogates using an ASTM standardized test for evaluating
medical mask efficiency. Once a suitable combination of catalyst support and
catalytic nanoparticles is determined, the solution and process can be
optimized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.