* 2032730
* A Novel Bioimpedance Sensor for Intracellular Hemoglobin Analysis in Single Sickle Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* E Du, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 402,698.00

Sickle cell disease is an inherited red blood cell disorder that affects
hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying protein inside the red blood cells. Sickle
hemoglobin is the fundamental cause of abnormalities in sickle cell shape,
deformability and blood flow behavior, leading to various symptoms and
complications. Variabilities in complications and disease severity are expected
over time. A major challenge in understanding the extreme heterogeneities of
sickle cell disease is the inability to measure the sickle hemoglobin within the
single sickle cells. This research aims to overcome this challenge by developing
a microfabricated sensor that can measure the amount of abnormal sickle
hemoglobin without breaking down cell membranes. This interdisciplinary project
provides research training to women and underrepresented minority students, in
biosensing, cell biophysics, microfabrication, and microfluidics. The research
findings and technological development are incorporated into course development
and disseminated to students at undergraduate and graduate levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sickle cell disease is known for its extreme
heterogeneities in cell morphology, deformability, hemorheology, and severity of
clinical symptoms and complications, which are linked to the intracellular
hemoglobin variations. This project develops a microfluidics-based single-cell
assay of intracellular sickle hemoglobin, using a sequential bioimpedance
sensing of sickle cells under controlled oxygen levels in a microflow cytometry
setting. Integration of hypoxic microenvironment with impedance sensing allows
selective measurement of intracellular sickle hemoglobin variant from the
induced cell sickling process in single cells. Three research objectives
include: (i) establishment of a bioimpedance analysis of hemoglobin solution;
(ii) design and development of a sequential impedance sensing of sickle cells
under low and high oxygen levels; (iii) modeling of single cell bioimpedance and
method validation for characterization of cell volume, membrane and
intracellular hemoglobin composition from the multi-frequency impedance signal
of single sickle cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.