* 2032072
* RAPID: Comparative CRISPR Genetic Screens to Understand Zoonotic Transmission of  SARS-CoV-2
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2021
* WILLIAM MCDOUGALL, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 12/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

To date the COVID-19 pandemic has infected over 3,000,000 people and resulted in
approximately 200,000 deaths worldwide. Viruses rely upon their target cells to
provide the proper machinery for their life cycle. Seeing as the coronavirus
(SARS-CoV-2) responsible for COVID-19 can infect both bats and humans, this
project aims to identify common and unique molecular interactions required for
infection in both organisms. In response to the NSF’s “Dear Colleague Letter”
this proposal uses cutting-edge genetic tools such as CRISPR/Cas9 to gain
knowledge about cellular factors needed for virus replication. Throughout the
course of this research, genetic tools to identify these interactions in bat
cells will be created, providing a resource for any researcher who wishes to
study these interactions further. This information will also inform researchers
on the specific interactions necessary for coronavirus replication that are
common between bat and human cells, providing a framework to fully understand
this SARS-CoV-2, in addition to future, undiscovered pathogens. Molecular
interactions that are unique to bat and human cell lines provide insight into
what interactions are overcome for survival in multiple species and also may
provide insight into how an infection can be benign in one species (bats) and
cause disease in another (humans). This project will discover new knowledge
essential to coronavirus biology, providing the basis for future in depth
studies. In addition to increasing knowledge about SARS-CoV-2 biology, this
proposal also supports the training of a post-doctoral fellow, broadening
participation in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The zoonotic transmission of SARS-
CoV-2 from the horseshoe bat to humans represents a large question in
coronavirus biology. What are the host-virus interactions and cellular pathways
in common between bats and humans that allow for efficient replication and virus
survival in both species? To answer this question, CRISPR/Cas9 will be used to
effectively knockout every gene in both bat and human cell lines to identify
genes are required for coronavirus replication in each cell line. While
CRISPR/Cas9 is a powerful genetic tool, currently these tools are limited to the
study of human and murine models, representing a significant challenge for the
study of viral replication in bat cell lines. A novel computational pipeline
named “MerryCRISPR” will be used to design bat CRISPR reagents and subsequently
build the tools necessary for this work. The combination of whole host genome-
viral interactions studies studied in parallel in both bat and human cell lines
will provide the necessary information to build functional and comprehensive
host-coronavirus interaction maps in addition to identifying species-specific
interactions. Collectively, these studies will provide the basis for future
interrogation of specific and unique host-coronavirus interactions, informing
researchers on the essential biology of coronaviruses. This RAPID award is made
by the Physiological and Structural Systems Cluster in the BIO Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief,
and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.