* 2032384
* RAPID: Infection Transmission of COVID19 in Urban Neighborhoods
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* J. Lee Hargraves, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 05/31/2021
* USD 199,718.00

Though most coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic has focused on the international
and national levels, it necessarily unfolds also at the local level. Recent
reports reveal that in many American cities the coronavirus is having
disproportionate impacts on neighborhoods that are historically disadvantaged.
This project will identify disparities in infection rates by examining how
residents of different neighborhoods have varied in their ability and tendency
to practice social distancing during the pandemic. While most research on how
infection proceeds through communities focuses on international transmission, we
expand this understanding to how it progresses through the finer geospatial
scale of communities in a metropolitan area. This research will provide
critical, replicable insights for not only the effectiveness of social
distancing policies, but their equitability in diminishing infection rates
across communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The consequences of disasters are often
influenced by where one lives (i.e., neighborhood effects). A pandemic
introduces the additional ingredient of network diffusion through interactions
both within and between neighborhoods. This study synthesizes these two
perspectives to understand how COVID19 infections spread through a city’s
neighborhoods, leading to differential infection rates. The project will conduct
a survey on social distancing practices and attitudes and exposure to infection
leveraging the existing survey of Boston residents called BEACON. The survey
responses will be cross-referenced with flows of movement across neighborhoods
from cellphone-generated records; diagnosis records; and a list of neighborhood
geographic features curated by the Boston Area Research Initiative. This project
will enable tests of a four-part causal model, with neighborhood characteristics
influencing social distancing practices, which in turn shape the mobility flows
of the city, which then drive the network diffusion of infection. The results
will be critical as cities around the world continue to manage the current
pandemic while also preparing for similar crises in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.