* 2032709
* CCSS: Brain Network Analysis Using Communication Theory
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Tongtong Li, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 563,049.00

The brain is a communication network, and connectivity between the brain regions
generates our minds. Along with improvements in data-gathering techniques, brain
researchers are increasingly relying on advanced computational tools to analyze
large, complex data sets. At the same time, driven by the revolution in
information theory, the communications area has accumulated rich methodologies
for system modeling, signal extraction and analysis. Driven by the convergence
of information theory and neuroscience, this project aims to develop new
techniques for brain analysis by exploiting advanced tools in communications.
The new technologies resulted from this project can expand and deepen our
understanding of brain functions and performances, and can be applied directly
to the diagnosis and treatment of age-related dementia; moreover, by integrating
these new technological advances into the undergraduate/graduate curricula and
outreach activities, this project has significant impacts on the training of a
highly skilled and diverse workforce for communications and computational
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop
innovative methods for quantitative, information-theoretic modeling and
characterization of brain connectivity, neuronal activity level, capacities and
stability, and to explore the applications of these new techniques in
understanding brain functions and human behavioral responses. More specifically,
(i) this project introduces an information conservation framework for individual
brain regions; for the first time in literature, the neuronal activity level of
a brain region is related to its information processing capacity; (ii) this
project establishes the conditional equivalence between directed information and
dynamic causal modeling, and provides a information-theoretic framework for
brain causality analysis; (iii) this project introduces new approaches for
quantitative characterization of the stability of individual brain regions, and
makes it possible to investigate how brain stability and capacities impact the
human behavioral response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.