* 2032257
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: A Case Study of Jaketown Social Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Tristram Kidder, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 26,992.00

Hunter-gatherers are thought to live in small groups with no formal leaders.
However, recent research indicates that hunter-gatherers in the past had a
variety of forms of leadership and ways of organizing themselves. Within this
broader context this project will use the scale and pace of earthen mound
building at a site in Mississippi as a proxy for understanding the extent of
leadership required to construct labor intensive monuments. The monumental
landscape presents an ideal case study for hunter-gatherer socio-political
organization, and specifically the relationships between leadership, planning,
mound building, and the Native histories that led to the remarkable Poverty
Point phenomenon. The Jaketown site is a registered National Historic Place and
learning more about the social organization of the extraordinary Poverty Point
culture and the monuments they left behind will add to the already significant
heritage value of the site. Furthermore, the research team is committed to
collaborating with the Chickasaw and Choctaw tribes in generating and sharing
knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will excavate three mounds.
Using standard archaeological methods augmented with geoarchaeological
approaches, they will recover stratigraphic evidence and artifacts, including
material for radiocarbon dating, that will allow them to explore how quickly
these mounds were built, and if they were built at the same time. If the mounds
were built quickly and simultaneously it suggests planning and leadership.
Building multiple mounds quickly requires effort and coordination that that
surpasses the capability of a household; some person or persons need to mobilize
the labor, direct the work, and ensure resources were available to
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.