* 2032122
* RAPID: Investigating the impact of online internships in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Matthew Hora, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 12/31/2021
* USD 145,000.00

Researchers at the University of Wisconsin-Madison’s Center for Research on
College-Workforce Transitions will partner with Parker Dewey to generate a
robust mixed-methods dataset about the impact of online internships on student
progression. Internships, mandated by many STEM academic programs, are a form of
work-based learning that can lead to academic and workforce success for
undergraduate and graduate students. Traditional face-to-face internships also
can enhance students’ social networks and technical and transferrable
professional skills. However, the COVID-19 pandemic has made face-to-face
internships untenable for many workplaces, with stay-at-home orders and social
distancing requirements, resulting in a large influx of college students to
vendors such as Parker Dewey seeking these opportunities. However, there is
little research on the quality of online or micro-internships, and higher
education professionals have little knowledge about their students’ experiences
with these new forms of work-based learning and their subsequent impact on
students’ career and academic development. This study will fill this need by
contributing both new empirical insights on online internships as well as
actionable knowledge to inform faculty and career advisors’ decision making
about students’ internship opportunities during and beyond the pandemic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine the following research questions:
(1) What are the demographic characteristics of past (2015 to early 2020) and
current online interns? (2) What types of tasks and mentoring are experienced by
online interns? (3) What is the impact of an online internship on student career
and academic development, professional networks, and transferable skills? and,
(4) What are the prospects for online internships to adopt innovations in
virtual simulations to enhance the internship experience? These questions will
be answered through three distinct yet inter-related studies that include
analyses of Parker Dewey’s past student participants (n=1,500), surveys
(n=2,500) and interviews (n=50) with current Parker Dewey program participants,
and interviews with employers in STEM-related fields (n=25) regarding the format
of internship programs amidst the COVID-19 pandemic. Thus, the research
leverages the strengths of large-scale survey data and the more fine-grained
“insider” perspective of qualitative data. The study will be the first empirical
study of online internships and represents a significant contribution to the
fields of experiential learning and workforce development. Given the likelihood
that online internships and some form of social distancing will continue,
generating rapid scientifically rigorous findings on this topic is a time-
sensitive concern for U.S. higher education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID
award is made by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program in the Division of Graduate
Education/Directorate of Education and Human Resources, using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act. ECR supports
fundamental research focused on STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.