* 2032772
* Group Support Grant for IEEE/CVF CVPR 2020 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Richard Souvenir, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2021
* USD 22,500.00

This award supports the participation of students from US-based institutions in
the Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) 2020, which will be held virtually due to COVID-19. CVPR is
the premier annual conference in computer vision with over 9000 participants
from all over the world. The award helps the career development of some of the
brightest junior researchers in computer vision to increase the number of active
researchers and educators in STEM and ensures that the computer vision
community, through its recent graduates, makes fast advances in solving problems
that will benefit society as a whole. The Doctoral Consortium aims to have
representation from a diverse group of participants in terms of gender, ethnic
background, academic institution, and geographic location.

NSF support covers some of the costs for 40 selected US-based graduate students
to participate in the Doctoral Consortium and CVPR conference. The Doctoral
Consortium highlights the work of senior PhD students who are within six months
of receiving their degrees (including recent graduates) and gives these students
an opportunity to discuss their research and career options with faculty and
researchers who have relevant expertise and experience. The opportunity to
receive advice on their research work and career plans from experts from
different institutions is particularly important due to the uncertainty of job
prospects and disruption of traditional networking and recruiting events caused
by COVID-19. Participants and recipients of support are selected by the 2020
CVPR Doctoral Consortium Chair. The support covers admissible conference-related
costs such as registration. This year's Doctoral Consortium features a poster
session, one-on-one mentoring, and panel discussion, all held virtually. These
components were introduced in past doctoral consortiums and were well received.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.