* 2032523
* RAPID: Community Cooperation in Response to the Covid-19 Pandemic.
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Frederick Weil, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 106,668.00

&lt;p&gt;In most major disasters, people in communities come together to respond
to the challenges. The COVID-19 pandemic is a major disaster, but a pandemic is
different because it turns the usual face-to-face community cooperation itself
into a source of threat, namely, the risk of infection. This project addresses a
novel question: What new forms of cooperation do people develop when they cannot
easily come together in traditional ways? The project will study community
leaders and residents in the city of New Orleans and state of Louisiana, places
with much experience in responding to disasters, but which have consequently
developed significant traditions of innovation. The project will identify (a)
innovative strategies that community leaders are pursuing in response to the
pandemic and economic dislocations - which, notably, emphasize synergies of
mutual assistance under conditions of social distancing - and (b) the impact
that the pandemic and the economic downturn are having on the general public:
how people respond to the new initiatives, and how well assistance is getting
through. The project will identify best practices and promising innovations that
can be shared with other communities, thus informing community leaders
nationwide who can formulate and implement new policies to facilitate recovery,
thus promoting safety and security in our society.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;This
project investigates what new forms of cooperation people develop in the face of
disaster when they cannot easily come together in traditional ways. It uses two
sets of qualitative directed, open-ended, in-depth interviews. First, the
project will interview about 15-30 community leaders in New Orleans, a city with
broad experience in community response to disasters, building on project
leaders' extensive contacts with community leaders, developed over 15 years of
research and continually updated. Second, the project will use Louisiana State
University (LSU) undergraduates to interview about 100-200 friends and family in
the general public about their life conditions in the time of the pandemic. The
diversity of LSU students will be leveraged to obtain a diverse, qualitative
sample across income, race, gender, and age lines. The project will conduct
three waves of interviews with each group over a 12 month period, following the
course of the pandemic over that time. The project will analyze these in-depth
interviews using qualitative data analysis software, seeking themes and patterns
of community response. Findings will contribute to sociological theories on
disasters and community organization.&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Sociology Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;/p&gt; &lt;p&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.&lt;/p&gt;