* 2032532
* Collaborative Research: Fingerprinting Energy and Water Cycle Extremes through a Scale-Interaction Lens
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Yi Deng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2024
* USD 462,376.00

Extreme weather events such as heat waves, cold air outbreaks (CAOs), droughts,
and heavy precipitation commonly cause disruptions over regions the size of the
northern midwest or the southern great plains. These extremes are generally
embedded in large-scale meterological patterns (LMPs). For instance a drought
might occur within a high-pressure center which is part of a pattern of highs
and lows originating over the North Pacific and extending across the continental
US. The LMPs may in turn be generated or influenced by planetary-scale climate
modes (PCMs) such as El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events and the Arctc
Oscillation (AO). Thus efforts to understand and predict extreme weather events,
or to anticipate changes in their frequency and intensity due to climate change,
must consider the events from a multi-scale perspective that recognizes the
interplay of regional, continental, and planetary scales that contribute to
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work performed here seeks to develop a comprehensive
suite of multi-scale metrics, or "fingerprints", for characterizing the
atmospheric processes responsible for regional extreme weather events. Once the
fingerprints are developed they are used to determine the dynamical mechanisms
through which larger-scale processes lead to, or strongly influence, the
regional extremes. The research also uses the fingerprints and subsequent
dynamical analysis to assess the realism of climate model simulations of
regional extremes and their associations with LMPs and PCMs. One analysis
technique uses the the tendency equation for geopotential height in a two-layer
quasi-geostrophic model to identify "optimal modes", meaning wave patterns which
are optimally shaped to extract energy from the mean flow to achieve rapid
growth over a few days. Prior work by the Principle Investigators (PIs) and
their collaborators used this approach to show that planetary-scale circulation
anomalies can alter the mean state in a way that promotes the growth of an
optimal mode that promotes CAOs. Additional prior work links the long-term
reduction in the summertime equator-to-pole temperature contrast to a reduction
in frontal weather systems over North America, which in turn promotes dryer and
warmer summers in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of societal as well
as scientific interest given the disruptions caused by extreme weather. The
project supports a graduate student and a postdoctoral research fellow, thereby
developing the future workforce in this research area. The PI at Georgia Tech
works with the Center for Education Integrating Science, Mathematics and
Computing (CEISMC), which conducts K-12 outreach in Atlanta-area schools and
organizes summer workshops focused on underrepresented students. The PI at
Florida State University works with undergraduate students to produce long-range
forecasts of continental-scale CAOs, which have been used by stakeholders from
the agriculture, energy, and water sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.