* 2032158
* RAPID: Development of online-based research experiences to mitigate the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on undergraduate biology education
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Carly Jordan, Widener University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2022
* USD 198,979.00

RAPID: Development of online-based research experiences to mitigate the negative
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on undergraduate biology
education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in a shift to
online learning for undergraduate educators on an unprecedented scale. This
project will support the accelerated development and use of online digitized
Natural History Collections (dNHC) to substitute for laboratory and field-based
research projects that have been lost as a result of the pandemic.
Implementation of dNHC-enabled online courses will engage hundreds to thousands
of students at the introductory and advanced level. This approach is known to
increase engagement, retention, and long-term success in undergraduates.
Embedding research experiences in biology coursework is especially important for
low income, first-generation, and minority undergraduate students who may be
unable to dedicate time to research outside their normal course load due to
personal and financial barriers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Rapid grant is
dedicated to bringing together undergraduate educators, natural history
collections professionals, data professionals, and collections researchers to
support the development and implementation of online Course-based Undergraduate
Research Experiences (CUREs) using dNHC data for the 2020-2021 academic year.
Extensive NSF-funded digitization of biological collections has created millions
of specimen records on publicly-available data portals, resulting in unique and
innovative opportunities for collections research. Using these resources in
CUREs provides teaching and research opportunities to students and educators and
requires only a computer, internet access, and time. Online CUREs using dNHCs
are perfectly positioned to fill the gap in ecology and evolution research
experiences as students lose access to laboratories and field sites. Teams of
undergraduate educators and collections professionals will collaborate to
develop teaching materials, course syllabi, and instructor guides to support the
implementation of online dNHC CUREs in fall 2020 and beyond. This RAPID will
recruit a diverse group of CURE developers and implementers and support members
with collaboration and training opportunities. Faculty members who teach high
proportions of underrepresented minorities and first-generation college students
will be especially encouraged to participate, and resources created through this
process will be widely disseminated to guide and support future dNHC CURE
development. This RAPID award is made by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI) using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.