* 2032649
* Robust Network-level Inference from Neuronal Data Underlying Behavior
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Behtash Babadi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

Individual neurons are highly unreliable computational units in isolation, due
to their drastic trial-to-trial response variability. Yet, when they act
together as a network, they result in robust brain function and precise
behavioral outcomes. The advent of large-scale neural recording technologies,
such as two-photon calcium imaging, has created a paradigm shift by enabling
scientists and engineers to study the activity of large populations of neurons
in order to decipher how they collectively encode information from the external
world and distill them to elicit robust behavior. In order to fully utilize
these data, computationally efficient and mathematically principled techniques
for robust network-level inference are required. The research objective of this
proposal is to develop such methodologies to infer network-level characteristics
of ensemble neuronal activity from two-photon imaging data, and to apply these
methods to large-scale recordings in order to reveal the computational
principles that underlie sensory processing and behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approaches include: developing a robust
framework for joint inference of the intrinsic and stimulus-driven correlations
of neuronal activity, designing a functional taxonomy to characterize the
relevance of neuronal activity to sensory processing and behavioral outcomes,
and constructing an estimation framework for capturing the dynamics and
functional relevance of higher-order synchronous neuronal activity. This project
addresses several outstanding challenges faced by existing methodologies,
including biased network characterization incurred by two-stage analysis
pipelines, intermixing the contributions of exogenous and endogenous processes
to collective neuronal activity, and studying sensory processing and behavioral
elicitation as disjoint problems. By employing two-photon calcium imaging data
from mice and zebrafish, the proposed modeling and estimation framework will be
used to investigate several fundamental problems in systems neuroscience such as
tonotopic diversity in the auditory cortex, interaction of sensory processing
and decision-making, and visuo-motor coordination. The project is expected to
impact technology by providing signal processing solutions to be used in neural
control and neuromorphic systems. The research is also integrated with
educational and outreach activities including high school level workshops,
undergraduate involvement in research, and course
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.