* 2032483
* Understanding Dislocation Motion and Plasticity via First Principles Simulations Towards Manufacturing of High Ductility Magnesium Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Qi An, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 469,200.00

This grant supports fundamental research that facilitates manufacturing of
ductile magnesium alloys. Magnesium alloys are the lightest structural materials
and they are desirable for automotive and aerospace applications where improved
energy efficiency becomes increasingly crucial. However, the limited room
temperature ductility of magnesium alloys poses one of the major challenges to
broad engineering application of these materials. Cold processing of magnesium
at room temperature results in cracking or fracture. Hence, warm processing at
elevated temperatures is typically used for industrial manufacturing, but this
increases energy cost. To improve the ductility, expensive rare earth elements
have been added to magnesium, but this is undesirable because of the high cost
and uncertain availability of rare earths. This research project incorporates
computational and experimental studies to search for inexpensive and readily
available alloying elements for manufacturing new magnesium alloys with superior
ductility. The results obtained from this work enables low-cost manufacturing of
magnesium alloys which impacts the US economy and the environment. The project
also promotes education of Integrated Computational Materials Engineering
principles at undergraduate and graduate levels, as well as diversity by
involving women and underrepresented minorities in disciplines of Science,
Technology, Engineering and Math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Easy dislocation slip
systems on the basal and prismatic planes in magnesium are unable to accommodate
strain components along the c-axis of the hexagonal close-packed crystal
structure. This leads to the limited ductility of magnesium at room temperature.
The pyramidal &lt;c+a&gt; dislocations are able to accommodate c-axis strains,
but their critical resolved shear stresses are one to two orders of magnitude
higher than those of prismatic and basal dislocations. Consequently, under
conventional deformation conditions, the density of &lt;c+a&gt; dislocations is
insufficient to meet the criterion of strain accommodation. This project
integrates first-principles hierarchical high-throughput-screening and
experimental studies to identify alloying elements that are able to reduce the
energy barrier to nucleation and glide of the &lt;c+a&gt; dislocations in Mg
alloys. This is achieved by calculating through first principles simulations how
alloying elements influence the landscape of generalized stacking fault energy
which describes the energy barrier to dislocation glide. After suitable
candidate elements are identified, magnesium alloys are synthesized by ingot
casting. Channel die compression is carried out to fabricate samples with
refined grains for tensile and compressive tests to determine their mechanical
behavior. Dislocation structures are characterized by transmission electron
microscopy. The project provides a new, physics-based strategy to develop novel
high ductility magnesium alloys, which can be processed into components of
useful shapes by rolling, drawing and stamping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.