* 2032788
* I-Corps: An interactive flavor enhancing spoon
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Nimesha Ranasinghe, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an alternative methodology to enhance flavor sensations of food
and beverages while reducing the consumption of excessive condiments such as
salt. Although it is recommended that a typical American consumes less than 2300
mg of sodium per day to maintain a healthy eating pattern, the average
consumption is 3500 mg per day. Most of the sodium consumed is in the form of
salt, and excess sodium intake increases the blood pressure and risk for heart
disease and stroke. It is also increasingly evident that the taste function of
older adults and cognitively impaired patients diminishes significantly. This
leads these groups to consume even higher amounts of salt as a flavor enhancer.
The proposed technology stimulates these sensations to simulate taste. Potential
applications include novel eating and drinking utensils such as a spoon,
chopsticks, and beverage tumbler that aim to promote a healthier lifestyle by
replacing or reducing unnecessary condiments such as salt. Patients on special
diets (e.g., restricted use of salt in sodium-reduced diets) and the elderly
(suffering diminished taste perceptions) may use this technology to enhance
their taste sensations virtually, making their meals more enjoyable while
reducing potential side-effects. Furthermore, this technology may have
applications to treat medical conditions such as xerostomia and swallowing
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of an “electric taste” technology that electronically simulates primary taste
sensations, such as sour, salty, and bitter. It applies controlled electrical
pulses to the tip of the tongue using pure silver electrodes; by controlling the
frequency and the amplitude of current, it simulates different taste sensations.
These utensils are embedded with electronics and silver electrodes and overlay
virtual taste sensations when a user’s tongue is in contact with the silver
electrodes. This enables people to experience digitally augmented taste
sensations while eating and drinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.