* 2032522
* RII Track-4: Data-Driven Navigation, Path Planning, and Coordination of Mobile Robots in Fluids
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Zhuoyuan Song, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2023
* USD 185,306.00

Autonomous mobile robots, such as unmanned aerial and underwater vehicles, are
becoming an essential element in an increasing number of applications that serve
the national interest. These intelligent platforms can provide critical in-situ
measurement data for weather forecasting and persistent monitoring of the
forming and developing of large-scale dynamic events. The capabilities to
navigate and sense dynamic fluid environments are fundamental to miniature
mobile robots in strong geophysical flows such as hurricanes or ocean currents.
These capabilities require the robots to sense, explore, and understand
background flow dynamics that are often not amenable to empirical models based
on first principles, challenging the existing approaches for robot autonomy.
This project aims at enhancing the navigation, path planning, and coordination
of mobile robots in dynamic fluid environments by using data-driven system
dynamics modeling, estimation, and control. The goals of this fellowship project
are to straighten the PI’s robotics research program with intensive training on
data-driven dynamics modeling and control techniques at the University of
Washington, and bring long-term sustained improvements to the research and
education capacity of the University of Hawai‘i system on data science and
robotics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances robot navigation, path
planning, and coordination in fluid environments, which are fundamental for
global ocean sensing and weather forecasting. The proposed research contributes
to the foundation of robot autonomy by combing physics-informed, data-driven
modeling with classical control and estimation based on first principles. The
research objectives are to (1) build the theoretical foundation for fluid-based
simultaneous localization and mapping using probabilistic inference, dynamic
compressed sensing, and sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics, (2) uncover
the connection between finite-horizon optimal trajectories in unsteady flow
fields and the underlying coherent flow structures using model predictive
control, and (3) identify the optimal swarming laws and emergent swarm dynamics
in unsteady fluids using data-driven dynamics learning. The training and
synergistic objectives are to establish a mutual student co-advising
relationship, develop a new undergraduate course on “Data Science for Engineers”
for the University of Hawai‘i, and initiate new collaborations with the eScience
Institute and the Applied Physics Laboratory at the University of Washington.
The expected outcomes include but are not limited to long-lasting collaborations
between the PI and the host, joint journal publications, lightboard lecture
videos series for the new course, and strategic plans for co-developing an open-
access marine robotics testbed in Hawai‘i. The project impact will be sustained
through joint publications, collaborative proposal development, student co-
advising, and collaborations between the University of Hawai‘i and the
University of Washington on data science research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.