* 2032713
* EAGER: Expanding public access to restricted research data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Cynthia Vitale, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,977.00

Researchers in disciplines across the behavioral, social, educational,
computational, and life sciences collect data whose sharing can pose significant
practical and ethical challenges due to privacy concerns, political risk,
cultural sensitivities, legal or policy restrictions, and intellectual property
constraints. How should researchers protect data while making access as open as
possible, in alignment with the principles of open science? And how should data
repositories clearly communicate who has what sort of access in ways that
encourage suitable uses? This project will create generalizable models and
infrastructure that strike a balance between providing open access to research
data and materials while protecting research data. The results will bolster
transparent, reproducible, integrative, interdisciplinary and insight-generating
research across scientific fields by enhancing an existing research data
infrastructure that specializes in sharing sensitive research data with
restricted scientific audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
infrastructure builds on Databrary.org, a restricted access data library
specializing in storing and sharing video data and documentation. Databrary was
co-developed by the PI with support from NSF. The project has two aims: (1)
Implement interface and metadata enhancements to the NSF-supported Databrary
digital library to make sensitive, restricted-access data maximally discoverable
to the widest range of audiences, including users of the NSF Public Access
Repository (NSF-PAR), and (2) Ensure that Databrary embodies best practices and
shares its innovations widely. The activities associated with these aims will
expand access to Databraryâ€™s existing holdings, improve the findability,
accessibility, interoperability, and reusability of data shared there, and
provide insights and knowledge that should benefit other scholarly communities
facing similar challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.