* 2032661
* EAGER: Sharing Knowledge, Building Community:  Introducing a Journal Editors' Discussion Interface (JEDI)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Colin Elman, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,735.00

A partnership of social science domain repositories proposes to create a
"Journal Editors' Discussion Interface" (JEDI). JEDI will establish and maintain
an online community of social science journal editors and data professionals,
encouraging and facilitating continuous communication and learning. With a long
track record of engaging with social science journal editors, including
organizing a well-attended series of annual workshops for editors focused on
open science practices, the partner repositories are well placed to design,
launch, lead and participate in this endeavor. By offering journal editors the
opportunity to draw on the expertise of other editors and data services
personnel, this pioneering, light-weight, high-risk / high-payoff project will
augment the readiness of the social science publishing community to generate and
adopt consensual best practices for open science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;JEDI will
combine features of an online forum and a traditional email listserv. It will
initially focus on the aspects of the editorial process that concern data and
code, and their management, citation, and accessibility; other aspects of
research transparency; and reproducibility, replication, and verification.
Editors, in turn, will be empowered to encourage and help authors to capitalize
on developments in the socio-technical infrastructure supporting open science.
With consequential developments in that infrastructure on the horizon – such as
the expansion of the National Science Foundation’s Public Access Repository (NSF
PAR) – there is a pressing need for immediate action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.