* 2032922
* Micromechanics and the Role of Cellular Forces, Collagen Production, and Mechanochemistry in Extracellular Matrix Growth and Remodeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Thao (Vicky) Nguyen, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 09/30/2023
* USD 666,472.00

Soft tissues in the human body consist of cells living in a matrix of large
proteins and other biomolecules. The mechanical behavior of the matrix is
important to how tissues and organs function. The mechanical properties of the
matrix are governed by complex structures formed by the protein collagen.
However, collagen structures can change in response to mechanical forces, such
as those that occur during exercise or as part of disease progression. This
project combines mathematical modeling with experiments on a model tissue system
to study how collagen structures change under externally applied forces and
forces exerted by the cells. The new understanding gained from this project will
advance knowledge of collagen biomechanics and cell mechanobiology. This will
advance the nationâ€™s health and welfare through translation to the study of
diseases, and by enabling new therapeutic strategies to address pathological
changes in tissue structure. An important outcome of the project will be
interdisciplinary research training for graduate students and undergraduates to
prepare them for careers in academia and industry. The project will also provide
research internships for Baltimore City high school students that will help
increase of diversity in the technical workforce in engineering and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an integrated micromechanical
experimental and modeling program to investigate the role and interactions of
collagen mechanochemistry, mechanosensitive cellular contraction, and
mechanosensitive collagen production on the growth and remodeling of the
extracellular matrix. The project will (i) develop a microtissue experimental
system to measure the effects of global mechanical stimuli on growth and
remodeling as well as mechanochemical effects on collagen structure; (ii)
develop a micromechanical model for collagen tissue growth and remodeling based
on the fibril-level processes of concurrent collagen deposition and degradation
including effects of mechanochemistry and cellular contraction; and (iii)
investigate effects of cell-scale perturbations on collagen growth and
remodeling. The integrated modeling and experimental framework will allow
separate characterization of mechanical stimulation of collagen
mechanochemistry, collagen production, and cellular contraction, and evaluation
of their long-term effects on tissue growth, remodeling of collagen structure
and tissue properties, and homeostasis. The local perturbation studies will
examine the complicated interplay between the remodeling of collagen fiber
structures and cellular actin stress fiber structures. New fundamental
understanding gained from this project will lead to the development of more
mechanistic and predictive models for collagen growth and remodeling that will
find application in both the study of mechanically implicated diseases and in
tissue engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.