* 2032518
* RAPID: Membrane remodeling dynamics by SARS-CoV-2
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Ruth Serra-Moreno, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

SARS-CoV-2 is the causative agent of the COVID-19 pandemic, a devastating
infectious disease that in only few months has caused a global health and
economic crisis. Similar to the SARS and MERS epidemics, COVID-19 originated
from a coronavirus that was transmitted from bats to humans. All these epidemics
evidence that spillovers of this type of viruses are frequent and future
transmissions will inevitably occur. Therefore, there is a critical need to
understand the mechanism by which coronaviruses in general, and SARS-CoV-2 in
particular, move from its natural host to humans. This project will address this
critical research question using biochemical and microscopy methods. This
research also aims at training the next generation of scientists by providing
them with the necessary tools and mentoring skills to carry out cutting-edge
research with high impact to our society: from deciphering how this class of
viruses disseminate at the molecular level to gaining a deeper understanding of
the human and animal behavioral interactions that have resulted in the emergence
of this disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the role of
the autophagy machinery in SARS-CoV-2 dissemination in different hosts.
Autophagy is a highly conserved survival pathway that remodels cellular
membranes to trap waste materials for their elimination. This research will test
the innovative hypothesis that SARS-CoV-2 usurps the cellular autophagy
machinery with the goal of creating two distinct structures: membrane scaffolds
for the multiplication of the virus genome (viroplasms) and antidefense shields
to conceal virus materials that would otherwise be detected by the immune
response (i.e. dsRNA intermediates). This project has two goals to test this
hypothesis:(1)Characterizing the membrane structures generated during SARS-CoV-2
infection in bat, ferret and human cells. Lipidomic and proteomic studies will
be performed to reveal the biochemical makeup of the membrane scaffolds and
antidefense shields generated by SARS-CoV-2 in different hosts. (2) Identifying
the molecular mechanisms by which SARS-CoV-2 intersects with the autophagy
machinery. The goal of this aim is to monitor the effects of SARS-CoV-2 on key
checkpoints of autophagy. Confocal microscopy, flow cytometry and biochemical
assays will be used to measure autophagosome formation, autophagy flux and the
molecular composition of the checkpoints that regulate autophagy in bat, ferret
and human cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Cellular
Dynamics and Function Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.