* 2032682
* RAPID: the role of nsp3, nsp4 and nsp6 of SARS-CoV-2 in double membrane vesicle formation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Michael Ragusa, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

SARS-CoV-2 is a coronavirus that leads to the respiratory disease COVID-19 and
is the cause of a global pandemic currently gripping the world. SARS-CoV-2, like
all viruses, relies on many components of the infected cell to drive viral
replication. One component of all eukaryotic cells that coronaviruses rely on
for their replication are lipid membranes that separate from different regions
of a cell. Coronaviruses hijack host cell proteins for viral replication, as
well as some of the host cell membranes, restructuring them to generate a unique
membrane architecture that supports the production of viral RNA. However, it is
currently unclear how coronaviruses accomplish this restructuring of host the
cell membrane. This gap in knowledge has limited the understanding of how SARS-
CoV-2 replicates in host cells and thus limited the development of therapeutics
that might be useful to slow its replication. Therefore, to gain insight into
the mechanisms by which coronaviruses restructure host cell membranes, this
Project will investigate three coronavirus proteins (nsp3, nsp4 and nsp6) that
are required for this restructuring event. As a Broader Impact, Project staff
will engage with local middle and high school students to discuss the structures
of different of SARS-CoV-2 components and how the structures of these viral
proteins inform scientists’ understanding of viral mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All positive sense RNA viruses restructure host cell
membranes to support the assembly of the replication and transcription complexes
required for viral RNA replication. Coronaviruses, including SARS and MERS,
generate a series of interconnected double membrane vesicles that appear to be
generated from endoplasmic reticulum membranes. The formation of these vesicles
require three integral membrane nonstructural proteins, nsp3, nsp4 and nsp6,
that are encoded by the virus. However, the molecular mechanisms by which these
three nsp proteins work together to generate double membrane vesicles is
unknown. To gain insight into these mechanisms, this Project will study the
structure and function of nsp3, nsp4 and nsp6 from SARS-CoV-2. Specifically,
this work will 1 ) identify the host cell proteins that interact with nsp3, nsp4
and nsp6; and 2) determine the atomic level structures of these three viral
proteins. To accomplish this, these proteins will be expressed in human lung
cell lines and screened for binding partners by immunoprecipitation and mass
spectrometry. The structure of these proteins will be investigated using a
combination of X-ray crystallography and electron microscopy. Knowledge of the
structure of the nsp proteins and their interactions will provide important
insight into how this virus takes advantage of its host cell, resulting in a
devastating pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.