* 2032744
* I-Corps:  Advanced Driver Assistance Systems for use in Adverse Weather Operations
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Zachary Asher, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of safe automotive transportation in inclement weather. This project
is based on the development of advanced computer vision algorithms that provide
more reliable driving information in inclement weather. The improvements in
vehicle operation from commercialization of this technology may directly lower
the number of accidents. This technology will lower insurance costs and payouts
as it minimizes risk and increases the safety of passengers. The goal of this
project is to add the proposed technology to the current Advanced Driver
Assistance Systems (ADAS) functionality; i.e., include the new abilities
alongside other automotive applications such as blind spot monitoring, lane-keep
assistance, and forward collision warnings. In addition, this technology may
help to advance the commercialization of self-driving vehicles. Due to the
flexibility of implementation, it is expected that there may be a significant
impact on the automotive transportation community over the next
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
advanced computer vision algorithms that provide more reliable driving
information in inclement weather. Using a camera as the proposed sensor input,
combined with proprietary computer vision algorithms, it is possible to provide
the Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) with a drivable region on snow-
covered roads. The proposed computer vision software was developed from research
conducted on how to improve autonomous vehicle performance in adverse weather
conditions. This research supports the development of proprietary image
processing, image filtering, and machine learning
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.