* 2032621
* NSF2026: EAGER: Probabilistic Analysis of Converting Marine-Borne Plastics into Usable Fuels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Nikolaos Kazantzis, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 259,299.00

The pollution of oceans by plastics has become a major environmental problem
worldwide. Marine-borne plastics pose new risks to marine life and ecosystems
and their impacts on human health are largely unknown as they enter the food
chain. Recently, several projects have been initiated worldwide to collect
marine plastics using shipboard harvesting approaches. On-board conversion of
marine-borne plastics to useful products is a promising technology that could
address the limitations of current shipboard harvesting approaches. With support
from the Environmental Engineering Program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems and the NSF 2026 Fund
Program in the Office of Integrated Activities, Professors Kazantzis and Timko
at Worcester Polytechnic Institute propose to explore the feasibility of
designing an on-board hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL) system that could harvest
and convert marine-borne plastics into useful products including oil, gas or
solvents. To achieve this goal, the investigators propose to first develop a
modeling framework to simulate the performance of an on-board HTL plastic
conversion system. The successful completion of this project will benefit
society through helping advance the design and implementation of next-generation
technologies to address the global problem of marine plastic pollution. Further
benefits to society will be achieved through student education and training, and
public outreach including the mentoring of a female doctoral student.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Every year between 4.8 and 12.7 million tons of plastics
are released into oceans and marine ecosystems. Hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL)
is a promising technology that could convert marine-borne plastics into useful
products. The HTL process utilizes a high-temperature and high-pressure reactor
to break down plastics into monomers and/or smaller organic compounds, which are
then mixed with water to produce oil, gas or solvents. The overarching goal of
this EAGER project is to explore the design of an on-board system with the
capability to draw in desalinated water and plastics into a HTL reactor to
generate useful products. Because the conversion of plastic wastes is not yet
practiced commercially, the development of an on-board HTL system is an
ambitious and inherently risky undertaking. Thus, the PIs propose to develop a
new probabilistic modeling and assessment framework to characterize the
technical feasibility, the sustainability profiles as well as the economic
viability prospects of an on-board plastic conversion HTL process system by
combining thermodynamic modeling (exergy analysis) with TEA and LCA. To account
for the uncertainties and related technology risks, the investigators propose to
use Monte Carlo simulations to stochastically model and propagate the sources of
uncertainties in the model input parameters. This could enable the PIs to
generate performance outcome zones and risk-reward distribution profiles rather
than single-point estimates of the relevant performance parameters of the
proposed on-board HTL plastic conversion system. Thus, the successful completion
of this project has potential for transformative impact through the development
a new system-modeling framework to advance the design of integrated shipboard
collection and reactor systems that could capture and convert marine-borne
plastics into useful products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supported project
further expands the concept from one of the top 33 NSF 2026 Idea Machine
entries: Repurposing, Recycling, Renewable Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.