* 2032463
* Collaborative Research: Laser Cutting Technology for Borehole Sampling
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Joseph Talghader, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2023
* USD 318,164.00

This project will take initial development steps toward a laser-cut ice-sampling
capability in glaciers and ice sheets. The collection of ice samples from the
Polar Ice Sheets involves large amounts of time, effort, and expense. However,
the most important science data are often retrieved from small sections of an
ice core and, while replicate coring can supplement this section of ice core,
there is often a need to retrieve additional ice samples based on subsequent
scientific findings or borehole logging at a research site. In addition, there
are currently no easy methods of extracting ice samples from a borehole drilled
by non-coring mechanical drills that are faster, lighter, and less expensive to
operate. There are numerous science applications that could potentially benefit
from laser-cut ice samples, including sampling ice overlying buried impact
craters and bolides, filling critical gaps in chemical records retrieved from
damaged ice cores, and obtaining ice samples from sites where coring drills
apply stresses that may fracture the ice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
explore a laser cutting technology to rapidly extract high-quality ice samples
from a borehole wall. The project will investigate and validate the existing
technology of laser ice sampling and will use a fiberoptic cable to deliver
light pulses to a borehole instrument rather than attempting to assemble a
complete laser system in an instrument deployed in a borehole. This offers a new
way of retrieving ice samples from a polar ice sheet without the need to drill a
borehole to collect ice-core samples (i.e., the hole could be mechanically
drilled). This technology could also be used in existing boreholes or those that
are made by augering through ice (i.e., not coring) or made with hot water. If
successful, this technique would create the ability to rapidly retrieve ice
samples with a small logistical footprint and enable science that might not be
supportable otherwise. The proposed technology could eventually provide better
access to ice-core samples to study past atmospheric composition for
understanding past climate and inform on future potential for ice-sheet
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.