* 2032914
* RAPID: Examining the Innovative Ecosystem During the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Amol Joshi, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 12/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic not only threatens the health and safety of
communities but also the operation and survival of firms and industries that
provide essential products and services to the innovative ecosystem. This crisis
has hit small businesses (firms with fewer than 500 employees) particularly
hard. Obtaining access to emergency financial resources such as the Paycheck
Protection Program and forgivable loans offered by federal and state government
agencies remains extremely difficult for many U.S. small firms. This holds
especially for firms owned by members of underrepresented groups that include
minorities, women, and veterans. This project has two primary aims in tracking
the different types of small high-tech firms. First, we aim to understand the
unique challenges and opportunities that small high-tech firms face in adapting
to this unexpected shift and in introducing innovations designed to combat
COVID-19. Second, we aim to evaluate state and federal responses to the pandemic
by estimating their impacts on the activity of small high-tech firms that drive
U.S. innovation. We plan to construct a comprehensive and scalable nationwide
database that tracks U.S. small high-tech firms that are current or potential
suppliers of critical public heath technologies related to pandemic response. We
will make this database publicly available to accelerate broad systematic
research. Our results will include detailed insights on the impacts of the
pandemic on small business performance. Moreover, the resulting public databases
and interactive dashboard will enable policymakers and businesses to identify
new opportunities to empower small high-tech firms to grow and supply much
needed expertise and resources during the pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
examine the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the U.S. innovative ecosystem. We
focus on small high-tech firms (with fewer than 500 employees), including firms
owned by members of underrepresented groups (minorities, women, and veterans).
Small firms are potential sources of innovation in combating COVID-19, but
remain especially vulnerable to the unprecedented health, social, and economic
risks arising from this pandemic. We have two primary research aims. First, we
seek to characterize changes in the landscape of small high-tech firms resulting
from the ongoing pandemic and policy responses. We will build a comprehensive,
interactive database to capture shifts in the spatial and temporal patterns of
the innovation ecosystem. Second, we seek to use this database for econometric
analysis to evaluate the differential impact of state and federal pandemic
policies on the performance of small high-tech firms. Specific deliverables
include: (i) detailed descriptive statistics characterizing changes in
concentrations of business activity in different sectors with geographic
precision; (ii) a public dashboard with an interactive map for visualizing
changes in the innovative ecosystem at state- and sector-levels; (iii) a public
data repository providing access to all aggregated data files used to create our
visualization tool; and (iv) econometric models exploiting variation in state
policies to determine the causal impacts of these policies on small firms. Our
intended broader impact is a clearer picture of which areas of the innovative
ecosystem are most susceptible to the effects of COVID-19. We will identify
firm-level characteristics that indicate which firms are most and least
resilient, as well as those best positioned to assist with government
countermeasures against the pandemic. This will illuminate priorities for public
and private sector efforts to rebuild innovative activity and allocate support
resources more effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.