* 2032784
* RAPID: Probing SARS-CoV-2 evolution and vulnerabilities through its mutation and fitness landscape
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Jean-Francois Gout, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 12/31/2022
* USD 198,293.00

A major challenge in the fight against viruses is their enormous amount of
genetic diversity resulting from large population sizes combined with high
mutation rates. However, the frequency at which such variants appear and the
consequences of specific mutations on viral fitness are largely unknown for
SARS-CoV-2. Researchers supported by this award will measure the mutation rate
and fitness landscape of three SARS-CoV- 2 isolates from around the world. The
work could be essential for accurately modeling the future evolution of SARS-
CoV-2 and may help identify the virusâ€™ vulnerabilities at the molecular level.
Results from these studies will also be leveraged by undergraduate students and
researchers for training in advanced genomic analyses. The findings and data
from these studies will be published in peer-reviewed journals, presented at
scientific meetings and in public STEM engagement activities, and shared on-line
through blog posts and the popular press.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
supported by this award will measure variant frequencies in viral populations
following several rounds of serial passaging in Vero E6 cells. Genome-wide
measurements of all possible variants frequencies will be accomplished using the
circle-sequencing to measure mutation rates and fitness landscape virus. Changes
in variant frequencies over the course of serial passages will be used to derive
the relative fitness of each variant. Knowing the mutation rate (and spectrum)
of the virus is paramount to modeling its future evolution, including the rate
at which resistant variants are expected to arise. By measuring the fitness of
thousands of mutations across the genome, the researchers hope to identify
residues and protein domains that are critical to the virus replication cycle
and narrow the range of protein domains and residues to target with
therapeutics. Among these sites, those for which no other mutation can rescue
the viral fitness will be of particular interest. This RAPID award to University
of Southern California is made by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.