* 2032119
* RAPID:NSF-BSF: Can Reef-Building Corals Bypass Aging?
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Karine Kleinhaus, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 107,880.00

This project’s integrated field and laboratory experiments in Israel and the US
will leverage conditions created by a rare storm to establish whether corals
show molecular-cellular-physiological effects of aging, and will disentangle the
effects of age and size on senescence. Reef building corals are long-lived
organisms, with some species living longer than most other organisms on the
planet. Aging organisms typically experience a decline in function and an
increased death rate, but coral colonies may be exceptions to this aging process
because they show an increase in fertility and a decline in mortality with age.
Questions remain, however, about whether corals undergo senescence on a
functional or cellular level. This project will test whether a coral’s
chronological age is linked to telomere length, an established biomarker of
aging, and measure effects of age on metabolic rate, growth, and reproduction.
The world’s coral reefs are in crisis, and it is predicted that by 2030 reefs
will no longer be the rich and highly diverse ecosystem that tens of millions of
people rely on for their livelihood. It is therefore imperative to understand
age-related physiology in corals so that coral reef ecosystems may be
sustainably managed for future generations. Furthermore, because reef
restoration efforts often use asexual propagation of small fragments originating
from older parent colonies, it is critical to know whether these fragments
experience senescence after transplantation. The project will also support a
master’s level graduate student who will develop and disseminate public
educational materials about coral health and aging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral
colonies, whose polyps bud asexually to produce thousands of clones, have been
described as an archetype of negative senescence, although recent evidence
suggests that this may not be the case. The rare extratropical cyclone that
occurred in March 2020 in the northern Gulf of Aqaba created an extraordinary
and time-sensitive opportunity to study aging and senescence because damaged
coral colonies are undergoing unusually rapid tissue regeneration, with
immediate juxtaposition of old and young polyps. This permits unusual study
designs that can address challenges inherent in investigating aging in corals,
and in colonial animals generally. Leveraging cutting-edge technology and a
complementary, interdisciplinary partnership, the researchers will conduct field
studies in the Gulf of Aqaba, precisely controlled mesocosm studies in an
automated, 80-aquaria facility in Israel, and advanced molecular biology studies
at a leading center for the study of aging in the US. These innovative
experiments will: determine whether a coral polyp’s chronological age (1) is
linked to telomere length, an established biomarker and central mechanism of
cellular aging, and (2) affects the physiological functions of metabolic rate,
growth, and reproduction. This project will significantly advance the
understanding of key aspects of the biological functioning of reef building
coral and of aging across phyla, and may inform the practice of using coral
colony fragments in reef restoration efforts. An MS student in the SUNY Stony
Brook Marine Conservation and Policy program will travel to Israel to
participate in the project and prepare video presentations, blogs, and social
media outreach activities for public educational outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by GEO-Division of Ocean
Sciences-Biological Oceanography and by BIO-Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems-Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.