* 2032113
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  The Construction of Monumental Architecture
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Tristram Kidder, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 31,493.00

This project investigates how the nature of coalescence and emergence of social
complexity results in the creation of monuments and artificial landscapes.
Multidisciplinary scholars have approached the emergence of social complexity,
particularly in early urban centers, as a phenomenon conditioned by process and
agency, whereby monuments are built conspicuously as representations of the
social order. Archaeology is well positioned to examine the social conditions
that gave rise to early urban centers and explain how monumental construction
was undertaken with respect to social organization, material resources, and
mobility of surplus labor. To what extent does the charismatic authority of
prominent leaders or longstanding adherence to tradition shape the increasingly
artificial landscapes of the world’s earliest cities and how? For US
moundbuilding societies the creation of earthworks held both religious and
socio-political significance, as a means of creating a common identity at the
place where monuments were built. As such, the energetics of their construction
and organization of their internal architectures provide critical insights into
their social environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the
largest US Pre-Columbian ceremonial center, by examining the nature and pace of
monumental earthwork construction within the site’s central precinct. Existing
interpretations of the site’s development into an urban center are divided
between models that emphasize rapid or slow-paced monumental construction. Rapid
pace models claim that hegemonic authority was exercised within a highly
stratified social order at the site to direct monumental construction projects,
while slower pace models portray such monumental architectures as byproducts of
community nucleation and aggregation that carried over extended time periods.
With the aid of accelerated mass spectrometry dating and Bayesian statistical
models that reference exposed earthwork contexts, this project will assess what
labor investments and construction strategies were employed for plaza and mound
building at the site. Excavations into a suspected plaza compound with
previously undocumented earthworks will be undertaken to acquire datable samples
and record new forms of architecture. In this way, the pace and nature of
moundbuilding as an expression of the existing social order will be more
effectively interpreted. Consequently, the material history of this early urban
center can be framed within the larger narratives about incipient urbanism and
society at a global scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.