* 2032376
* CAS-MNP: Elucidating Nanoplastics - Cell Interactions that Enhance Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Uptake in an Intestinal Membrane Model
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Bjoern Reinhard, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The large-scale use of plastics has resulted in an accumulation of plastic waste
in marine ecosystems, where weathering processes can result in the formation of
plastic particles that are small enough to enter the food chain. These small
plastic particles are commonly referred to as microplastics or nanoplastics,
depending on their exact size. Plastic particles can act as carriers of certain
carcinogens, bringing potential risk to the food chain and ultimately to humans.
However, the interactions between carcinogens and plastic nanoparticles remain
insufficiently understood. This project will address key questions related to
the nanoplastics-mediated uptake of carcinogens. The absorption and release of
carcinogens from nanoplastics will be investigated in an intestinal model. In
synergy with the laboratory work, this project will provide training
opportunities in nanotechnology and nanotoxicology. Furthermore, educational web
modules on nanoplastics will be developed geared towards a general audience with
diverse educational backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons are carcinogens that are generated through incomplete combustion
processes of organic materials. Human activity has become a major source for
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and has resulted in a ubiquitous distribution
of these molecules in the environment, including marine ecosystems. Polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons have a high affinity for plastic nanoparticles due to
their hydrophobic character. As plastic nanoparticles, are also accumulated in
marine ecosystems, they represent a potential carrier for these carcinogens,
which have a poor solubility in water. The sorption and release of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons to/from plastic particles depends on a variety of factors,
including the chemical nature of the plastics, the size and morphology of the
particles, and the pH and chemical composition of the surrounding media. This
project will systematically characterize the effect of nanoplastics composition
and weathering on the release of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. The
experiments will be performed with nanoparticles of different plastics with
typical dimensions of 100 nm under well-defined conditions in a simulated
gastrointestinal tract model, based on human colon carcinoma cells.
Subsequently, the transepithelial transport obtained for free and nanoplastics-
associated polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons will be measured, and the effect of
nanoplastics on the intestinal membrane integrity will be determined. By
correlating membrane integrity with transmembrane polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons transport, it will be possible to quantify the effect of
nanoparticle-induced membrane damage on polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
transport. Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy will be applied to detect
nanoplastics-induced molecular changes in the cell metabolism that do not lead
to an acute change in membrane integrity but can still cause chronic damage. In
synergy with the laboratory work, this project will enable substantial
educational and training activities. The project will provide training
opportunities in nanotechnology and nanotoxicology for at least one PhD student.
Furthermore, micro- and nanoplastics have attracted significant public
attention, and there is substantial interest in nanoplastics and their
interactions with living systems, including humans. This project will develop
educational web modules that collate existing information about this theme and
disseminate the findings of this research project. These web modules will be
geared towards a general audience with diverse educational
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.