* 2032183
* Neural underpinnings of attention in the real world: Insights from co-registration of eye movements and EEG
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Elizabeth Schotter, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 12/31/2022
* USD 25,000.00

Visual attention plays a fundamental role in many tasks that have important
consequences for the daily lives of Americans. Two primary tasks are visual
search (e.g., identifying signs of cancer in medical images, or weapons in TSA
baggage scans) and reading text (e.g., learning inside and outside of the
classroom). Eye movements play a critical role in both tasks, but most cognitive
neuroscience methods (e.g., electroencephalography; EEG) require research
participants to refrain from moving the eyes because doing so produces artifacts
in the neural measurements, which make the brain processes of interest harder to
study. However, when eye movements are restricted, the inferences made in these
neuroscience studies are somewhat removed from the phenomena being studied. New
analytic techniques may allow these fields to move beyond simplified laboratory
paradigms but this transition requires significant technological and analytic
advances. The long-term goal is to create documentation of “best practices” and
frameworks for future research applications that promote the best work using a
combination of eye tracking and electroencephalography methods. Such guidelines
should also foster reliability and reproducibility of studies and allow better
integration of theoretical insights across scientific
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this workshop is to bring together
leading experts from different scientific fields to address the methodological
and conceptual challenges of integrating eye tracking and electroencephalography
methods. The primary outcome will be to advance the impact of these fields on
the lives of everyday people. As examples, better understanding of why TSA
screeners misclassify images can lead to better detection of real threats while
reducing the negative impact of screener bias on marginalized individuals and
better understanding of how eye movement behavior relates to underlying neural
processing during reading can lead to faster, easier, and less-invasive
detection of reading disorders such as dyslexia. The workshop will promote
improved teaching, training, and learning by bringing together researchers at
several career stages (from graduate students to senior researchers) with
diverse backgrounds and in different domains of visual cognition to discuss the
benefits and challenges of integrating methodological approaches in these
domains. The workshop format, which includes invited talks, small-group panels,
poster sessions, and brainstorming 'pitch' sessions, is specifically designed to
engender cross-talk between junior and senior researchers in a way that spans
disciplinary boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.