* 2032632
* Collaborative Proposal: Developmental and Genetic Pathways to Phenotypic Convergence in a Radiation of Groundwater Salamanders
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* David Hillis, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 08/31/2024
* USD 829,426.00

Cave organisms as unrelated as insects and salamanders often have shared
features â€“ such as lack of eyes, pallid coloration, and elongated limbs. Life
underground provides different challenges from life on the surface, and those
challenges favor relatively rapid changes in appearance (and other, more subtle
characteristics) at the population level. Those rapid changes lead to
convergence in the appearance of many cave organisms, but the genetic and
developmental processes that lead to repeated changes in different organisms are
largely unknown. The Edwards Plateau of central Texas has an extensive, though
fragmented, network of springs, caves, and aquifers that host numerous, diverse,
underground salamanders. These salamanders attain reproductive maturity while
retaining features (such as gills) that are characteristic of immature
salamanders, and many of them show eyes reduced in size and development to
varying degrees, along with other characteristics associated with living
underground (e.g. an enhanced sense of smell). These characteristics have
evolved independently and repeatedly in the various species, and this research
will integrate information derived through a variety of approaches to shed light
on the mechanisms that enable new structures and functions to evolve. This
project is timely because in addition to enhancing understanding of the
evolution of sensory systems, it will highlight and clarify the diversity of
salamanders in central Texas at a time when human population growth and
commercial development further threaten species that have been identified as
being in danger of extinction. Finally, this project will serve as a platform to
train numerous undergraduates in STEM research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will use an integrative, hierarchical approach combining genetic,
developmental, and phylogenetic perspectives to study the mechanisms that drive
convergence in phenotypes of subterranean Groundwater Salamanders. Results from
micro-computed tomography imaging, histology, transcriptomics, and exon
sequencing will demonstrate the degree of morphological convergence in sensory
systems (visual, olfactory, and lateral line) across subterranean lineages.
Comparative transcriptomics will be employed to examine the developmental
genetic mechanisms of organ system reduction and signatures of molecular
convergence at the protein-coding level in sensory-system
genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.