* 2032435
* Plant herbivore defense syndromes mediated by canopy structural complexity
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2024
* Kailen Mooney, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2024
* USD 519,457.00

Plants defend themselves against attack by herbivorous (plant-eating) insects in
many ways. For example, they make chemical poisons and construct mechanical
defenses, like thorns. Plants also use predators of herbivores for protection,
following the age-old adage that the enemy of my enemy is my friend. But no
plant can afford to invest in all types of defense. Investment in one strategy
must trade-off against investment in another, leading to tremendous variation
among plant species in the combination of defenses they employ. Understanding
the environmental factors that dictate a plant species' defense strategy has
proven difficult. Yet, tackling this challenge is important for understanding
why plants are made the way they are. That, in turn, is important for guiding
plant breeding and pest management practices in agriculture. This study will
test a new idea about how plants can make it easier for birds to pick off
herbivorous insects. Specifically, it is predicted that birds will be attracted
to plants with few branches, where they can most easily move and find insects.
Because birds remove lots of insect enemies, those plants should need to invest
less in chemical and mechanical defenses. Thus, this study will thus reveal
whether a plant's branching pattern sets the stage for predictable patterns of
variation in how plants defend themselves. The researchers will work with local
teachers to use results from the project to promote an understanding of research
practices to undergraduate and K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
evolutionary ecology of plant defense against herbivores has been a major
program of research for more than half a century. Both the types and magnitude
of herbivore defenses vary dramatically with geography, among plant families and
species, among populations and individuals within species, and even among
tissues within individuals. Trade-offs are believed to lie at the core of this
variation, but predicting how trade-offs play out has been difficult within the
complex milieu of changeable ecological settings and the constraints imposed by
evolutionary history. This study tests a novel the hypothesis that plant
structural complexity drives variation in multivariate herbivore defense
strategy in plants. These predictions will be tested by characterizing co-
variation among structural complexity, bird indirect defense, arthropod indirect
defense, and direct defense traits for 30 species of sympatric plants (shrubs,
large perennial herbs) from the California Coastal Sage Scrub
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.