* 2032783
* EAGER: Assembling the Immunoglobulin Loci Across Mammalian Species and Across the Human Population
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Pavel Pevzner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 05/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic raised the challenge of developing new
computational techniques for understanding the immune response to emerging
pathogens. This project will develop a new computer program for analyzing the
parts of the genome that are responsible for immune responses to pathogens. This
will enable analyses of the development of immunity to the virus in human
populations by characterizing the mutations that are essential to the immune
response. This research will also enhance understanding of the immune responses
in bats, which are hosts to large numbers of coronaviruses, and in llamas, which
are potentially an important source for a robust vaccine against the virus. The
project will also develop a Massive Online Open Course “Bioinformatics of SARS-
COV-2” that will cover various aspects of computational analysis of emerging
pathogens, and the challenges of analyzing these complex and dynamic parts of
the human genome. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information about the immunoglobulin-
encoding regions in the genome is critically important for analyzing the immune
response to the novel SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus, developing antibody drugs against
SARS-COV-2, and testing future vaccines against SARS-CoV-2. However, there are
still no algorithms for inferring the sequences of the highly complex and
rapidly evolving immunoglobulin (IG) loci. Moreover, although the immunoglobulin
genes within the IG loci form the building blocks of antibodies, there are still
no software tools for accurate identification of these genes. This project will
develop a new algorithm for assembling and annotating the IG loci. These methods
will be applied to multiple mammalian genomes with a focus on assembling the
unusually complex IG loci in bats to characterize their immune response to
coronaviruses. A second focus will be assembly of camelid IG loci to aid in
developing vaccines against SARS-COV-2, taking advantage of the simpler and more
stable antibodies present in this group. The project will also focus on
assembling the highly variable immunoglobulin loci in multiple COVID-19 patients
with the goal of revealing functionally important mutations in these loci. The
project entails substantial risk, because the IG loci have been recalcitrant to
all previous assembly attempts, but enhanced understanding of mammalian
immunoglobin genes would greatly enhance the ability of society to predict and
respond to current and future pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.