* 2032825
* SBIR Phase I:  Handheld Detection of COVID-19 With Simple Biosensor Devices for Environmental Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Khalid Alam, STEMLOOP, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2022
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop an inexpensive, easy-to-use, and
portable test for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 in the environment. A portable
test kit for the environmental detection of SARS-CoV-2 would enable widespread
and proactive identification where the virus is present, allowing for informed
decisions regarding social distancing and related COVID-19 pandemic mitigation
measures. The proposed device will be battery-powered, support easy operation,
and will report results directly.The technology can be extended to other
pathogens in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will
develop a rapid, on-site SARS-CoV-2 environmental detection technology that can
be performed by non-technical users with a portable handheld device. The
technology integrates a simple-to-use and one-pot assay for the simultaneous
isothermal amplification and detection of ribonucleic acids. This project will
establish an assay that can specifically detect SARS-CoV-2 genomic RNA, be
freeze-dried to eliminate cold chain logistics, and can be run in an hour; and
refine a battery-powered handheld device to provide temperature control, report
on assay test results, and allow tests to be performed in the field. The
proposal will address technical hurdles related to assay handling, sensitivity,
specificity, shelf-stability, run time and device design through a technical
plan that involves assay component optimizations and device design and testing
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.