* 2032764
* GOALI: Pulsed sprays for cooling high power devices
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Yunjun Xu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2023
* USD 452,880.00

The increasing demand for faster and more powerful devices is a ubiquitous trend
in science and technology. From high-speed transportation to personal devices to
data centers, efficient, cheap thermal management is currently one of the key
bottlenecks for advancing the technical envelope. Spray cooling, particularly
with boiling-based cooling processes, is expected to play a growing role in the
development of new 3D microelectronics, electro-optic devices, and manufacturing
processes such as rapid 3D printing. Currently, most devices and large-scale
data centers are cooled by a combination of air fans and water cooling channels.
However, to meet the heat dissipation demands for the next generation of more
powerful and more compact devices and data centers, liquid cooling with the
added benefit of phase-change cooling (e.g., boiling and evaporation) is needed.
This work pursues the use of pulsed sprays to better understand the fundamental
limits of cooling high-power devices with boiling and evaporating fluids. Also,
this work will facilitate the collection of systematic fluid flow-field and
thermal transport data – both of paramount importance for predicting and
understanding phase-change cooling instabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research aims to fully understand the critical heat flux and Leidenfrost effects
during pulsed spray cooling. The project has three major research and
educational thrusts: (1) Establish refined spray cooling capabilities with
moderate area, hemiwicking-textured surfaces/devices and advanced optical
metrologies for systematic characterization of spatiotemporal temperature and
flow-fields. (2) Understand the thin-film thickness and the instantaneous and
time-averaged heat transfer characteristics on structured surfaces with
temperatures up to and beyond the Leidenfrost point. (3) Study control
allocation methodologies for pulsed, spray/jet cooling with multiple spray
nozzles. The application of optimized hemiwicking-structured surfaces adds a
transformative niche to this research. Such structures will not only ‘extend’
the liquid-to-solid wetting beyond its intrinsic wetting length in variable
gravity environments, but can also reduce droplet splashing, rebound, and
entrainment – via using sharp tipped, half-conical (anisotropic) pillars. The
project supports many hands-on, educational, and industrial outreach components,
facilitating broader impacts from K-12 activities to undergraduate senior design
projects to distinctive research for doctoral degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.