* 2032073
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Bat goblet cells as immuno-hotspots for infection of coronavirus
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Bhart-Anjan Bhullar, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 170,942.00

Why are bats so likely to carry coronaviruses, yet seem little affected by them?
Many studies have focused on their immune system, but there is much to learn
about the cells viruses attack upon entry. Acute respiratory symptoms, as well
as the curious loss of the sense of smell in human patients with COVID-19 hint
that cells in the nasal passage are afflicted first. Indeed, cells that produce
mucus in the nose, known as goblet cells, have been shown to be “ground zero”
for viral entry. Since these cells are also present in bat noses, there must be
a difference in how coronaviruses attack goblet cells in bats versus humans.
However, virtually nothing is known about immune-related proteins in bat goblet
cells. This project proposes a new approach to understand how bats are resistant
to respiratory viruses such as those related to SARS-CoV-2. By generating a
multi-dimensional study of the anatomy and physiology of the upper respiratory
tract —nose and pharynx— of bats, the proposed work will enable researchers to
better understand how viruses enter the body and infect or fail to infect their
hosts. This project will also allow health agencies around the world to better
survey bat populations and prevent future pandemics similar to COVID-19. In
addition, this proposal supports a graduate student and post-doctoral fellow to
increase training in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers supported by
this award will test the hypothesis that bats with nasal anatomy similar to
humans have a specific composition of the lining of their respiratory tract,
evolved to prevent viruses such as SARS-CoV-2, from infecting them. To
understand how the lining, or epithelium, is modified in bats compared to
humans, this grant will compare the proteins, DNA, and histology of bats to
humans and mice. The proposed work will highlight the role of goblet cells,
which do not only produce mucus, but also have immune and inflammatory
functions, as critical for infection from- versus resistance to viral attack.
The team will also integrate layers of data, from 3D imaging to proteomics, to
build a complete picture of the inner and outer workings of the upper
respiratory tracts of bats. By visualizing the anatomy in high resolution and
uncovering which specific proteins are produced by the lining of the bat’s nasal
passage, this project will produce the most thorough study of the upper
respiratory tracts of bats yet. This will be critical for humanity’s fight
against zoonotic viruses, and surveillance of wildlife populations. This RAPID
award is made by the Physiological and Structural Systems Cluster in the BIO
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, using funds from the Coronavirus
Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.