* 2032896
* RAPID Proposal: Assessing changes in humpback whale stress hormone levels in response to COVID19-related decreases in ocean noise and vessel traffic
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Ari Friedlaender, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 106,594.00

Humans influence nearly all environments and ecosystems. In marine ecosystems,
sound is used by nearly all animals, but marine mammals in particular use sound
to communicate, feed, navigate, and perform other critical life functions. In
the oceans, sound from human activities like shipping, vessel traffic, and
sonars increase stress hormone levels in whales. As well, the presence of ships
and boats around whales can also increase stress. As a result of COVID19-related
mandates, human use of the oceans has changed significantly. In Monterey Bay,
shelter-in-place restrictions minimized recreational boating and whale watching
concurrent to humpback whales returning for their feeding season. To determine
the impact that changes In human activity have on stress levels in humpback
whales, a unique study to compare blubber hormone levels in whales during
COVID19-related human use of Monterey Bay versus a period next year when
conditions return to normal is proposed. To do this, vessel numbers will be
measured using AIS vessel reporting information, the ambient sound levels will
be measured from continuous passive acoustic arrays, and stress hormone levels
in whales from blubber biopsy samples will be collected and quantified.
Comparisons will then be made between stress hormone levels in whales during
periods with decreased and normal human presence to identify both how levels
change and also which factors (vessel presence, ambient noise, or both) most
impact whale health. This is a unique opportunity to gain critical knowledge to
understand how human activities impact marine ecosystems and how these can be
minimized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying the impacts of anthropogenic
activities in marine systems is difficult because it requires large-scale
changes in industry and major logistic support. COVID19-related changes in human
use of oceans has resulted in significant declines in recreational and
commercial vessel traffic and ambient sound levels. Steroid hormones are
released for myriad physiological responses, and two of these glucocorticoids,
cortisol and corticosterone, have been associated with the stress in baleen
whales. Combining glucocorticoid quantification with environmental factors can
determine physiological responses to anthropogenic stressors. Monterey Bay is a
feeding ground for humpback whales, has a real-time, calibrated, wide bandwidth
passive acoustic monitoring system (Monterey Accelerated Research System: MARS,
MBARI), and offers access to sample whales locally. This study will collect
biopsy samples from humpback whales, both as a rapid response to current
conditions and in a comparable period when activity and disturbance is more
typical. Tissue samples will be evaluated for stress hormone levels and compared
with concurrent noise levels and vessel activity (derived from available
tracking information and passive acoustic detections of vessels) to monitor how
changes in anthropogenic noise and disturbance affects whales in different
conditions. The current conditions for vessel noise associated with changes in
human activity related to the COVID-19 pandemic provides a unique opportunity
for this comparative study. This will help to understand the magnitude of
physiological stress associated with different levels of disturbance, and inform
ongoing efforts to set science-based goals to strategically quiet large vessels
once industrial activity returns to more typical
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was cofunded by the Integrative
Ecological Physiology and the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Programs
in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems in Directorate for Biological
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.