* 2032179
* RAPID: Learning to Teach During COVID-19: Leveraging Simulated Classrooms as Practice-Based Spaces for Preservice Elementary Teachers within Online Teacher Education Courses
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Jamie Mikeska, Educational Testing Service
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 05/31/2021
* USD 199,440.00

School-based field experiences are a critical part of preservice teacher
education. The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly disrupted the ability of
teacher education programs to place their teacher candidates in typical K-12
teaching settings as a part of learning to teach. This project examines how
simulated classroom field experiences for preservice teachers can be implemented
in online and emergency remote teacher education courses. Elementary mathematics
and science teacher educators are provided with opportunities to engage their
preservice teachers in practice-based spaces using mixed-reality simulated
classroom environments. These simulations are real-time lessons with animated
student avatars that are voiced by an interactor who is responding to the
teacher's lesson in real time in ways that represent authentic student thinking.
This project aims to develop support materials for integrating simulated field
experiences into elementary mathematics and science teacher education courses.
The research will seek to understand what preservice teachers learn about
teaching from these experiences, how teacher educators integrate the simulated
field experiences into coursework, and how such simulated experiences can be
integrated in remote, online courses in ways that support preservice teacher
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances knowledge through the
development and deployment of simulation-based tools that develop preservice
elementary teachers' abilities to teach mathematics and science. Preservice
teachers use performance tasks to deliver instruction in the simulated
classroom. The project develops support materials for teacher educators to
integrate this work into online and/or emergency remote teacher education
courses (in response to COVID-19) in ways that support engagement in ambitious
teaching practice. The project assesses impact on preservice teachers' ambitious
teaching practice through artifacts of the simulated classroom practice,
including observations and recordings of the simulated interactions and
preservice teacher surveys and assessments of their use of ambitious teaching
practices. The project evaluates the ways in which teacher educators integrate
the simulated field experience into their emergency remote teacher education
courses through surveys and interviews. The research addresses the immediate
COVID-19 pandemic challenges in providing field experiences for students and
provides long-term support for the ongoing challenge of finding field experience
settings that are conducive to preparing highly-qualified elementary mathematics
and science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.