* 2032645
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Metapopulation Modeling to Develop Strategies to Reduce COVID-19 Transmission in Public Spaces
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Davida Smyth, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 01/31/2022
* USD 53,288.00

The COVID-19 pandemic presents an unprecedented challenge to public and private
institutions to safely reopen public spaces, including workspaces and schools.
However, we have little guidance on how to manage the use of shared spaces in
light of a highly transmissible, but invisible, pathogen. The fundamental aim of
this project is to better understand how SARS-CoV-2 spreads in built
environments. Predictions generated by mathematical modeling will be
experimentally tested using a surrogate non-pathogenic virus. This project
presents a new paradigm where the likelihood of infected individuals being
present, the amount and manner of viral shedding, the locations of viruses over
time, and the usage-needs of a location provide for a major advancement in the
assessment of public space occupancy and usage. The ultimate goal is to develop
practices capable of limiting virus transmission and meeting the current
worldwide challenge to public health. Recommendations will resemble established
building and fire codes, which regulate how space is allotted per occupant based
upon design and usage requirements; our analyses will generate a “COVID Code”
that can be generalized for use during future outbreaks. This research will also
provide training opportunities for students and postdoctoral scholars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recently developed computational model (the Ephemeral
Island Metapopulation Model (EIMM)) that applies metapopulation theory to
explain how pathogens persist in hospital environments will be revised to
address the spatial spread of SARS-CoV-2 within built environments. The EIMM
defines aspects of the built environment as distinct habitable zones of
occupancy (“demes”) in much the same manner as human hosts are considered, but
these demes have their own biological parameters relevant to the survival and
transmission of SARS-CoV-2. The number and size of both living and non-living
demes, instead of human hosts alone, are used to model size and location of
pathogen populations using ecologically relevant parameters, such as growth
rate, population size, and carrying capacity. An enveloped bacteriophage phi6
will be used to validate model expectations as well as test control strategies
in real environments such as classrooms. The goal is to test which interventions
suggested by the EIMM minimize opportunities for phage phi6 spread in shared
spaces, and this information can be adapted to provide estimates of how various
interventions would affect SARS-CoV-2 persistence and
transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Ecology and
Evolution of Infectious Diseases Program in the Division of Environmental
Biology, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.