* 2032954
* RAPID: Using Real Life COVID-19 data to teach quantititative reasoning skills to undergraduate Hispanic STEM students
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Gabriela Solis-Cavazos, Laredo Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,978.00

The Hispanic-Serving Institutions Program supports RAPID projects when there is
a severe urgency with regard to availability of, or access to, data, facilities
or specialized equipment, including quick-response research on natural or
anthropogenic disasters and similar unanticipated events, such as the COVID-19
pandemic. The project at Laredo Community College, a two-year institution, seeks
to investigate the effectiveness of using a fully-virtual undergraduate research
format to enhance quantitative reasoning and literacy while promoting student
persistence during a pandemic of COVID-19. Additionally, this project seeks to
promote faculty development in guiding undergraduate research at a community
college and in an online learning environment. This work will include collecting
and monitoring data on the rate of infection of the COVID-19 in high-poverty
rural communities in Laredo thus increasing the diversity of the data available
to scientists. The project may shed light on inequities that have occurred as
learning has transitioned to fully-virtual formats and may provide targeted
strategies for engaging and encouraging groups historically underrepresented in
STEM to degree completion. Students and faculty comprise a two-tier model where
the former conduct research on COVID-19 in their communities and the latter
examine how these students learn in this setting; this structure may serve as a
model for other rural community colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By gathering
data from the COVID-19 spread in Laredo, this project can be an opportunity to
use data to study, to learn, and to prepare for the future, an important
component of resiliency. The unique data elements will only exist at this time.
An undergraduate research experience will be designed and implemented around
data analysis utilizing existing COVID-19 data resources. Students will increase
their quantitative reasoning knowledge base, skills set, and confidence level by
gathering, interpreting, analyzing data, and drawing conclusions based on
numerical evidence, and communicating this information to others. Faculty
involved in the project will also gain a quantitative reasoning-focused
professional development opportunity. The impact on faculty development for
delivering research content material and guiding research virtually as well as
studentsâ€™ transitions into four-year institutions and quantitative reasoning
ability will be evaluated. The proposal also includes plans for communicating
results virtually throughout the college, city, and state, as well as to other
HSIs through conferences and professional society
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Hispanic-serving
Institutions Program in the Division of Human Resource Development, Directorate
of Education and Human Resources. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate
STEM education and build capacity at HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.