* 2032467
* RAPID: COVID-19 diagnostics for limited resource settings via improved sample preparation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2020
* Rustem Ismagilov, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 12/31/2020
* USD 140,939.00

COVID-19 continues to be a global challenge. A critical aspect of the disease is
that up to half of all people infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus are
asymptomatic, rendering screening and containment strategies based solely on
clinical presentation impossible. Society cannot fully return to work and school
unless both symptomatic and asymptomatic infected individuals can be screened
regularly. There is therefore an urgent need for a universally accessible, rapid
point-of-care (POC) diagnostic with accurate, reliable results that can be
deployed in an affordable way on an unprecedented global scale. However, the
diagnostics field has struggled for decades to make these complex tests
compatible with POC settings. Great progress has been made developing nucleic-
acid amplification assays that are ultrasensitive and rapid; yet the core
technology for the initial RNA-extraction step remains largely unimproved since
1990. The RNA extraction step is the key bottleneck to developing a globally
deployable COVID-19 diagnostic. This project will bring advances in interfacial
engineering to COVID-19 diagnostic technology to decentralize molecular
diagnostics from the laboratory, which is needed to reopen the US economy and to
protect the vulnerable members of society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The ultimate
impact of this project will be to improve the performance and availability of
SARS-CoV-2 RNA testing so that these tests can be run at the POC by minimally
trained users. There are two goals: (1) reduce the logistical burden associated
with relying on supply-chains and centralized labs and (2) simplify the RNA
extraction step to eliminate the need for complex equipment. Standard RNA
extraction follows a complex, multi-step protocol based on solid-phase
extraction (SPE). The protocol requires centrifugation, and it suffers from
lowered assay performance due to the carryover of inhibitory buffers. This
project will directly address both bottlenecks associated with RNA extraction by
integrating an innovative approach: a two-phase wash (TPW) that reduces
inhibitors while maintaining the RNA yield during the extraction step. The TPW
technology integrates a wash buffer immiscible with water. TPW removes
contaminants from the extraction column by leveraging the combination of solid-
liquid and liquid-liquid interfacial properties and solubility of the inhibitory
components. Extra purity obtained via TPW will improve assay sensitivity and
reduce cost and will enable the use of lyophilized reagents and isothermal
amplification, eliminating refrigeration requirements and reducing testing time
(from hours to minutes). Finally, using TPW with a pressure-based RNA-extraction
technology will eliminate the need for centrifugation and will improve the speed
and accessibility of RNA extraction. Additionally, this project will leverage
interfacial engineering via TPW to develop sample-preparation modules that can
be used as stand-alone components and combined (plug-and-play) with other state-
of-the-art amplification and readout technologies, such as those designed by
industrial collaborators and other sensing/detection technologies currently
under development in the RAPID program. The technologies developed in this
project can be immediately adopted by commercial and pre-commercial diagnostic
manufacturers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.