* 2032388
* Developing a Strategic Plan for Upham Woods, a Field Station and Living Lab of the University of Wisconsin-Madison
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2023
* Philip Townsend, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 24,016.00

Upham Woods Outdoor Learning Center, a field station and living laboratory of
the University of Wisconsin-Madison, is convening partners from their home
university’s main campus and other field stations and universities around the
country to develop a strategic plan for their field station. Upham Woods
institutionally returned to the University of Wisconsin-Madison after spending
48 years as part of a separately administered entity within the University of
Wisconsin system. This recent reorganization presents an opportunity to
undertake a visioning and planning process for the field station operations –
specifically related to research, innovation, and connections to students and
faculty from main campus. With a strategic plan to more intentionally integrate
into the university, Upham Woods will better serve as a field station that
provides place-based, environmental education opportunities to undergraduate
students that otherwise may not have the opportunity to have enriching
educational experiences outside of the classroom. Additionally, by extending
Upham Woods engagement into the collegiate landscape with more innovation and
research, the engagement with the 12,000 youth and adults that the field station
reaches annually will be enhanced and more robust. That audience will learn
about, and in some cases experience firsthand, the research on the landscape at
Upham Woods that is associated with the University of Wisconsin-Madison,
enhancing the broader impacts of the natural science research of the university.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upham Woods Outdoor Learning Center will develop a 5-year
strategic plan that addresses a) the advancement of research on the landscape at
Upham Woods, b) expanding opportunities for more intentional integration into
the University of Wisconsin-Madison as a living laboratory, c) promoting access
and involvement of university students at Upham Woods through university
courses, student organizations, and research projects, d) identifying future
grant projects that will ensure the sustainability of the research program at
Upham Woods and e) develop a data management plan for the field station. Over
the one-year duration of this project, Upham Woods will host and co-facilitate a
series of workshops that focus in field station administration (evaluation and
diversity, equity, and inclusion effective practices), humanities, and natural
sciences. Each workshop will convene a partners of Upham Woods with the relevant
expertise to develop research prospectuses for collegiate students,
recommendations for enhancing field station operations, and identify
opportunities to pursue grant funding. The data generated in each of these
workshops will inform the formal strategic plan that Upham Woods will present to
the strategic planning committee assembled for this project. The overarching
goal of this project is to develop a strategic plan for Upham Woods that ensures
the longevity and sustainability of the research program at the field station
while enhancing its reach to a broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.