* 2032589
* Collaborative Research: A Fast, Scalable, and High-Fidelity Spin Entangling Gate On-A-Chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Philip Hemmer, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2024
* USD 186,930.00

By harnessing uniquely quantum mechanical effects such as quantum superposition
and entanglement, it becomes possible to create exponentially fast quantum
computers, unconditionally secure quantum networks, and ultraprecise quantum
sensors. However, to achieve these quantum advantages requires controlled
interactions among a large number of quantum bits, which is extremely difficult
to realize. One way to scale up a quantum system is to interconnect multiple
small-scale quantum modules using a bus formed by optical photons. This program
aims to develop a chip-integrated quantum photonic circuit that can optically
interconnect electron spins with unprecedented entanglement rate and fidelity.
To deterministically couple two or multiple electron spins with the photonic
circuit, the principle investigators will explore a new hybrid photonics
platform by merging bottom-up material synthesis with top-down device
fabrication. This capability will pave the way towards scalable manufacture of
quantum circuit in an integrated photonics chip and open new opportunities in
both solid-state spin and optical photon based quantum information processing.
In addition to the research component, this program will include the training of
the next generation of scientists and engineers in quantum science and
technology, as well as a strong outreach effort to educate K-12 students and
broaden participation in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: &lt;br/&gt;Among the many qubit platforms for solid-state quantum
technologies, defect centers in diamond exhibit some of the best spin coherence
properties. Both the electron and nuclear spins of the defect centers can be
used as qubits, and they can interact with each other through direct dipolar
coupling. However, there is a fundamental limit in scaling up this system, due
to the short range of the dipolar interactions. On the other side, photons are
ideal carriers to mediate remote entanglement. They are highly versatile
interconnects and can bridge quantum interactions over multiple distance scales
from micrometers to kilometers. To attain the full potential of spin-based
quantum technologies requires photon-mediated entanglement with sufficient rate
and fidelity, which is difficult to achieve with traditional entanglement
schemes based on spontaneous emission. The proposed research aims to develop a
new entanglement scheme based on cavity scattering, which will significantly
boost the achievable entanglement rate and fidelity. To deterministically couple
two or multiple spins with different cavities, the principal investigators will
explore a new device engineering approach by merging bottom-up material
synthesis with top-down nanofabrication. Specifically, they will develop a novel
technique to grow nanodiamonds on a mature photonic material, silicon nitride.
Following the material growth, the researchers will use top-down nanophotonic
engineering to develop a coherent spin-photon interface by coupling single
electron spins of silicon-vacancy centers in nanodiamonds with silicon nitride
nanocavities. Combining both capabilities, the researchers will develop an
integrated quantum photonic circuit to generate photon-mediated spin
entanglement with an unprecedented entanglement rate and
fidelity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.