* 2032521
* Collaborative Research: Three-Dimensional Flexible Biosensor Enabling Label-Free Spatial Mapping of Intra-Organoid Functions
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Hyunjoon Kong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2024
* USD 320,000.00

Over the last decades, biologists and bioengineers have attempted to engineer
"living" cell masses that exhibit tissues and organ structure and function
outside of the body. These "living" cell masses, named organoids, can serve as a
low-cost, rapid, but precise drug-screening platform and, ultimately, replace
animal models. Despite the promise, there remains a lack of tools to enable
real-time, non-invasive monitoring of the organoids' biological activities. This
project supports an integrated research and educational program with goals to
(1) develop a three-dimensional flexible sensor deciphering electrophysiological
actions of human heart-like organoids and use it to predict the effect of
potential anti-viral drugs for COVID-19 on the human heart, and (2) develop a
multidisciplinary educational framework associated with the biosensor for
multiple levels of students, especially from traditionally underrepresented
groups in science and engineering. The proposed research will make a positive
and immediate impact on U.S. health and economy by providing a novel organoid-
sensor platform useful to determine powerful therapeutics to the on-going
COVID-19 and future, unforeseeable outbreak.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the last
decades, extensive efforts have been made to recapitulate the multicellular,
anatomical, and functional hallmarks of organs, thereby offering comprehensive
frameworks to model organ development, homeostasis, regeneration, and disease.
These movements have quickly engineered a variety of organ-like multicellular
clusters named organoids. However, there remains a lack of tools enabling label-
free, real-time, and non-invasive monitoring of intra-organoid functions. This
project aims to establish a set of materials, design layouts, and assembly
methods to develop a three-dimensional flexible intra-organoid sensor
instrumented with vertically ordered silicon nanoneedles. As a model system,
this sensor will be tailored for label-free spatial mapping of electrocardiogram
signals from the inside of cardiovascular organoids that are engineered by
orchestrating spatially-organized co-differentiation of pluripotent stem cells
to cardiac muscle cells and endothelial cells. The quantitative readout of the
intra-organoid activities will facilitate improved understanding of the
underlying anatomical-electrophysiological-mechanical relationships of cardiac
function. Furthermore, this intra-organoid sensor platform will become a
transformative organ-on-a-chip tool that will greatly assist efforts to
determine the efficacy of newly developed drugs as well as the impact of
unidentified toxins. Complementary experimental and computational methods will
be established for analyzing time-series data associated with vascularized
cardiac muscle functions. This collaborative research has been built upon a
strong research tie of the Multiple-PIs in joint efforts over the past 2 years
based on a long-standing relationship between Purdue University and the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Because the universities are within
close geographic proximity in the Midwest, the investigators at Purdue
University will be able to spend significant amounts of time in the clinical
setting at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in order to not only
obtain timely feedback from the clinical perspectives but also ensure the
progress of the proposed tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.