* 2032454
* I-Corps Teams: Development of Noninvasive Diabetes Breath Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Quinn Qiao, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 35,430.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project to enable a non-
invasive, simple and portable monitoring blood glucose levels from human breath.
This project will provide the commercialization training to graduate students
and enhance students learning on commercialization skills. As a potential
societal impact, this innovation will enhance the quality of life, by using
noninvasive breath sensors for the recognition of human blood glucose level for
diabetics. New discoveries will be disseminated through presentations,
workshops, partnerships, and potential technology transfer to a start-up
company. Industrial collaborators from various companies will help translate
this innovation into engineering practice. More than 100 people will be
outreached about the innovations in the noninvasive diabetes sensors during the
interview process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is to conduct
market analysis and customer interviews for commercializing a noninvasive breath
biosensor for detecting acetone in exhaled breath for the recognition of human
blood glucose level. The molecular imprinted layer improved the selectivity of
the sensors by allowing the specific molecule to be exposed into the sensor. The
acetone-imprinted sensor shows a wide range of linear relationship with the
growth of the acetone concentrations in the range of 0-10 ppm at a sensitivity
about 15 &amp;#8486;/ppm. This sensor has the following advantages over the
existing diabetes sensors in the market. This sensor has a linear gas response
to acetone from &lt;0.9 ppm to 10 ppm, which leads to accurate detection of
acetone concentration in breath of patients with diabetes (usually in the range
of 1.7 ppm to 3.7 ppm). This sensor demonstrates high stability, improved
selectivity, and high sensitivity for acetone from different gas molecules such
as moisture, ethanol, etc. This sensor has a small size that can fit in a
pocket. Patients with diabetes can conveniently and discretely carry the sensor
for real-time detection of acetone in exhaled breath to recognize human blood
glucose level and help determine a patient?s insulin
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.