* 2032328
* Southern Ocean Biogeochemistry Control on Short-Lived Ozone-Depleting Substances and Impacts on the Climate System
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Eric Apel, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 343,969.00

A class of small molecules, very short-lived substances (VSLS; e.g.
CHBr3,CH2Br2, and CH3I) are important components in the climate system where
they act as tropospheric ozone destroyers as described in the multilateral
environmental Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. The
Southern Ocean represents a key component in the climate system and has a
critical role in other global biogeochemical cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use the NSF/NCAR Community Earth System Model (CESM) with a newly
developed online air-sea exchange framework, to evaluate biogeochemical controls
on the marine sources of VSLS in the Southern Ocean as well as the Southern
Hemisphere. A machine-learning approach will be used to couple ocean
biogeochemistry with air-sea exchange for these compounds. A variety of oceanic
and atmospheric observations of VSLS will be used to evaluate a unique oceanic
VSLS inventory. In particular, the recent ORCAS field campaign provides a unique
opportunity to examine Southern Ocean VSLS emissions, and their impacts from
ocean biogeochemistry, meteorology and sea ice cycles. The project will also
support a postdoctoral early-career researcher, and a specific effort of this
project is STEM education and public outreach activities. The research team will
extend opportunities to high school and undergraduate students so they may gain
experience in the coupled ocean and atmospheric sciences, including exposure to
and experience in programming and modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.