* 2032313
* RAPID Collaborative: Networks and Spatial Dynamics of the US Food Supply Chain amid the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Craig Carter, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 53,692.00

Security and safety in food supply chains is critical to preventing the
transmission of COVID-19. During the COVID-19 pandemic, it has become clear that
the US food-supply system is vulnerable. As the pandemic forced restaurants to
close, or dramatically curtail operations, the news reported that farmers were
discarding products because the buyers (restaurants) were no longer buying. At
the same time consumers are struggling to find products in the supermarkets.
Restaurant-supply networks may play a larger role in the resilience and
sustainability of the US supply network than people had thought. It is clear now
that these food distribution networks likely have evolved independently to
maximize efficiency, not resiliency to risks such as pandemics. Recognizing this
problem, and the potential impact on the economy, jobs, and national security,
the US government has invested billions of dollars to buy and redistribute food
that farmers were discarding. This research will pinpoint weak links in the
food-supply network during the COVID-19 pandemic by rapidly assessing
disruptions in restaurant-supply network, which include restaurateurs,
distributors, and producers. The team’s novel spatial, ethnographic, networks
(SENs) approach will also advance supply chain management theory by quantifying
difficult-to-reach components within supply chains. The goal is to provide
actionable strategies that can identify how people can adapt and help create a
more resilient and sustainable US Food System amid the COVID-19 pandemic, and
avoid these disruptions in future unanticipated events. Finally, the project’s
novel SENs approach will train students in research methods that can be rapidly
applied to tackle unexpected changes in our global food system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supply-chain scholars are calling for new theoretical
developments that account for the complexities and dynamics, and provides
visibility to hidden components in supply networks. This project will bridge the
gap in knowledge through spatial, ethnographically-derived, networks (SENs). A
multi-phase comparative research design is employed that allows the ability to
maximize the comparison potential of the analysis along key dimensions: the
onset and intensity of COVID-19 and the influence of regional supply
distribution over time. The overall goal is to understand what are the
structural and spatial characteristics of actors’ (restaurateurs’,
distributors’, and farmers’) supply networks that lead to various outcomes
(e.g., new business opportunities, more sustainable practices, staying in
business, or closing shop). Key informant interviews will be used to design
structured interviews that will be conducted at two points in time. A number of
measures will be derived from these survey spatially-explicit food supply
networks for key informants, including a Sourcing Diversity Index that
characterizes distributor typologies, geography, and ego network measures. By
capturing these disruptions at the onset, and throughout the pandemic, this
project will be able to identify key areas of the food-supply network that are
vulnerable, not only for this pandemic, but other global
disruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.