* 2032114
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Covid-19 Hotspot Network Size and Node Counting using Consensus Estimation
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* cihan tepedelenlioglu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 05/31/2023
* USD 107,995.00

In order to open up the economy in light of the reality of COVID-19, a suite of
solutions are needed to minimize the spread of COVID-19 which include providing
tools for businesses to minimize the risk for their employees and customers. It
is important to detect transmission hotspots where the contact between infected
and uninfected persons is higher than average. This project will provide
information to assess precisely the size, density and locations of COVID-19
hotspots and enable issuing well-informed advisories based on data-driven
continuous risk assessment. Every step will be taken to ensure privacy and
network security and specific algorithms will be developed for secure access and
information transfer. The project will access databases at CDC, Johns Hopkins
and the WHO, and create a comprehensive website to disseminate real-time
localized COVID-19 hotspot data, while maintaining privacy. The project will
create new algorithms and embed them in iOS and Android apps that will
continuously interact with databases. The software for mobile devices as well as
central hubs will be made publicly available through APIs for use by the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use advanced consensus-based
methods for estimating network area/size, node locations and node counts in a
network based on minimal transmit-receive data. The proposed methods will lead
to significant improvements compared to existing algorithms. The project will
design consensus-based algorithms to estimate (a) the center, radius, and
consequently, the size of the network, and (b) the number of users in the
network. Localization algorithms will be designed that work with noisy and
incomplete data. The proposed work is different from the contact-tracing
technology used by Google and Apple which is limited to newer devices. The
proposed algorithms and software will advance the state of the art while
retaining compatibility with emerging and existing mobile technology. The
project will help reduce COVID-19 infections and save lives. The research will
also have applicability to other fields such as the E911 system, indoor user
tracking, infrastructure-free implementations applicable to robotics, autonomous
systems and vehicle fleets, and location-aware patient care and other mobile
health applications. The developed algorithms can be used in other emergency
situations, such as locating clusters of sheltering groups in the case of
earthquakes and tsunamis, to assist first responders in finding survivors after
an event, and for detection of transmission nodes in the case of future
pandemics or future waves of COVID-19. Outreach activities will be integrated
with the research and include the creation of software and web content for
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.