* 2032769
* EAGER: Applying Paleoecosystem-Mass Extinction Theory to Socio-Economic Systems During COVID-19
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Peter Roopnarine, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 05/31/2022
* USD 242,627.00

The project will apply a developing theory regarding the behavior of
paleoecosystems as complex adaptive systems during mass extinctions, to the
response of human and socio-economic systems (SESs) during the COVID-19
pandemic. Socio-economic systems and ecosystems are examples of complex,
adaptive systems. Such systems underlie much of our world’s complexity,
including human genetic systems, and the global economy. System behavior depends
on the number of agents, their interactions, external influences, and how agents
are organized into sub-groups. In ecosystems, the agents are species,
interacting through mechanisms like predation or competition, and groups of
species form when they have overlapping interactions. The behavior of a complex
system is difficult to understand and forecast because of structural complexity,
but a lot may be learned if the system is subjected to extreme stress. This has
been the case when ecosystems in the past suffered mass extinctions, driven by
enormous events such as asteroid impact. It is also the case for human SESs
stressed by the COVID-19 pandemic and its socio-economic fallout. Studies have
shown that ecosystem resilience during mass extinctions was determined by
structural complexity, and that proper recovery depended on how structural
complexity was re-evolved. This project will use similarities between ecosystems
and SESs to model the impact of pandemic-driven mortality, morbidity, and
economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop network models of
Californian and national SESs, relating employment organized by industrial
sectors to system dynamics. The pandemic’s impact on selected SESs are modeled
with numbers of persons employed in sectors, and we will identify critical
sectors, forecasting future system dynamics. SES recovery will be modeled as
employment recovery, comparing three recovery strategies: opportunistic recovery
distributed randomly among sectors (random recovery), distributed fairly among
sectors (equitable recovery), or distributed unevenly to maximize recovery rate
and magnitude (strategic recovery). The latter strategy will be modeled using a
Markov Chain Monte Carlo Metropolis-Hastings machine learning
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.