* 2032354
* Dynamics of granular raft on a moving interface: assembly, structure, and property
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Xiang Cheng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 12/31/2024
* USD 446,023.00

The “Cheerio’s effect” refers to the spontaneous aggregation of floating
particles on the fluid-fluid interface through capillary interactions. The
particles floating on the interface can form stable particle rafts with unique
properties that have inspired technological innovations such as liquid marbles
and bicontinuous gels. In addition, aggregates of large granular particles on
water surfaces are commonly seen in the open environment, ranging from the
assembly of mosquito eggs, shade balls to prevent evaporation of reservoirs, to
sand particles deployed to clean oil spills. Particle rafts of environmental
importance are naturally subject to perturbations due to flow, which can affect
the collective dynamics and stability of the raft. Yet, the connections between
the dynamics of fluid-fluid interfaces and particle assembly remains unclear.
This project aims to address the issue by combing tabletop experiments with a
theoretical investigation on the dynamics of granular rafts on moving interface.
The results of the research will provide not only a fundamental understanding of
the behavior of particle rafts in natural contexts, but also a new engineering
tool to design and tailor macroscopic properties of particle assembly. The
project will include an educational plan that emphasizes engagement of
undergraduate students. The students and post-docs involved in the project will
have outreach and networking opportunities with industrial partners though the
industrial program at University of Minnesota. In addition, the visual nature of
the research provides a good opportunity for integrating commonplace surface
tension phenomena, such as “Cheerio’s effects”, in undergraduate fluid mechanics
courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research is to gain
fundamental understanding of particle rafts on a moving fluid-fluid interface,
ranging from the assembly to macroscopic properties of the rafts. A particle
raft is a monolayer of particles trapped at the interface between two fluids. As
unique low-dimensional materials comprising discrete elements, particle rafts
have a wide range of technical applications. However, the focus of the state of
the art is on the particles themselves, while the fluid-fluid interface serves
mostly as a passive site with a globally fixed geometry onto which particles can
self-organize. Only limited studies have considered the dynamics of the rafts
made of large granular particles, where gravity plays a dominant role. By
combining experiments and theory, this project will directly address the role of
the moving fluid-fluid interface in the assembly process and the mechanical
properties of granular rafts. Experimentally, the PIs will investigate the
influence of the moving interface on the structure of granular rafts and
characterize the mechanical properties of resulting rafts via linear and
nonlinear compression tests. In parallel to experiments, the PIs will develop a
continuum model incorporating the intrinsic gravity-driven dynamics missing in
the current theory of colloidal rafts. Together, the theoretical model and
experimental measurements will provide a comprehensive physical understanding on
the formation and the response of granular rafts under different interfacial
perturbations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.