* 2032272
* Photonic Integration of Site-Controlled van der Waals Emitters for On-Demand Entangled-Photon Pair Generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Galan Moody, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 398,040.00

Scientists have been exploring methods for quantum light generation for nearly
50 years, beginning with the isolation of a single atom emitting individual
photons at a time. Quantum light is an essential resource for both fundamental
scientific research and emerging quantum technologies, including secure
communications, information processing, and precision metrology. It is now
possible to create individual atom-like emitters in solid-state atomically thin
materials, known as two-dimensional materials, by introducing individual defects
in the material structure. By irradiating a defect with a laser pulse, single
photons are emitted from the defect one-at-a-time and on demand. This project
seeks to demonstrate that it is also possible to precisely engineer the material
defect properties for the generation of on-demand photon pairs that are
entangled. The research also integrates the materials with chip-scale silicon
photonic devices that confine the light to extremely small volume to enhance the
light emission efficiency. Ultimately, this research provides significant
insight into how to control the properties of atomically thin materials and
devices for efficient quantum light generation for new applications in quantum
information. This project provides valuable training opportunities for
scientists and engineers in materials processing and assembly, photonic device
fabrication, and quantum measurements, as well as community engagement through
hands-on short courses in quantum mechanics for high-school students and summer
workshops introducing young students to atomically thin materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of quantum light sources capable of
producing single and entangled photons on demand in silicon-based photonics
would enable practical and scalable quantum technologies with low size, weight,
power, and cost; however, due to the lack of suitable sources in silicon
photonics, new device concepts are needed. The recent discovery of single-photon
emitters in atomically thin van der Waals materials provides a promising new
direction to address this need. These materials have unique advantages for
integrated photonics in that they can be easily transferred to various material
platforms and they host defect states that serve as bright sources of single and
correlated photons, but entangled-photon pair generation has not yet been
demonstrated. The first objective of this project is to utilize strain and
particle irradiation to engineer site-controlled single quantum emitters in
monolayer semiconductors that are capable of producing entangled-photon pairs on
demand, which will be characterized with quantum optical metrology techniques.
The second objective is to enhance the emission brightness and entanglement
quality through integration with photonic waveguides and resonators using dry-
transfer techniques. This research will advance our understanding of both the
fundamental properties of quantum light generation in atomically thin materials
as well as their potential impact on quantum technologies, filling a long-sought
need for scalable, on-demand quantum light sources compatible with silicon-based
photonics. The project will provide hands-on training for student researchers in
interdisciplinary fields including nanotechnology, atomically thin materials
processing and characterization, photonic device fabrication, and quantum
optical measurements. The project will also establish a strong engagement with
the community through a new short course for high-school students with hands-on
immersive activities introducing several key fundamental concepts of quantum
mechanics. A weekend summer science workshop will be offered for students to
learn about how atomically thin materials are transforming technology to make a
societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.