* 2032226
* RAPID: Developing and Researching Youth-Driven Media that Highlights Science as an Act of Service During a Public Health Crisis
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Jenefer Husman, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 06/30/2022
* USD 151,040.00

During the COVID-19 pandemic, numerous media sources have placed a spotlight on
the critical role of science and scientists in promoting public health. In
contrast to many existing media sources that portray images of adult scientists,
this project will develop media that portrays youth scientists as they conduct
scientific research related to COVID-19. This media will be developed based on
the findings from focus groups with youth of color, and it will include features
that are designed to encourage youth to see the value of science while
envisioning themselves as participants in science. These features include
showing first-person narratives of youth of color; portraying science as a team
endeavor; and framing science as an act of service to local communities and to
society at large. After developing a video with these features, researchers at
the University of Oregon Eugene will share the video with youth of color who
will share their responses in focus groups. This project will broaden
participation in science career pathways by advancing knowledge of the features
of media that motivate youth to pursue science careers and career pathways. This
project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the University of Oregon Eugene
will conduct focus groups with 30 high school students who identify with races
or ethnicities that are underrepresented in STEM careers. These focus groups
will include reflections related to the COVID-19 pandemic and the purpose of
science. Informed by data from these focus groups, undergraduate students in the
University of Oregon’s School of Journalism and Communication will use footage
from professional and student scientists conducting research related to
COVID-19, as well as first-person narratives from high school students, to
produce a new video titled “Science as Service.” This video will highlight the
global, community-focused, service-oriented nature of science as conducted by
diverse teams. The research team will then conduct a qualitative study to
determine how youth from underrepresented groups respond to this new video by
conducting focus groups with 30 high school students who identify with races or
ethnicities that are underrepresented in STEM careers. These focus groups,
conducted after the students watched the video, will be designed to elicit
aspects of the students’ perceptions of science, science identities, and
motivations to pursue science. A constant comparative analysis will illustrate
how youth perceived science and their motivations to pursue science careers and
career pathways relative to the video. Empirical findings will be shared in
empirical journals, while the video will be disseminated widely through existing
national networks and organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.