* 2032408
* RAPID: Low-cost, Batteryless Smart Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) Tackling the COVID-19 Pandemic
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Oliver Cossairt, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 10/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Healthcare workers rely on face masks and other personal protective equipment
(PPE) to safeguard their health. The COVID-19 pandemic has shown that PPE alone
cannot protect workers, because fatigue, activity, even exposure to people
impact the health and ability of the worker. The goal of this project is to
develop smart PPE, which includes the design of small, low cost, and smart
batteryless sensor devices that can be attached to masks. The masks will provide
useful information for workers to self-manage health without the need for
recharging or maintenance at reduced size and cost, unobtrusively protecting the
worker.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research tasks center on building an energy
harvesting and battery-free hardware and software platform that conducts
continuous inference and notification on in-mask sensor data despite
intermittent power failures stemming from dynamic energy input. Three research
tasks are pursued (1) prototyping a hardware platform for intermittently powered
human sensing, (2) developing a task-based adaptive checkpointing system for
memory-constrained intermittent systems that perform on-device inference, (3)
exploring adaptive mechanisms for continuous inference which modulates estimated
accuracy of prediction to reduce power failures. Finally, the research products
are integrated into a single platform and sensing applications are developed for
smart PPE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enable the computational
means for low cost, active protection of healthcare workers in the COVID-19
pandemic and future health crises using smart PPE. By leaving batteries behind,
these devices can function maintenance-free, without recharging, at a reduced
size and cost. These devices will provide actionable data and notifications to
workers and hospitals for controlling the spread of infectious diseases and
maintaining a ready, healthy workforce. The research informs ultra constrained
computing system design and could be applied to protect other essential workers
and the general population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed systems,
including software, hardware, documentation, and detailed assembly instructions
will be made available to the community. All research products will be made
available at the following website http://kamoamoa.com/projects/smart-ppe/. The
site will remain accessible for at least a year after the completion of the
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.