* 2032044
* RAPID: Evaluating the potential for SARS-CoV-2 spillback infections of native North American wildlife
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Daniel Mead, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 199,791.00

SARS-CoV-2 originated from a bat, likely passing through another animal before
it infected people. The objective is to determine if two North American native
wildlife species can be infected with SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent of
COVID-19, which to date has not been evaluated. Skunks and raccoons are closely
related to other species that are known to be susceptible with this virus, and
are highly abundant in human environments, frequently consuming human refuse.
Both species are also handled frequently in wildlife research and rehabilitation
settings—creating situations where spillback of the virus from people to them is
likely. Further, this study will investigate whether skunk-to-skunk and racoon-
to-raccoon transmission is possible, needed to forecast what would happen if
this virus spilled into our native wildlife; the worst case scenario is that
these species become reservoirs of the virus for people. Skunks and raccoons
will be inoculated with two doses of SARS-CoV-2 that represent doses they might
encounter the environment, or when in close contact with people. Nasal and fecal
samples will be collected after inoculation and tested using two detection
methods. Blood will also be collected at intervals to determine if these species
create antibodies against the virus. In addition to rapidly disseminating this
information to wildlife management agencies, presenting and publishing the
results, this work will train three graduate and two undergraduate students on
animal husbandry, experimental infections, and various laboratory
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this study is to identify if two
North American native wildlife species that represent a high likelihood of
susceptibility and ecological opportunity—skunks and raccoons—are susceptible to
infection with SARS-Cov-2. Current phylogenetic evidence indicates a spillover
event from an animal host prompted the COVID-19 pandemic, thus, understanding
susceptibility of animal species is paramount. Researchers will assess clinical
outcome, duration and route of virus shedding, and seroconversion and pathology
to understand the: 1) potential reservoir status of these common and abundant,
peridomestic, mammalian wildlife species and, 2) likelihood of virus spillover
from humans to these species. Results will guide proactive actions to manage
contact between humans, domestic animals and wildlife—crucial to combat the
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Animals will be acquired from a captive breeder and
housed in BSL3 facility. Three pairs of each species will be intranasally
inoculated with one of two doses of SARS-CoV-2 (103 and 105 plaque forming
units). To determine direct contact transmission, at Day 1 post-inoculation, we
will add one animal to each pair of inoculated animals. Post-inoculation, nasal
and rectal swabs for qrtPCR and virus isolation and blood samples from both
inoculated and direct contact animals will be collected up to 21 days. All
animals will be monitored for clinical signs daily by a veterinarian and
humanely euthanized, whereby a complete post-mortem examination will be
conducted. This RAPID award is made by the Physiological and Structural Systems
Cluster in the BIO Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, using funds from
the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.