* 2032704
* RAPID: Wireless Positioning for Mitigating COVID19 Surface Transmissions
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Joseph Paradiso, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The project develops a new micro-location technology for tracking hand movements
and alerting users when they are about to touch their face. The technology uses
wireless signals and mobile sensors to track the distance between a user's hand
and their face, and introduces new algorithms and frameworks that enable
achieving high accuracy and robustness at ultra-low cost. Such technology can
significantly reduce COVID19 surface transmissions, which account for 10% of all
COVID transmissions according to the CDC and scientific studies. The success of
this project can have an immediate impact on essential workers (in factories and
grocery stores) and aide in a quicker economic recovery while minimizing the
impact of a potential second wave as the economy re-opens. The potential long-
term impact of this research extends beyond COVID19 and future pandemics to
providing transformative capabilities in networked micro-location for smart
environments, indoor navigation, and asset tracking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this proposal is to design and build a low-cost (sub-$5), ubiquitous
wireless positioning technology that allows tracking and predicting hand-to-face
distance. Developing such a technology requires addressing challenges in terms
of accuracy (centimeter-scale), interference (from co-existing technologies and
multi-path reflections), and compatibility (with existing ubiquitous
technologies). To overcome these challenges, the project introduces a principled
multi-modal sensor fusion framework for mobile devices. This framework operates
by fusing various sensing modalities that already exist in mobile devices --
including BLE, accelerometers, magnetometers, and ultrasound. Taken
individually, ultra-low-cost sensors for each of these modalities lack the
necessary accuracy and robustness for centimeter-scale positioning; however,
because they experience uncorrelated sources of noise and interference,
combining these modalities in a principled probabilistic framework enables
achieving high accuracy and robustness while maintaining low cost. If
successful, the resulting system would be the most accurate, low-cost, and
ubiquitious micro-location technology to date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.