* 2032016
* RAPID: Interaction of the Coronavirus M protein with a Myosin V  motor protein
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* James Goldenring, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The COVID-19 coronavirus represents one of the most acute and dangerous threat
to global health in a century. The present COVID-19 outbreak is caused by the
SARS-CoV-2 virus and is exacerbated by our present inability to inhibit the
assembly of virus inside cells, which affects the spread of coronavirus within
human patients. SARS-Cov-2 is a member of a family of related coronaviruses that
includes SARS, MERS, and Mouse Hepatitis Virus (MHV). These are RNA viruses
wrapped in a lipid membrane, which has a number of different proteins embedded
in it. In general however, relatively little is known about how viral proteins
are packaged together inside human cells to assemble coronavirus particles. This
lack of knowledge impedes the development of strategies that could target the
assembly of virus particles inside human cells. However, one membrane protein
encoded by the virus, designated the M protein because of its membrane
association, serves as the starting seed for the assembly of all the other
coronavirus proteins. It has recently been discovered that the tail of the MHV
version of the M protein can interact with a motor protein used for trafficking
inside human cells. Because the sequence of the M-protein tails in this class of
coronaviruses is very conserved, this project seeks to determine if this
interaction is generalizable among SARS-CoV-2, and other related coronaviruses.
If this interaction is present in SARS-CoV-2, then this project will identify
the parts of the M protein that interact with the myosin motor. This would allow
future research to evaluate drugs that can interrupt this interaction, which may
alter the ability of the SARS-CoV-2 and other coronaviruses to assemble and
spread. As a Broader Impact, the Project will provide critically needed
information for fight the Covid-19 pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relatively
little is known about the processes required for the assembly of coronavirus
virions in human cells. The family of beta-coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-2,
SARS, MERS and MHV all utilize a similar compendium of proteins, including a
membrane glycoprotein protein, termed the M protein. M protein serves as the
nidus for assembly of other coronavirus proteins into the mature virus particle.
This project seeks to expand on the recent finding that the M-protein of MHV
interacts with a specific 26 amino acid alternatively spliced exon of Myosin Vb
(MYO5B), termed exon D. This observation is the first to identify a key
intracellular trafficking protein that interacts with the M protein. This
project seeks to identify whether this interaction is preserved in the M
proteins of other beta-coronavirus family members, including the SARS-CoV-2
virus. The Project will also determine the molecular basis of the interaction
between M protein and Exon D of MYO5B. The Project will first utilize yeast
2-hybrid assays to evaluate the binding of the internal tails of SARS-CoV-2
(COVID-19), SARS and MERS and other related coronaviruses. Second, random
mutagenesis of the coronavirus tails will be utilized to determine the common
amino acid motifs used for interaction with MYO5B Exon D. Third, wild type and
mutant coronavirus proteins will be expressed in HeLa cells, and mutations that
block interactions with MYO5B on M protein will be evaluated for their effects
on trafficking through the endoplasmic reticulum, the Golgi apparatus and to the
plasma membrane. If verified with the SARS-CoV-2 M protein, the site of
interaction with MYO5b Exon D could be utilized as a target for disruption of
the assembly of coronavirus virions. This RAPID Project is expected to provide
insights for the future development of molecular strategies to disrupt virion
assembly in host cells, which could lead to new therapeutics for the treatment
of Covid-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.