* 2032579
* STTR Phase I:  An Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based algorithm using nanosensor-based salivary analytics to predict clinical outcomes in symptomatic COVID-19 patients
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Xiaoqian Jiang, NANOINNOVATIONS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2022
* USD 267,239.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to provide U.S. hospitals with a tool to help
accurately predict the expected severity of illness for COVID-19 infected
patients at the time of initial diagnosis. A simple interface uses Artificial
Intelligence-based predictive algorithms to help hospitals make informed and
accurate decisions about which patients require specific care and treatment
interventions. This enhanced process allows hospitals better and faster
decision-making on patient care and treatments, redirecting hospital resources
(including staff, hospital beds, ICU) for maximum effectiveness. In the longer
term, the platform can be adapted to predict illnesses related to other
infectious diseases, and also scaled for countries where availability of
hospital infrastructure is limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology (STTR) Phase I project will develop a completely new category of
medical diagnostic and prognostic tools via a novel approach that relies on
analysis of a complex multi-variate signal, reflective of the patient’s entire
salivary metabolome and proteome. Artificial intelligence tools will be used to
see if signal clusters correlating with patient outcomes can be identified. This
is a radical departure from traditional medical diagnostics which evaluate
individual biomarkers for a clinical diagnosis. Such approaches are ill suited
to the task of predicting future patient outcomes. The scope of this pilot phase
work is the development of an effective algorithm and understanding algorithm
efficacy and reliability in prediction and classification of outcomes for
COVID-19 patients. The goals of the pilot project are to: (i) obtain COVID-19
patient bio-fluid samples, and (ii) develop machine learning techniques for an
effective predictive algorithm. Multiple machine learning techniques and
comparison strategies will be used for algorithm development and efficacy
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.