* 2032938
* RII Track 4: Development of Rigorous Techniques to Detect Polar Pesticides at Low Concentrations
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Shakira Hobbs, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 156,681.00

Glyphosate is the most widely used herbicide worldwide and is often transported
from application areas to surface water when solubilized in runoff, sorbed to
eroded sediment or taken up by plants. There is evidence that suggests both
glyphosate and its main metabolite aminomethylphosphonic acid (AMPA) may pose a
risk to human health, as well as cause adverse effects in the environment.
Concerns about impacts to the environment and human health continues to grow and
application rates increase with production of glyphosate-resistant crops for
more efficient weed control in agriculture. The widespread use of glyphosate may
be resulting in glyphosate transport to drinking water resources, especially in
karst topography. Scientific understanding and analytical methods for analyzing
glyphosate and AMPA with low detection and consistent monitoring data is a
lacking. The goal of this proposed work is to develop analytical methods for
analyzing glyphosate and AMPA by establishing a partnership with Dr. Lee Blaney,
a leader in environmental engineering at the University of Maryland Baltimore
County (UMBC). The new analytical methods will support a long-term collaboration
focused on detecting and quantifying polar pesticides occurrence and creating
sustainability assessment tools for agroecosystems. Implications of this work
will inform decision-making and assist farmers in sustainable agroecosystem
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposed work is to develop
analytical methods for analyzing glyphosate and AMPA. The new analytical methods
will support a long-term collaboration focused on detecting and quantifying
polar pesticides occurrence and creating sustainability assessment tools for
agroecosystems. This research addresses a significant gap in knowledge and need
for sensitive analytical methods for detecting glyphosate and AMPA at low
concentrations and environmental monitoring. In collaboration with Dr. Lee
Blaney at University of Maryland Baltimore County, new pretreatment protocols
using solid phase extraction and quick, easy, cheap, effective, rugged, and safe
extraction with liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectroscopy will be
developed. Stored frozen water, sediment and plant samples collected previously
from watersheds on karst topography will be transported to UMBC and analyzed
using the proposed methods. New data for glyphosate and AMPA at low detection
limit will be generated; current methods do not provide enough resolution for
detecting polar pesticides at low concentrations. Analytical results will be
used to evaluate the occurrence of glyphosate and AMPA, transport, fate,
ecotoxicity, and human toxicity. This proposed research not only develops
transformative techniques for detecting glyphosate and AMPA at low
concentrations but provide real-world methods for safeguarding sensitive species
and human health. Research activities will be disseminated through traditional
academic journals and via on-boarding training modules for researchers analyzing
glyphosate and AMPA. Underrepresented students in engineering will be engaged in
the formation of the training to encourage and support research development,
diversity and inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.