* 2032814
* STTR Phase I:  Minimizing Uncertainties in Software-based Vibration Compensation of 3D Printers to Enable Increased Speed and Accuracy (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Samuel Thompson, S2A TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 09/30/2022
* USD 249,070.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to increase the productivity (speed) of manufacturing machines at low
cost without sacrificing quality. The project is specifically motivated by 3D
printing (or additive manufacturing), a $9 billion rapidly growing industry
whose adoption for mainstream manufacturing is hindered by the low speed of 3D
printers. For example, faster 3D printers can help support manufacturing of key
equipment, such as personal protective equipment (PPE). A major hindrance to
high-speed 3D printing is vibration, which causes loss of quality at high-speed
operation. This project seeks to develop a new approach for mitigating the
vibration of 3D printers and other manufacturing machines. Because the dynamic
behavior of manufacturing equipment may lead to uncertainties in software
compensation schemes, this project will develop new software algorithms to
address these uncertainties. The software algorithms developed through this
project will not only benefit 3D printing, but would also apply a wide range of
manufacturing machines, like machine tools and robots, whose speed and accuracy
are often limited by vibration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project
seek to develop two new calibration approaches that allow the filtered B spline
vibration compensation software to handle uncertainty and avoid loss of accuracy
due to dynamic mismatch. The first approach is robust offline calibration –
i.e., calibration of the machine offline to accommodate the widest range of
potential mismatch in machine dynamics. Preliminary lab-scale work has shown
potential of a robust filtered basis functions to address this issue. However,
remaining technical challenges of guaranteed computational efficiency and
accuracy of the robust filtered basis function approach must be overcome. The
second approach is adaptive online calibration – i.e., updating the calibration
of the machine while it is operating in the field using vibration measurements
obtained from low-cost accelerometers. To achieve this, this project will
address challenges of guaranteed accuracy of adaptive online calibration using
low-cost accelerometers by ensuring persistence of excitation during online
calibration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.