* 2032974
* Collaborative Research: Stakeholder Interdependencies in Post-Disaster Relocation under High Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Nazife Ganapati, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 159,475.00

The aftermath of a disaster often results in the need for individual households
and businesses to relocate to less hazardous locations but at other times
movement can be necessary for larger numbers of both. In the latter case,
deciding whether to move requires the interaction and concerted action of a
variety of community stakeholders in a context fraught with many uncertainties.
Unfortunately, existing research has paid little attention to how community-
level stakeholders make relocation decisions under high uncertainty and how
these decisions may be interrelated. Understanding such interdependencies
requires using a more holistic approach than those adopted in prior relocation
studies. Such an approach must acknowledge both the individual capacity of
stakeholders in making relocation decisions and the broader contexts which
influence these capacities. This study advances the NSF’s mission to promote the
progress of science by generating scientific knowledge of the factors that
affect community relocation decisions of households and businesses in highly
uncertain and emergent institutional environments. By focusing on underserved
communities, this study also advances NSF’s mission to promote national health,
prosperity, and welfare of these communities which are often at the frontline of
fast and slow-onset disaster events such as, hurricanes, floods, earthquakes,
and sea level rise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study’s specific aims are to
examine the following in highly uncertain and emergent institutional
environments: (1) resources households and businesses use to make relocation
decisions; (2) the inter-dependencies between household and business relocation
decisions; and (3) the dependence of household and business relocation decisions
upon the actions of nonprofits or volunteer groups. This three-year study uses
an embedded, multi-case study and mixed-method research design in two rural,
under-served and at-risk communities in Puerto Rico coastal (Loíza) and
mountainous (Comerío) zones and their neighborhoods designated for relocation
after Hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017. These communities are not only at the
frontline of multiple and concurrent, fast and slow-onset disaster events but
also are dealing with high levels of political unrest and uncertain and
constantly changing institutions. The study’s annual data collection methods
include: (i) random sample surveys of households and businesses; (ii) multi-
stakeholder key informant interviews; (iii) PhotoVoice project with residents;
and (iv) multi-stakeholder Role Playing Games with
residents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.