* 2032056
* STTR Phase I:  Rapid Acting Disinfectant Spray for Slowing the Spread of COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Christina Drake, KISMET TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2022
* USD 255,536.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is development of a disinfectant spray to curb the
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 via contact with contaminated surfaces. COVID-19
transmission occurs primarily via respiratory droplets produced by an infected
person and by contact with a surface where a droplet containing the virus
exists. Mitigating infection by contact with surfaces is a measure that will
slow the spread of novel viruses ahead of development of a vaccine or other
protective measures. In conjunction with other measures, a novel disinfectant
will support public health during the COVID-19 pandemic. Current disinfectants
require times ranging from 30 seconds to 10 minutes for disinfection to begin
after application and do not continue to disinfect. The proposed technology
creates a temporary, continually disinfecting film that remains on the
application surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project will
demonstrate both the rapid performance of a novel spray and its ability to form
a temporary and continually disinfecting film post=application. This technology
employs a select medium containing fast-response doped nanoceria where the
oxidizing response/mechanism is engineered to perform several disinfectant
reactions in parallel. A safe, rapid, multi-disinfectant approach using
engineered nanoceria has not previously been demonstrated for use. The project
will also demonstrate the post-application disinfection properties. The goals of
this project will be achieved with the following: 1) development of an anti-
viral, multi-mechanism disinfectant formulation, 2) demonstration of efficacy
and safety, 3) study of product stability, and 4) demonstration of temporary
film formation, stability, and activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.