* 2032029
* RAPID: Monographing the Antarctic and Subantarctic Cumacea
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Sarah Gerken, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 08/31/2023
* USD 71,397.00

Ocean communities play an important role in determining the natural and human
impacts of global change. The most conspicuous members of those communities are
generally large vertebrates such as marine mammals and sea birds. But smaller
animals often determine how the changes impact those charismatic animals. In the
Antarctic, where some of the most dramatic physical changes are taking place, we
do not know much about what small animals exist. This project will sample the
sub-Antarctic and three different Antarctic seas with a hope of identifying,
quantifying and discovering the variation in species of a group of small
invertebrates. Comma shrimp, also called cumaceans, are rarely seen elsewhere
but may be common and important in the communities of these locations. Antarctic
sampling traditionally used gear that was not very effective at catching
cumaceans so we do not know what species exist there and how common they are.
This study will utilize modern sampling methods that will allow comma shrimp to
be sampled. This will lead to discoveries about the diversity and abundance of
comma shrimp, as well as their relationship to other invertebrate species. Major
impacts of this work will be an enhancement of museum collections, the
development of description of all the comma shrimp of Antarctica including new
and unnamed species. Those contributions may be especially important as we
strive to understand what drives the dynamics of charismatic vertebrates and
fisheries that are tied to Antarctic food webs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will collect cumaceans from benthic samples from Argentinian waters,
Bransfield Strait, and the Weddell Sea using benthic sleds. Specimens will be
fixed in 95% ethanol and preserved in 95% ethanol and 5% glycerin to preserve
both morphology and DNA. The specimens will form the basis for a monograph
synthesizing current knowledge on the Subantarctic and Antarctic Cumacea,
including diagnoses of all species, descriptions of new species, additional
description for currently unknown life stages of known species, and vouchered
gene sequences for all species collected. The monograph will include keys to all
families, genera and species known from the region. Monographic revisions that
include identification resources are typically useful for decades to a broad
spectrum of other scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.