* 2032190
* Collaborative Research: Don’t forget the foot! Exposing foot energetics to enhance foot orthoses and gait rehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Dustin Bruening, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2024
* USD 196,527.00

The foot and ankle play a major role in the ability to walk efficiently, which
is essential for independent living and overall quality of life. Yet, the foot’s
role in walking efficiency is not well understood, limiting innovation of future
assistive devices. This has implications for patients with compromised strength
and for the design of ankle-foot assistive devices for walking. This study aims
to reveal the mechanisms that control foot energetics and apply this new
understanding to assist walking for individuals with ankle-foot impairments
using a novel foot brace. It is anticipated that the knowledge gained from this
work will spur a shift in understanding of the foot’s role in walking, which
will be applied to the design of next generation foot and ankle-foot assistive
devices. As part of this collaborative research project, a broad group of
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students will be trained in
multidisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research
is to reveal critical understandings of the mechanisms governing the energetics
of the human foot and apply this understanding to probe and modulate the
energetics of the ankle-foot systems using a novel foot orthosis. This objective
will be achieved in three parts. First, metatarsophalangeal joint motion will be
systematically manipulated through a series of activities and the associated
changes in foot power and work will be studied via novel kinetic, multi-segment
foot modeling. This will provide critical knowledge of how energy is used and
transferred in the healthy ankle-foot system and enhance the ability to
interpret measurements used to capture and quantify foot energetics. Next,
ankle-foot energy usage and transfer will be probed using a novel deformable
foot orthosis with customized forefoot stiffness to gain a deeper understanding
of the healthy foot’s energetics as well as its interaction with the ankle
joint. Healthy individuals will walk under footwear conditions, representing
varying forefoot stiffness levels, while energetic and biomechanical motion
analysis data are collected. Finally, as a proof-of-feasibility study,
individuals post-stroke will walk under three conditions - barefoot, flexible
shoes, and a custom orthosis with tuned forefoot stiffness - while energetic and
biomechanical motion capture data are collected. The goal of this final
objective is to determine if a deformable foot orthosis with customized forefoot
stiffness can be used to enhance the energetics of the ankle-foot system for
individuals with impaired ankle-foot energetics. This study will provide
critical understanding of the human foot’s energetics and how energy usage and
transfer throughout the ankle and foot can be modulated in both healthy and
impaired individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Disability and Rehabilitation Engineering program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.