* 2032835
* Mentor Up: Supporting Preparation of Competitive Proposals to Improve Education of the Skilled Technical Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Karen Wosczyna-Birch, Education Connection
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

According to the National Center for Education Statistics, the United States has
1,252 two-year institutions of higher education. However, each year only about
200 of these institutions submit proposals to the Advanced Technological
Education (ATE) program, which support education of the skilled technical
workforce. As a result, a large pool of potential institutions and faculty who
could benefit from the ATE program are not submitting proposals. This project
will support a mentoring program to guide prospective principal investigators in
crafting and submitting a proposal to the ATE program. This project aligns with
the ATE program objective to provide leadership opportunities for faculty at
two-year institutions. It will also support the national priority of educating
the skilled technical workforce for the industries that keep the United States
globally competitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage the
promising practices from other NSF awards that focus on mentoring and leadership
development activities. Each year of the award, the project team will recruit
teams from 16 community and technical colleges, with the team members including
two technician-education faculty from the institution, together with a grant
writer, administrator, or other key contributor from the institution. Specific
activities will include virtual mentoring and webinars as well as an in-person
2.5-day workshop where two-year faculty who are teaching technician education
will learn the strategies and NSF requirements for writing and submitting
competitive proposals. Faculty from all disciplines applicable to advanced
technological education will be considered for participation. The intention is
that each two-year college team will submit at least one ATE proposal. The
project will also provide professional development for mentors-in-training,
including newly awarded ATE Principal Investigators who will become the next
generation of ATE leaders. This project will help participants address many of
challenges faced by community college faculty in preparing and submitting NSF
grant proposals, often due to a lack institutional experience and resources to
support efforts to secure NSF awards. At the workshop and after, participants
will be able to engage with their institutionâ€™s administration or other key
personnel, thereby increasing the number of community colleges with knowledge of
the NSF and its ATE program. In this way, project participants will bring
knowledge and skills to their campuses that can help to catalyze and implement
institutional change. The project will target a diverse group of urban,
suburban, and rural institutions and provide opportunities for participation of
faculty and students who are typically underrepresented in technician programs,
such as minority populations and women. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.