* 2032658
* I-Corps:  An educational software platform and simulation library for supporting role-playing simulations of collective decision-making
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Elisabeth Gerber, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of tools to enable educators to create meaningful, engaged, online
learning opportunities. The new technology has the potential to benefit society
in a number of ways. It may improve teaching through simulations that allow
instructors to quickly and confidently incorporate engaged learning activities
into their courses, and introduce them to a dynamic pedagogy that they can
infuse throughout their teaching. It may improve learning by providing benefits
to learners by using a safe setting within which to develop critical life skills
such as empathy, communicating across differences, critical thinking, inquiry,
and team work. It also increases access by supporting engaged learning
experiences in the remote learning space, which has the potential to include a
wide swath of society that had previously been limited to a privileged subset of
learners in face-to-face educational settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of cloud-based software and an expandable
simulation library. Both elements are deeply grounded in the insights developed
through previous research. Specifically, the simulation library consists of
simulation templates that capture essential elements of various decision-making
situations that have been theorized, modeled, tested, and refined. Future
development envisions a process for automating the simulation development
process by scraping the web for information on current topics and populating the
templates with real-time content. The software platform includes features that
allow simulation authors to either adapt and implement ready-made simulations
from the previously developed library, or to create their own simulations that
capture these essential elements in various decision-making situations.
Together, the core technology provides simulation experiences that reflect the
accumulated knowledge and insights gained through the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.