* 2032180
* Collaborative Research: IIBR Instrumentation: The Nanosizer - A new tool for the preparation of arbitrary bioactive surfaces
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Chad Mirkin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

An award is made to Northwestern University and the City University of New York
to develop an instrument capable of synthesizing arbitrary 3D nanopatterns of
biologically active materials, coined “the Nanosizer.” The development of said
instrument, the instrument itself, and the new photochemistry developed, will
have wide reaching impacts on trainees, the nearby Chicago and New York City
communities, and the broader scientific community. Both Mirkin and Braunschweig
groups have previously and will continue to mentor trainees, including
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows, on the design of
experiments and communication skills. Importantly, the researchers will lead the
experimentation effort and work closely with the PIs on the dissemination of
results through high-impact publications, patents, grant reports, and conference
presentations. Exposure to all aspects of the research process will provide
trainees with the highest probability of success on their paths forward, as
proven by the track record of academic and industrial job placement from the two
groups. The neighboring Chicago and New York communities stand to benefit from
the award, through participation in outreach endeavors. Braunschweig group will
participate in the Research Internships in Materials Science and Mirkin members
will volunteer with Science In your Community Center with the goal of engaging
K-12 students, primarily those from traditionally underrepresented groups, in
science and technology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Nanosizer will make arbitrary
3D nanopatterns of biologically active macromolecules with 100 nm resolution a
reality through in situ surface patterning and fully orthogonal biomacromolecule
construction. Through a combination of beam-pen lithography with 100 nm pixel
resolution, precise multiwavelength irradiation control, and continuous flow of
variable reagent streams, the Nanosizer will enable control over the reaction
conditions at any 100 nm pixel over a &gt;1 cm2 area. This, in conjunction with
the development of orthogonal photochemistries for surface functionalization and
synthesis of biomolecules, such as oligopeptides, oligonucleotides, and glycans,
will enable the massively parallel generation of biomolecule arrays, with each
pixel containing a chemically unique and well-defined molecule. Synthetic
interfaces coated with biologically active materials have screening and
functional applications in nearly every field of biology. The Nanosizer will
provide monumental improvements in batch-to-batch reproducibility, resolution
size, feature density, feature quantity, and overall cost in the preparation of
such substrates. Results from these studies will be published in peer-reviewed
journals, presented at scientific meetings, broadly distributed through
commercialization, and incorporated into outreach
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.