* 2032157
* RAPID: Adaptive immunity in bats: foundational knowledge for assessing specific pathogen responses in natural coronavirus reservoirs
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Hannah Frank, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 199,842.00

In recent years a number of infections have passed from non-human animals to
humans causing numerous different diseases and creating significant burdens on
public health and the economy. In particular, the current COVID-19 pandemic is
caused by SARS-CoV-2, a coronavirus whose ancestors likely evolved in a non-
human animal. In general, bats host a wide diversity of coronaviruses. Indeed,
SARS-CoV-2, like its relative SARS-CoV, the virus that causes SARS, is
hypothesized to have its origins in bat hosts. The proposed research seeks to
understand how the natural hosts of viruses respond to these infections with a
specific focus on bat immunity. Bats are a hugely diverse group that have been
linked to numerous emerging human infections but also provide critical ecosystem
services such as pest control, seed dispersal and pollination. The research will
clarify how bat immunity has shaped the evolution of these viruses. This will
yield insights into how to potentially prevent, manage or treat infections in
people, as well as protect and better understand bats. The research will also
facilitate the training of undergraduate students in genomic laboratory
techniques and bioinformatic analysis, training the next generation of
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, there is a limited understanding of
bat immunity, hampered in part by the diversity of bat species and lack of
immunological reagents for studying them. In particular, most research has
focused on innate immunity in a few species; almost nothing is known about the
immunoglobulins and T cells that form the basis of adaptive immunity. The
proposed research overcomes these obstacles by using genomic methods to
understand adaptive immunity in multiple bat species. Specifically, the proposed
research will 1) analyze the germline and rearranged immunoglobulin and T cell
receptor repertoires in multiple, diverse bat species, including known
coronavirus hosts, using a mix of gene capture, long-read sequencing, and
targeted amplification and sequencing; 2) characterize the cells involved in
adaptive immunity using single-cell transcriptomics; and 3) test for
coronaviruses in wild bats and compare the immunoglobulin repertoire between
infected and uninfected bats. The results will provide foundational knowledge of
adaptive immunity of an important reservoir group, clarifying the bat-pathogen
relationship in multiple species. These findings can be leveraged by others to
characterize the responses of bats to specific pathogens, to predict whether
certain species are better equipped to respond to infection, and to guide
prevention and intervention efforts for zoonotic disease. This RAPID award is
made by the Physiological and Structural Systems Cluster in the BIO Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief,
and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.