* 2032464
* Laser-Based Processing of Graphene Aerogels in the Manufacture of Ultra-performance Bolometers
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Xinwei Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2024
* USD 349,652.00

This project contributes new knowledge related to laser-based manufacturing
which can be used to incorporate novel ultra-low-density functional materials
into useful device structures. Bolometers have very broad applications in both
civilian and military fields including thermal imaging, night vision, astronomy,
security, and particle physics. To achieve high sensitivity and fast response,
the bolometer system requires very efficient light absorption, high temperature
response of its electrical resistance, very low heat loss to the environment,
and very small heat capacitance. Existing bolometers lack wide spectrum response
and the performance needs to be improved significantly to meet various needs.
This project develops a novel manufacturing process using laser-controlled
chemical reactions to make very high sensitivity bolometers that have a fast
response time and excellent sensitivity to radiation from ultraviolet to far-
infrared. The laser-controlled chemical reaction is used to manufacture and
tailor graphene aerogels to make sub-micron size bolometers. The project
investigates the patterning and chemical, and electrical materials modification
using spatial precision available through laser-based manufacturing. The
advances made in this work will benefit the U.S. economy and potential national
security applications, with the potential to impact the manufacture of other
aerogel materials. This research will involve extensive graduate and
undergraduate student training and education outreach to K-12
graders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of its excellent photon absorption
properties and porous structure, graphene aerogel has both a very high (close to
100%) and wideband photon absorption (ultraviolet to millimeter). Current
graphene aerogel manufacturing processes cannot be directly used for making
micron-scale bolometers Laser-based manufacturing has the additional potential
to provide materials modification with high spatial resolution and optimized
control over the changes in materials properties. Addressing the device need,
this project is designed to develop a laser-controlled chemical reduction
technique allowing for the direct manufacturing of graphene aerogel-based
bolometers down to sub-micron scale. The research team will develop laser-
controlled chemical reduction and N-doping for direct manufacturing of graphene
aerogel bolometers of highly defined size (down to sub-µm) with direct and
scalable integration to microscale circuits. The effect of laser parameters will
be investigated to uncover the relations between manufacturing conditions and
graphene aerogel structure and properties. Via tailoring the surface functional
groups within the graphene aerogel, the research team will significantly
optimize the sensitivity of GA bolometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.