* 2032200
* RAPID: Human-Driven Trophic Cascades: Mesopredator Release and Recreational Fishing in Estuaries
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Delbert Smee, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 78,696.00

Human activity affects natural populations of organisms directly through
exploitation and indirectly by changing how species interact with each other.
This project is investigating the effect of fishing on an estuarine food web. In
the oyster reef food chain, newly settled oysters are eaten by crabs, and the
crabs are in turn eaten by fish. More fish predators mean fewer crabs and more
oysters. Fish also reduce foraging by crabs, which further benefits oysters.
Although small-scale experimental studies have measured the impact of fish
exclusion on oyster reefs, the links between fishing, fish populations and
oyster reefs require an estuary-scale experiment. Stay-at-home orders associated
with the COVID-19 pandemic has curtailed fishing activity throughout estuaries.
This project combines empirical experiments and fisheries monitoring data from
before, during and after COVID-19-related restrictions to investigate how
changes in fishing activity influence oyster reef food webs. Building on 10+
years of preexisting observations the dataset encompasses a 100-year flood, a
hurricane, and now a pandemic, a rare opportunity to investigate the effects of
low fishing pressure in the absence of other disturbances. The broader impacts
of this study contribution of data towards optimizing management and
conservation of marine resources. Oyster reefs are essential habitat that
perform ecosystem services such as water filtration and shoreline stabilization,
but they are also harvested as a commercial fishery. Interest in estuarine
systems for recreation and fishing is high along the Gulf of Mexico. Public
displays and outreach activities at the Dauphin Island Sea Lab will include
results from this project to increase awareness of the effect of human activity
on local ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The loss of top predators can
destabilize ecosystems by making them more prone to invasions, altering nutrient
fluxes within and between habitats, and impeding recovery after disturbances.
Overfishing reduces the abundance of higher order predators, leading to higher
abundances of intermediate consumers or mesopredators. Mesopredator release can
increase predation pressure on basal trophic levels, including foundation
species. In estuaries, fin fish, many of which are targeted by both commercial
and recreational anglers, provide an important trophic link and their removal or
experimental exclusion can trigger mesopredator release. However, the extent
that fishing alters communities remains poorly understood. Estuarine systems
along the Gulf of Mexico have experienced nearly continuous and widespread
exploitation for over a century, and the few examples of temporary releases from
fishing pressure have co-occurred with other natural disasters. The COVID-19
pandemic has curtailed fishing and has provided a unique research opportunity.
Using a Before After Control Impact (BACI) design, the effects of fishing
pressure on top-down control is being investigated in a model system, oyster
reefs. Fishing activity and fish stock assessments are compared with field
experiments to determine top predator feeding activity, mesopredator abundances,
and recruitment and growth of oysters. To gauge changes in the structure of
estuarine food webs, the data are being compared with 10+ years of preexisting
results to isolate the effect of fishing activity from confounding factors
associated with natural disasters like hurricanes and
floods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.