* 2032261
* Collaborative Research/GOALI: Fully Continuous Downstream Processing Enabled by Coupled Precipitation-Filtration Capture Operations
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2021,08/31/2021
* Todd Przybycien, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 70,052.00

The goal of this research project is to develop a highly efficient purification
method for therapeutic biopharmaceuticals that has the potential to facilitate
the transition of the biomanufacturing industry from batch to continuous
processing. The use of continuous processing has the potential for improved
product uniformity, lower cost production of drugs, and more flexible
manufacturing operations. The research project involves designing, building,
operating, evaluating, and optimizing an integrated demonstration process for
biopharmaceutical purification. The research is being performed in collaboration
with an industrial partner, so the project is providing a unique training
environment for graduate students and should facilitate successful career entry
into the domestic biopharmaceutical industry. Additionally, knowledge gained
from the research project can be rapidly transferred to industry. Outreach
efforts are leveraging an existing program at the university to develop, deploy
and assess bioseparations learning modules and lab experiments for use in
secondary school chemistry curricula.

The goal of this research project is the development of a continuous coupled
precipitation-filtration biomanufacturing process for protein therapeutics that
offers significant performance and cost advantages relative to traditional
column chromatography-based capture. This purification process is based on
staged pairings of static mixers and hollow fiber filters for efficient
dewatering, washing, and re-dissolution of the target product. The use of
synergistic and generalizable cross-linking and excluded volume precipitant
pairs results in reversible, non-denatured precipitates at low precipitant
concentrations, relieving the traditional limitations of precipitation. Data-
driven models are being developed and validated for protein solubility,
precipitation kinetics, and precipitate morphology to provide a quantitative
description of the precipitation process. This research project is being
performed in collaboration with an industrial partner who, in conjunction with
the project researchers, are designing, building, operating, evaluating, and
optimizing an integrated demonstration process for biopharmaceutical
purification. Consequently, knowledge gained from the research project can be
rapidly transferred to industry.