* 2032166
* EAGER: Integrating Genotype, Phenotype, and Environment to Identify Biomarkers of Coronavirus Disease Severity and Transmission
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Lin Kang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 297,382.00

Proposed in response to a “Dear colleague letter” to fund research to fight the
coronavirus pandemic, this project will study the impact of obesity, diabetes,
and gender on disease severity and transmission in a mouse model of coronavirus
disease. Mouse models must be used to study this disease since humans cannot be
infected due to ethical reasons. Obese and diabetic people, along with males,
are at a higher risk for severe coronavirus disease, which is concerning since
42% of Americans are obese, 30% are pre-diabetic, and 9.4% have diabetes, while
49.2% are male. It is currently unknown why these groups of people are at higher
risk for severe disease, a question that must be answered to develop effective
treatments and public health campaigns. The value of this research to the
taxpayers is that the information gained will generate data necessary to create
effective vaccines and antivirals and identify ways to control coronavirus
transmission. In addition, this model will have broad interest to researchers
studying the modeling of transmission dynamics, virus-host interactions,
immunology, antivirals, and understanding basic virus biology. If successful,
these studies will provide a model with the potential to transform the way
research with these SARS-CoV-2 is currently done. The borader impacts of this
work include mentoring a graduate student and undergraduate students in
infectious disease research to train the next generation of STEM
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, no models to study the impacts of
co-morbidities or identify biomarkers of disease severity or transmission on
COVID-19 exist. The goals of this project are to define the impact of obesity,
diabetes, and sex on disease severity and transmission in the context of
different viral and host genotypes using a natural model of mouse infection with
the murine hepatitis virus (MHV). The two strains of mice display differential
susceptibility to severe disease to the two strains of mouse coronavirus—from
asymptomatic to 80% mortality. Furthermore, MHV is highly transmissible mouse-
to-mouse, which is unlikely to occur with SARS-CoV-2 infection in mice.
Accordingly, this is an excellent model system with which to gather
immunological, viral, and other data from infected mice to identify potential
biomarkers of severe disease or transmission. Levels of MHV in the blood and
oral passages, gene expression, cytokine levels, blood parameters, clinical
disease, tissue pathology, and mortality will be the phenotypes used to compare
to disease severity and transmission to identify associations. The hypothesis is
that pro-inflammatory cytokines (notably interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor-
alpha, and CXCL10) and concentration of virus in the blood or oral passages can
be used to predict disease severity and transmission, respectively. These
studies will increase understanding of the underlying biology of coronaviruses,
virus and host interactions, the genotype, phenotype, and environmental factors
influencing coronavirus disease and transmission, and may identify biomarkers to
predict disease severity and transmission in people with COVID-19. This RAPID
award is made by the Physiological and Structural Systems Cluster in the BIO
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, using funds from the Coronavirus
Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.