* 2032738
* Advanced Technological Education: Collaborative Outreach and Engagement to Communicate Impacts and Outcomes
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2026
* Rachael Bower, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,912,542.00

The National Science Foundation's Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program
focuses on enhancing technician education in advanced technology fields. It
emphasizes education/industry partnerships and supports projects based primarily
at two-year institutions of higher education across the country. ATE encourages
and supports these institutions to extend their leading roles in educating the
skilled technical workforce. The community and collaborations built by this
program have had an impressive and ongoing impact on the development of the
nation’s skilled technical workforce. The ATE Impacts book showcases this impact
by representing the diversity of programs, students, faculty, and industry
partners supported and amplified by the ATE program. The need to share
information about the impact of technician education is critical as outlined in
the National Science Board’s 2019 report, “The Skilled Technical Workforce:
Crafting America’s Science &amp; Engineering Enterprise.” The report discusses
the need to improve the message about technician education and “communicate the
importance of the STW to our nation’s S&amp;E enterprise, individual economic
prosperity, national security, and US global competitiveness.” This project will
showcase outstanding examples of how technical education and messages about
skilled technical careers are changing. It will also help strengthen
partnerships, encourage community building, and support outreach and
dissemination within and beyond ATE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a suite of deliverables designed to collect and share data about the
impacts and outcomes of the ATE program, including the centers and projects the
program funds and the valuable resources and activities these grantees develop
and deploy. The project team will work collaboratively with the ATE community,
the American Association of Community Colleges, Vox Television, and a project
Advisory Board to help showcase the important role two-year community and
technical colleges play in building the skilled technical workforce and provide
evidence of the critical U.S. economic need for and impact of technician
education, within and beyond ATE. The project will create the following set of
deliverables: 1) Three new ATE Impacts print publications (2022, 2024, and 2026
editions), covering ATE centers and projects, their impacts, and the impacts of
the whole ATE program; 2) Digital versions of the ATE Impacts editions, in both
accessible PDF and interactive flipbook format; 3) Professionally-produced
videos that illustrate individuals (student, faculty, industry partner) impacted
by ATE, with a corresponding spread in the print and electronic publications; 4)
An ATE Impacts Blog that will provide an ongoing series of examples from
different segments of the ATE community, increasing the currency and relevance
of the publications; 5) Audience- and subject-focused adaptable components to
re-frame the ATE Impacts publication and blog content for use by ATE projects
and centers and other stakeholders in outreach to specific audience segments; 6)
A visual library that organizes the hundreds of photos gathered in the process
of creating the ATE Impacts publications and makes them available for use by ATE
projects and centers and others for promotional and educational use; 7) An ATE
Impacts online portal to provide no-cost access to all of the deliverables. The
content produced and managed for all of these deliverables will be offered and
distributed under a Creative Commons license, to encourage maximum adoption,
reuse, and impact. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.