* 2032371
* RAPID: COVID-19 Influences on Racial, Gender, and Social Class Disparities in Time Use and Well-Being
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Liana Sayer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Time is major resource for all people in the United States. People allocate time
to work, family activities and leisure in different amounts. For many years,
social scientists have tracked time use to determine how social groups vary in
time use, and analyze how time use has changed historically. We know anecdotally
that the COVID-19 pandemic has drastically changed how people allocate time,
especially given school closures and sharp increases in working from home, with
less commuting to work. This project will support an urgent nationally
representative time diary survey with a subjective well-being component to
assess both objective time use and subjective reactions to current conditions.
The project will collect time use data between August and December 2020 to
understand how racial, gender, geographic location and social class variation in
current time use contribute to the different ways that COVID-19 is affecting
Americans. The data collection will facilitate the creation of knowledge on how
individual and structural inequities relating to these statuses influence daily
behaviors that increase risk of exposure, infection, and dying from COVID-19.
These data will inform social policy at several levels regarding pandemic
experiences and subjective responses, thus supporting the health and well-being
of people in the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time use has changed
dramatically owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, but we understand little beyond
anecdotes and a few aggregate figures. This project will collect time diary and
well-being data during the COVID-19 pandemic from a representative sample of the
U.S. adult population aged 18 and older. Time diary data are the gold standard
for collecting unbiased, valid, and reliable data about daily routines and the
ways time is allocated to the many activities of daily life, and will include
sampling of respondent activities throughout the day. The time diary will be
accompanied by assessments of positive and negative dimensions of subjective
well-being assessed for each activity reported. The momentary assessments of
well-being allow researchers to analyze the well-being consequences of time use
decisions, which are fundamental to health, quality of life, and effective
functioning of a society. The project will collect 6,250 time diaries between
August and December 2020, thus ensuring an adequate number of cases for sub-
group analyses. All data will be collected by Gallup and the sample will be
drawn from the nationally representative Gallup Panel. The data collection will
include oversamples of persons of color; sampling weights will ensure the final
dataset is nationally representative. In combination with similar, previously
collected time-use data, these new data will show how time use has changed owing
to the pandemic, and will enable analyses of social differences in time use
during the second half of 2020. The project will use data analytic techniques
including multivariate regression models using OLS, fixed effects, and random
effects. These data will form an important foundation for analysis of time
series, time use data, thus informing sociological theories regarding work and
family, with implications for the economy, for family functioning, for
education, and inter-generational relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.