* 2032787
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: COVID-19 Preparedness in Remote Fishing Communities in Rural Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Elbert Howe, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 05/31/2023
* USD 154,599.00

This time-sensitive RAPID project focuses on perception of COVID-19 risk in the
Bristol Bay region of rural western Alaska. Every spring, the town of
Dillingham, the hub of Bristol Bay fisheries, experiences massive in-migration,
as an estimated 13,000 workers arrive for the sockeye salmon fishing season.
Local health care resources and access to transportation are extremely limited.
Leveraging existing partnerships, project investigators will conduct surveys
with local residents, decision makers, fishermen and processors to characterize
risk perception, evaluate social distancing compliance, and assess perceived
costs and benefits of various pandemic mitigation plans. These data will inform
epidemiological modeling of possible scenarios in the region and help
stakeholders understand the dynamics of COVID-19 in a transient population
working in the close quarters of fishing vessels and the crowded conditions of
fish processing plants. This project will contribute to the emerging body of
research on the perception and effects of COVID-19 across the country, and more
specifically, to understanding pandemic impacts on a key Alaska
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Standard ethnographic methods, including
qualitative key informant interviews, two online surveys, and collection of cell
phone mobility data, will be employed to characterize risk perception and
response and evaluate compliance with social distancing guidelines. Surveys will
be designed collaboratively, and will leverage existing networks developed as
part of an ongoing Navigating the New Arctic project (ICER 1927827). Surveys
will be conducted at the beginning of the 2020 fishing season and again in
February/March 2021. Analysis will evaluate risk perception and response by
occupation, socioeconomic status, age, and sex. Epidemiological modeling will be
employed to predict disease dynamics (i.e., likelihood of infection and
mortality) under different scenarios; these estimates will be used to project
demand for limited health care resources in the region, such as
ventilators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.