* 2032701
* RII Track-4: Elucidating controls of sediment phosphorus delivery to tile-drains
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* William Ford, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 12/31/2023
* USD 226,757.00

Subsurface tile-drainage is widely used to increase crop yields in poorly
drained, agricultural landscapes across the nation. Sediment-bound phosphorus
(P) loadings from tile-drainage are contributing to the excessive richness of
nutrients in a body of water, through water run-off, and increasing the
prominence of harmful algae in downstream waterbodies. There are major gaps in
understanding of sediment erosion and transport dynamics through tile-drains,
which has limited our ability to manage these contaminants from agricultural
fields. This research will provide funding for a tenure-track Assistant
Professor, and a graduate research assistant from the University of Kentucky to
conduct extended site visits at the National Soil Erosion Research Laboratory
(NSERL) in West Lafayette, Indiana. The PI and his student will collaborate with
researchers at NSERL to perform laboratory rainfall simulations to study
mechanisms of sediment erosion and transport through subsurface soils. The
research team will also enhance computer simulation tools that can capture tile
sediment P loadings from fields in order to improve management strategies. Tile-
drainage is increasingly implemented in the PI’s state of Kentucky, as well as
food-production systems across the country. This research will improve
infrastructure for researching and managing tile-drainage water quality, advance
graduate curricula at the PI’s home institution, and provide training for an
underrepresented student in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies have
highlighted the importance of dissolved reactive phosphorus (DRP) that is
regenerated from streambed sediments as a major source of watershed-scale DRP
loading. There is now renewed interest in quantifying and managing sediment-
bound particulate P (PP) delivered through tile-drains. Mechanisms controlling
sediment erosion and transport dynamics in macropores are not well understood,
particularly the impact of biological crust development on macropore walls and
how it influences flow pathway dynamics and sediment erodibility. Further,
field-scale controls on PP delivery to tile drains have been hypothesized, but
not quantified, which stems from a lack of field datasets and limited
representation of subsurface PP delivery through tile drains in agricultural
water management models. The research team will collaborate with the National
Soil Erosion Research Laboratory (NSERL) to study the impact of macropore
biological crust development on sediment erosion and flow pathway dynamics.
Fellowship activities include the use of rainfall experiments on undisturbed
soil lysimeters with a growth and control condition. The team will also modify
the Water Erosion Prediction Project (WEPP) model to include subsurface flow
pathways and sediment P erosion and transport routines for tile drainage, which
will be evaluated at both field and watershed scales using long-term datasets
managed by NSERL. The infrastructure developed in this proposal may be used to
inform weighting factors and model structure for empirically-based tools used by
practitioners, such as P-indices. The proposed research activities will improve
mechanistic understanding of subsurface erosion processes, advance numerical
modeling infrastructure at field-watershed scales for subsurface drained
agroecosystems, and will quantify the prominent mechanisms causing PP transport
to tile drains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.