* 2032282
* SG: Demographic drivers of plant community response to fire: Re-evaluating the relative importance of survival vs. reproduction
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Stuart Wagenius, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 10/31/2023
* USD 297,768.00

Before European-American settlement in the 1800s, the vast grasslands of North
America burned every 2-5 years. These frequent fires maintained grassland
habitat and contributed to the diversity of birds, mammals, insects, and plants
found in prairies today. Widespread habitat loss and the elimination of fire are
causing native plant populations to decline in the few prairie patches that
remain. The loss of native plant diversity has motivated many Americans to take
action. People, businesses, and agencies of local, state, and the federal
government conduct prescribed burns to improve habitat and promote prairie plant
diversity. Understanding why native prairie plants thrive with fire is essential
for achieving these management goals. In addition to sharing results that will
advance the fundamental scientific knowledge about fires and plant populations,
the researchers will share practical information with land managers,
conservation practitioners, policy-makers, and the public to help them make
better decisions about how frequently to burn prairies to achieve their
management goals. In addition to disseminating scientific results and
recommendations, this project will provide research experience and training to a
postdoctoral researcher and two college students, as well as opportunities for
engagement by high-school students, secondary-school science teachers, and
conservation research volunteers in Minnesota and at the Chicago Botanic
Garden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will investigate how fire
maintains healthy populations of native perennial plants in western Minnesota.
Scientists have two main hypotheses about fire: on one hand, fires may help
native plants compete and survive; on the other hand, fires may help plants
flower, get pollinated, and produce seeds. Evidence exists for both hypotheses
and both survival and reproduction are necessary to maintain a population, but
how much fire influences each process remains an open scientific question. The
researchers will test the hypothesis that the reproductive benefits of
synchronized flowering after fire help promote population growth and forestall
local extinctions. They will randomly assign burn treatments in 30 prairies,
where they will 1) examine the effects of fire on pollination and reproduction
in previously-studied populations of a purple coneflower, Echinacea
angustifolia, 2) conduct a seed addition experiment to characterize the
influence of fire on seed germination and seedling survival, 3) develop models
to quantify effects of fire on Echinacea population growth, and 4) estimate fire
effects on mating and reproduction in three other widespread prairie
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.