* 2032023
* STTR Phase I:  Formulation of a COVID-19 mRNA Vaccine by Inverse Flash NanoPrecipitation
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Robert Pagels, Optimeos Life Sciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 02/28/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is the development of a novel messenger
ribonucleic acid (mRNA)-based vaccine for COVID-19. The fastest-to-clinic
vaccine for COVID-19 was mRNA-based; however, there are no mRNA-based vaccines
on the market currently. This is, in part, because this class of vaccines is
difficult to optimize and manufacture at a large scale. If clinical trials are
successful, hundreds of millions of doses will be needed in the U.S. alone. This
STTR project aims to pioneer a novel technique to manufacture mRNA-based
vaccines initially for COVID-19. This technology is highly modular, allowing for
the better understanding and optimization of this class of vaccines.
Importantly, this new technique can be scaled to manufacture the doses needed
both for the current COVID-19 pandemic and in the case of future outbreaks. The
flexibility and scalability of this platform technology provide a durable
competitive advantage. Following demonstration of preclinical efficacy, the
company will work with an established pharmaceutical partner for testing and
manufacturing. Capturing 5% of the U.S. COVID-19 vaccine market would bring an
estimated $125 million in revenue. This is a beachhead market, and, once
successful, the company will expand into other mRNA-based vaccine and
therapeutic markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project aims to develop an mRNA-based nanoparticle
vaccine for COVID-19 without the use of cationic materials. Current formulation
methods require cationic lipids or polymers to form charge-based complexes with
the anionic mRNA. Charge-based assembly limits the accessible nanoparticle
surface chemistries, a feature crucial to directing which cell types will be
transfected and the resulting immune response. Additionally, mRNA is only a
minor component of the resulting formulations. The proposed formulation method
decouples the mRNA encapsulation from the nanoparticle surface in a two-step
process. The method does not require cationic materials, allowing for mRNA
loadings up to 5-times higher than those achievable through other routes.
However, mRNA transfection has not previously been demonstrated without the use
of cationic materials. This will be achieved by completing three key milestones:
(1) optimize mRNA encapsulation, (2) vary surface coatings to enhance dendritic
cell uptake, and (3) demonstrate efficient cell transfection. A highly loaded
nanoparticle formulation that can efficiently target and transfect dendritic
cells is desired. Following the completion of this Phase I work, this
formulation may be applied to a SARS-CoV-2 spike protein-coding mRNA to produce
a COVID-19 vaccine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.