* 2032822
* SBIR Phase I:  Hypothalamus Stem Cell Exosomes for Treatment of COVID-19 (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Christine Ichim, FLORICA THERAPEUTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2022
* USD 275,678.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to create a novel type of therapeutic using
cutting-edge technology and adult stem cells. This therapeutic may be used in
hospitals to treat patients with severe COVID-19 infection; the proposed drugs
would be made from the cells of healthy brains and have the capability to
correct an aberrant immune response in sick people. This can potentially be used
for other neurodegenerative diseases as well as for other drug discovery
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR)
Phase I project addresses the urgent need for development of drugs to modulate
the immune response to prevent escalation of COVID-19 to acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS). The hypothalamus is crucial to secretion of cortisol
and other modulators that dampen the immune response following activation. This
project will test whether exosome-based therapeutics produced from hypothalamus
stem cells can abate the cytokine storm that causes ARDS in COVID-19 patients.
Technical tasks include: 1) engineer pluripotent cells to produce exosomes with
enhanced neuronal specificity by transducing cells with the XStamp-BHP1 and
XStamp-NCAM lentiviral vectors; 2) grow pluripotent cells at scale using the
mTesr3D system; 3) induce cells to differentiate into hypothalamus stem cells;
4) collect exosomes. The technical milestone is to engineer exosomes with at
least a 70% enhanced neuronal specificity and to produce highly concentrated
hypothalamus stem cell exosome particles. These engineered human hypothalamus
stem cell exosomes can be used to dampen the cytokine storm in a mouse model of
LPS-induced ARDS. This proposal establishes the feasibility of using
hypothalamus stem cells as therapeutic candidates for treatment of ARDS in
COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.