* 2032040
* RAPID: Supply Chain Portal to Serve Entrepreneurs Producing Critical Items in Response to COVID-19
* TIP,ITE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Binil Starly, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jemin George
* 05/31/2023
* USD 86,177.00

This COVID-19 RAPID project combines the efforts of the NSF Convergence
Accelerator Business Open Knowledge Network (BOKN) and Manufacturing Open
Knowledge Network (MOKN) in order to develop a knowledge resource to support the
discovery of manufacturers and materials suppliers to help assemble new supply
chains, particularly focusing on personal protective equipment (PPE), such as
ventilators. The BOKN encodes information about businesses and their
capabilities, while the MOKN encodes manufacturing information about goods. By
combining information and capabilities from both networks, this integrative
COVID RAPID project will develop search and matching tools that will help
entrepreneurs and manufacturers to adapt swiftly to the supply chains and
processes needed to produce new types of products. The key information along
with analysis capabilities for performing information extraction, data cleaning,
and data representation will be accessible via a web portal, initially focusing
on supply chains for PPE. The resources developed can be used equally well by
small businesses and entrepreneurs as well as more established organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will harness data from a diverse set of
sources, including manufacturing designs open-sourced by manufacturers;
component information from shipping manifests; and manufacturing capabilities of
firms sourced from websites and social media pages. Services provided via the
web portal will enable users to find data, determine where to source components,
and/or which designs to produce from these components. The project will develop
an end-to-end system for generating, representing and populating new supply
chains and processes focusing, initially, on the manufacture of PPE. These
objectives will be achieved by the creation of enhanced interfaces for
navigating company information, including relationships to other companies and
profile information about each business. Learned representations of
manufacturing firms will be developed in vector space models to better capture
manufacturing capabilities and to investigate fuzzy matching capabilities for
materials, parts, and sub-components. The materials and parts mentioned in
patent claims for PPE will be of particular interest. The project will create
the relationships between bill of lading data and domestic importers, and
potential suppliers of materials and parts. Users will be able to integrate
offerings from multiple information sources to rapidly meet emergent production
needs, beginning initially with PPE, but extendibly to other critical products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Convergence Accelerator
program in the Office of Integrative Activities and is associated with the
Convergence Accelerator Track A: Open Knowledge
Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.