* 2032196
* RAPID COVID-19: Metasurface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy Platform for High-Sensitivity, Multiplexed Detection of Antibodies and RNA for Point-of-Care Diagnostics
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Andrea Tao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The ability to rapidly and accurately detect coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
is imperative in managing the current global outbreak. In response to this
critical need, the research groups of Prof. Tao and Prof. Steinmetz at the
University of California, San Diego will collaborate to develop sensitive
diagnostic tests that are easy to perform at the point-of-care. The project aims
to enable 1) direct detection of viral ribonucleic acid (RNA) without the need
of RNA amplification; and 2) a sensitive immunoassay at the earlier stages of
infection. This project provides interdisciplinary research training
opportunities to a postdoctoral researcher, undergraduates, and graduate
students. In addition, it promotes teaching and learning by incorporating novel
insights from this research into the NanoEngineering undergraduate and graduate
curriculum and summarizing the findings in lay terms in
videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team seeks to develop an innovative
metasurface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (mSERS) sensing platform for detecting
coronavirus infection. Nanoscale optical cavities are uniquely designed to
enhance the sensitivity of optical detection by increasing both the local
optical field strengths of hot spots and the hot spot area for sampling a large
number of analyte molecules in the cavity. The quantitative readout of Raman
scattering intensity for a single vibrational band can be performed using a
commercial benchtop spectrometer. Integration of this highly sensitive mSERS
optical technique with vertical flow, lateral flow, or dipstick devices enables
fast, straightforward sample preparation and easy-to-perform testing. This
versatile platform can be used for multiplex detection of nucleic acid (RNA and
DNA), antigens/antibodies, or biomarkers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.