* 2032563
* RAPID: Effects of Responses to COVID-19 and Social Context on Food Insecurity
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Sarah Bowen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,034.00

In this project, the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on household food
insecurity are investigated. Food insecurity rates in the United States have
more than doubled as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Food insecurity rates
also vary widely across place, with state averages ranging from 14 percent to 32
percent. Researchers investigate how variations in social context and official
responses to the pandemic affect familiesâ€™ ability to prevent or cope with food
insecurity by documenting the ways the pandemic has affected how families shop
for food, cook, and eat. Results have implications for how community and
governmental groups can develop more responsive and equitable responses to a
range of crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To identify the key contextual and
official response variables that exacerbate or reduce place-based disparities in
food insecurity, 160 semi-structured interviews are conducted and photovoice
data are collected with a diverse group of poor and working-class families in
four rural and four urban counties across four U.S. states. The four states have
been selected to ensure variations in severity of COVID-19 outbreaks and in
state responses. The data are analyzed to understand how experiences of food
insecurity vary between and within states, and how variations in social context
and official food directives affect whether and how people are able to buffer
the impacts of food insecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.