* 2032688
* RAPID: Creating Opportunities for Visualization of Data: Applying STEM Education Research
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Kevin Moore, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2022
* USD 193,101.00

This RAPID study incorporates a diverse project team of scientists and
communicators to investigate how people interpret representations of
quantitative data regarding COVID-19. Such representations include maps, graphs,
and charts, which are commonly used in media such as newspapers, television,
websites, and press briefings. Research indicates that many people have
difficulty interpreting the information presented in these representations. As a
result, the public may have limited tools for understanding the severity of the
COVID-19 pandemic, which may limit their ability to use the data in making
decisions about their risk and effective risk-mitigation actions. The project
responds to this pressing issue by immediately enacting a study to investigate
individuals’ understandings and decisions during the pandemic. It will use this
information to develop new approaches to displaying quantitative data that can
promote greater understanding. Such approaches are likely to be useful for
increasing scientific and mathematical literacy, and will also be incorporated
into undergraduate STEM courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
includes a multi-phase design-research approach to investigating COVID-19
quantitative data representations (QDRs) through an iterative sequence of task-
based clinical interviews. In Phase I, the project team will investigate a
diverse population to produce differentiated models of participants’ QDR
interpretations and juxtapositions of these models that reveal key conceptual
categories across participants. In Phase II, the project team will apply
findings from Phase I and STEM education research to create research-based,
project-designed QDRs while simultaneously investigating the extent to which
these QDRs better support individuals’ understanding of the pandemic. In Phase
III, the project team will actively disseminate the results, to draw attention
to knowledge and products generated by the project. Reflecting the societal
implications of COVID-19, the dissemination plan targets both educational and
public communication media communities. Collectively, the project activities and
deliverables have the potential to produce a deeper understanding and tangible
examples of how STEM education research can be used to improve students’ and
citizens’ learning and well-being. Through working directly with members of
education and media communities, the project team will improve project exposure
and the QDRs made available for public use to ensure that STEM education
research impacts not only students’ educational experiences, but also the
general public’s ability to interpret quantitative data in ways that positively
influence their lives. This RAPID award is funded by the Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education Program in the NSF Education and Human Resources/Division of
Undergraduate Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.