* 2032592
* Using First Principles Calculations and Electro-Pulse Annealing to Design and Manufacture Low-Cost Permanent Magnets
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Geoffroy Hautier, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2024
* USD 512,737.00

Demand for high-performance permanent magnets is increasing rapidly for
applications such as wind turbine generators and electric and hybrid car motors.
Samarium-cobalt (Sm-Co) and Neodymium-iron-boron (Nd-Fe-B) rare earth magnets
are generally used for such challenging applications. While rare earth magnets
are the best currently available permanent magnets, they tend to be brittle,
suffer from thermal shock and experience corrosion. Additionally, rare earth
mining has been associated with severe environmental degradation and prohibitive
energy usage. Nickel-iron, which has been identified in meteorites as the
compound Tetrataenite where it transformed from a high temperature phase to a
low temperature magnetic phase over thousands of years, has magnetic properties
comparable to that of rare earth magnets. This award develops nickel-iron based
permanent magnets using quantum-mechanical calculations to predict the effects
of alloying and experiments to verify the effects of these additional elements
on the transformation kinetics and magnetic properties of these materials. A
novel pulsed electrical heating is used to accelerate the phase transformation.
The development of novel nickel-iron magnets enables production of permanent
magnets at low cost, which impacts the U.S. economy and security. The project
engages women and under-represented minorities in multi-disciplinary research
activities and develops a website that offers simple virtual experiments to
explain to a wide audience magnetism and the materials science of permanent
magnets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The L10-structured compound nickel-iron (NiFe) has
the potential to replace rare earth (RE) magnets at low cost. NiFe has a
magnetic anisotropy energy, ku, of 1.3 x 106 J.m-3 and a saturation
magnetization m0MS of 1.59 Tesla, which is comparable to that of Nd2Fe14B, and
it has good corrosion resistance. The challenge is that the binary L10 compound
has a very low transformation temperature from the high-temperature face
centered cubic (f.c.c.) phase of about 320oC that forms on casting and, thus,
orders very slowly at temperatures where it is stable. This project combines ab
initio quantum mechanical calculations and experimental work to design new
L10-structured NiFe magnets with ternary elemental additions. These ternary
compounds potentially have a significantly higher f.c.c.-to-L10 transformation
temperatures and higher diffusivities than binary NiFe but have similar
saturation magnetizations. Thus, the L10 phase can be produced at higher
temperature in short, commercially-viable times utilizing electro-pulse
annealing of cold-worked material, which has also been shown to dramatically
accelerate recrystallization in NiFe. Commercially, NiFe can be manufactured by
continuous electro-pulse annealing of rolls of sheet material or of rods and,
being ductile, can easily be machined into various
shapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.