* 2032756
* RII Track-4: mRNA processing and adaptation to the environment
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Sarah Signor, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 187,257.00

Organisms live in highly variable environments where they regularly encounter
perturbations such as heat, cold, or different environmental toxins. In response
to these stressful conditions, organisms will often change the expression of
genes that will help them to better maintain their function. This can be an
important means of adaptation to variable environments. However, a much more
flexible route for achieving this end would be a difference in the length of the
3’ untranslated region of the gene (a noncoding region of the gene’s transcript
that is important for regulation, this is termed alternative polyadenylation).
This does not require the time that de novo transcription takes, or a change in
overall expression. Yet it can change gene expression but altering the stability
of transcripts, their translation, or where they are sent in cells. This
fellowship will address this question by investigating the role of the length of
the 3’ untranslated region in Drosophila’s adaptation to ethanol. This
fellowship will provide the Signor lab training and tools to conduct a method
called 3’ sequencing, developed in our host lab at Memorial Sloan Kettering, to
quantify alternative polyadenylation. Through this training this will address
the following fellowship aims: i) enhance the research capabilities of the
Signor lab ii) facilitate collaborations at NDSU and across other research
networks (e.g. EPSCoR Track-2 ICE Network). The training in 3’ sequencing at
Memorial Sloan Kettering will allow our group to test the hypothesis that
alternative polyadenylation has been important for adaptation in Drosophila.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene expression differences between individuals and
populations is important for differences in fitness. Yet, oftentimes mRNA
expression differences do not result in different final phenotypes. Likewise,
phenotypes can be linked to genes that do not show mRNA expression differences.
What are the missing regulatory steps which result in these patterns, and how
can we better understand the genotype to phenotype map? The failure of many
studies to account for the possible influence of differences in mRNA processing
may obfuscate some relationships between gene expression and phenotype, and
could potentially be the key to understanding the next layer in the genotype to
phenotype map. Our research will explicitly test for the importance of
alternative polyadenylation in environmental response, using a classic model
system, alcohol and Drosophila. Alternative polyadenylation can change where
mRNA is localized, how it is exported from the nucleus, how long it is stable
and whether or not it is translated. Very little is known about whether
alternative polyadenylation is important for adaptation, particularly in
response to the environment. Furthermore, we know very little about how
alternative polyadenylation evolves between species and how it is
regulated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.