* 2032153
* RAPID: The potential of SARS-CoV2 to utilize the ACE2 receptor of domesticated and wild animals for cell entry.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,08/31/2021
* James Van Leuven, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 199,594.00

Zoonotic coronaviruses (CoVs) have caused two serious epidemics in humans (MERS-
CoV and SARS-CoV) and the current COVID-19 pandemic (SARS-CoV2). There is
evidence suggesting that although these CoVs originated from bats, other mammals
could have been intermediate hosts that transmitted the virus to humans.
Research supported by this award will help to identify animal populations that
are likely susceptible to the current pandemic CoV (SARS-CoV2) and could
potentially act as viral reservoirs and initiate new disease outbreaks.
Determining the animal receptors that enable SARS-CoV2 cell entry will benefit
both human and animal health by directing future studies of CoV tropism. This
knowledge will also focus surveillance efforts to species most likely involved
in zoonotic and reverse zoonotic transmission of SARS-CoV2 and other CoVs. This
proposal will train undergraduate research students in computational and
laboratory skills during the proposed project. Results from these studies will
be published in peer-reviewed journals, presented at scientific meetings, posted
to shared data repositories, and also shared through social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research supported by this award will employ
computational modeling and empirical laboratory research to identify animal
angiotensin converting-enzyme 2 (ACE2) cell receptors that confer susceptibility
to SARS-CoV2. Researchers will test the hypothesis that certain amino acid
residues in animal ACE2 are essential for coronavirus (CoV) spike protein
interaction and cell entry. A computational pipeline will be developed to model
and simulate the docking of the SARS-CoV2 receptor binding domain to the ACE2
cell receptor from hundreds of divergent animal species. We will also
empirically test the capacity of SARS-CoV2 spike protein to utilize ACE2 through
heterologous expressions systems and in vitro cell culture studies. The research
has the potential to identify a wide spectrum of animal species that are
susceptible to SARS-CoV2. This will aid in the understanding of the relationship
between ACE2 genotype and SARS-CoV2 cell entry and allow the prediction of ACE2
residues that are critical for determining CoV susceptibility. This RAPID award
is made by the Symbiosis, Defense, and Self-recognition Program in the BIO
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, and by the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), using funds from the Coronavirus Aid,
Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.