* 2032861
* RAPID: What is the role of extracellular vimentin in SARS2 host cell entry?
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Jennifer Schwarz, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2022
* USD 196,457.00

This project will determine the mechanisms by which cell surface vimentin
modulates the cellular uptake of the novel virus SARS-CoV-2 (SARS2). Vimentin is
an intermediate filament that forms part of the cellular cytoskeleton. New
evidence indicates that vimentin is present on the extracellular surface of
cells and plays a critical role in the binding and uptake of multiple viruses;
yet, the mechanisms by which this happens remain unclear. Identifying the
factors that regulate cell surface vimentin and how it interacts with SARS2 will
provide new insight into new functions of cell surface vimentin and the
fundamental mechanisms by which viruses infect cells. There is an urgent need
for this information as we have an incomplete understanding of how this virus
enters the cell. This project integrates techniques from physics, engineering,
chemistry, and biology and will broaden participation in the field of biophysics
by providing interdisciplinary training for graduate students and
postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Host cell entry of SARS2 is not yet fully
characterized, but inhibition of both endocytosis and direct fusion are known to
be preventative. SARS2 makes use of a spike protein to interact with the
angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) cellular receptor to drive host cell
entry via membrane fusion. The membrane fusion pathway for SARS2 is, therefore,
similar to SARS-CoV (SARS), the virus that genetically most closely resembles
SARS2. Endocytosis is another dominant pathway for host cell entry, but the
mechanisms involved remains largely unknown. Previous studies indicate that SARS
host cell entry via endocytosis critically involves cell surface vimentin. This
project aims to determine the role of cell surface vimentin in SARS2 cellular
uptake. This project pursues the following three objectives: 1) determine the
presence and the factors that regulate extracellular vimentin using fibroblasts
and lung epithelial cells; 2) study the effect of extracellular vimentin on
SARS2 viral uptake and determine whether viral uptake can be blocked by anti-
vimentin antibodies; and 3) quantify the molecular interaction between vimentin
and the spike protein of SARS2. These studies will be conducted using SARS2
virus-like particles. Results from molecular dynamics simulations will provide
an interpretative framework for the experimental
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Cellular Dynamics
and Functionl Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,
using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.