* 2032657
* From Self-similar Solutions to Turbulent Cascades
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Roman Grigoriev, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 322,696.00

Turbulent fluid flows are both ubiquitous and immensely important in the modern
society. They shape climate and weather, control transmission of many infectious
diseases and the spreading of pollution, and determine the fuel-efficiency of
our cars, airplanes, and ships. Yet, many of turbulent flowsâ€™ properties remain
mysterious despite centuries of systematic research. In particular, we do not
fully understand the principles that control the motion of fluids such at air
and water at very small scales. As a result, despite continuing advances in
computing power, numerical simulations resolving the small-scale structure of
turbulent flows remains out of reach, limiting our ability to make sustained
improvements in numerous civilian and military applications. This project
harnesses recent numerical and theoretical advances to describe how fluid
motions at one scale can generate motions at another (often much larger or much
smaller) scale, yielding a hierarchy of eddies responsible for the unique and
beautiful structure of fluid turbulence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project uses a combination of novel numerical methods and innovative
theoretical approaches to addresses several fundamental problems in fluid
turbulence that remain largely unsolved despite almost a century of concerted
effort. One of the oldest, most fundamental, and least understood issues in
fluid turbulence is the multi-scale structure of the flow at high Reynolds
numbers. Such structure emerges due to cascades of various quantities, such as
energy, vorticity, and helicity, describing the fluid flow. Our understanding of
the physical mechanisms of respective cascades is very limited. For instance, it
is not entirely clear what determines the direction of the cascades, i.e.,
whether the flux of a particular quantity is towards large scales (inverse
cascade) or small scales (direct cascade). This project aims to develop a
dynamical description of direct and inverse cascades in two spatial dimensions.
Advanced numerical methods for finding self-similar solutions to inviscid
governing equations are used to uncover the fundamental physical mechanisms
describing scale interaction in fluid flows that is responsible for the multi-
scale nature of developed turbulence. Established tools from dynamical systems
theory are leveraged to develop a comprehensive quantitative theory of turbulent
cascades that does not rely on unproven assumptions and approximations that
underlie existing statistical theories of turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.