* 2032747
* RAPID: Estimating the Reciprocal Relationship between COVID-19 Infections of Prisoners and Staff and Infections in the Surrounding Communities
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Danielle Wallace, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,887.00

Controlling COVID-19 infections in prison is a critical part of “flattening the
curve.” Prisons are high transmission and risk settings for the spread of
infectious disease due to crowding, communal dining, and difficulty with
sanitation. Prison staff may contribute to disease transmission between the
local community and prisoners because staffers exit the prison and enter the
community each shift (and vice-versa). This creates a bidirectional pathway for
spreading the disease. Prisons, as well as other high density accommodations
like nursing homes or cruise ships, are in immediate need of information
concerning the spread of COVID-19. In particular, strategies are needed for
halting or slowing the spread of COVID-19 in these settings. Prisons are a
particularly difficult setting for such evaluative efforts because the current
crisis leaves stakeholders little time to assess whether virus suppression
strategies and their associated policies are working – creating a devastating
information gap. Thus, quickly understanding the spread of COVID-19 both among
people and across geographies, the effectiveness of policies and strategies for
flattening the curve, as well as the return on investments (ROI) is critical for
prisons to minimize and contain future outbreaks of COVID-19. This project will
deepen our understanding of the reciprocal relationship between COVID-19
infections among prisoners, correctional staff and the communities where prisons
are located. Findings will be useful to communities and congregate facility
officials as they develop policies to manage these reciprocal infections in
congregate settings, thus contributing to U. S. health and well-being.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prisons are at high risk for the spread of COVID-19, due
to their communal settings, and the movement of staff between prisons and
communities on a daily basis. To assess the dynamics of these risks, this
project will develop a data driven dynamical disease model focusing on the
temporal patterns in COVID-19 infections in the inter-connected
prison/staff/community populations, and assess the relative efficacy of
potential best practices for infection control, either aimed at the prisoner
population and/or the staff population. In addition, the project will examine
the reciprocal relationship between infections and deaths in prisons among
prisoners and staff and the communities surrounding the prison from a geographic
perspective. An ability to model the geospatial intricacies and the
geodemographic impacts of this process is critical to developing a deeper
understanding of how COVID-19 interacts with mobile (e.g., staff) and/or
immobile (e.g., prisoner) populations. Specifically, the project will use
geocomputational approaches for modeling the spatial envelopes of potential
interactions between prison staff and their local residential communities. This
includes the development of high-resolution spatiotemporal catchment areas
to/from each federal prison in the United States. Finally, using return-on-
investment (ROI) analysis, the project will illuminate the potential economic
implications of COVID-19 infection control interventions targeting justice-
involved populations. The anticipated insights from the ROI analysis include the
identification of the key ROI drivers and the magnitude of impact required for
the accrual of net savings to relevant decision-making agencies. Findings from
the project will inform sociological theories regarding incarceration and
literatures regarding reciprocal relationships between work and
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.