* 2033615
* B1 (Future Jobs and AI): Skill-XR: An Affordable and Scalable X-Reality (XR) Platform for Skills Training and Analytics in Manufacturing Workforce Education
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Kylie Peppler, Purdue University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Linda Molnar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,470,935.00

The broader impact and potential societal benefits of the SkillXR Convergence
Accelerator Phase II project are training, pre- and upskilling, remote skilling,
and enabling new insights in the manufacturing and education sectors. There is a
multiplier effect on job growth in the national economy through expansions in
manufacturing. As jobs and skills change and evolve, retraining and upskilling
will become necessary steps towards economic sustainability, more importantly so
as we recover during the COVID-19 pandemic. The aim of the SkillXR platform is
to disrupt current modes of workforce development by eliminating the current
need for expensive software development and consulting intermediaries to create
and maintain augmented, virtual and mixed reality (XR) applications. Through our
partnerships within the small and large manufacturing industry and workforce
education, we will transition the future workforce from acquisition of
apprenticeships to real-world profitable skills in emerging industries over the
next decade. Our focused partnerships with small businesses, minority
entrepreneurs, play museums, and rural education promotes equitable access. The
general-purpose nature of SkillXR will amplify the impact beyond our initial
planned manufacturing education area to become ubiquitous across many other
fields including robotics, construction, plant operations, education, and
eventually everyday spatial cognitive assistance. Our pre-upskilling and
learning analytics platform is planned to impact tens of thousands in five to
six years and millions within a decade. Rural communities especially will
benefit, as manufacturing represents twice the amount of earnings there, versus
non-rural areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The highly interdisciplinary team brings
knowledge spanning manufacturing, computer vision and artificial intelligence
(AI), spatial interfaces and interactions, learning sciences, learning
analytics, cognitive psychology, and visual gamified interfaces. We will
collaborate closely with key partners using a design-research driven convergence
framework to develop and transform research-based prototypes into products and
services to impact our skilled workforce and economy. The two sides of our
emerging product platform will (1) enable the authoring of AI-based XR
personalized training applications by subject matter experts (coaches, teachers,
trainers), without the need for prior knowledge in programming or sophisticated
applications, and (2) a low-cost AI-based hardware approach to get personalized
user analytics of tasks “on-the-job” for scalable workforce assessment and
optimization. Our approach permits extreme flexibility for various industrial
use cases, reusability through plug-and-play for millions of applications, as
well as tracking end-user spatial and performance analytics across time. By
combining both basic and applied research our team will develop several high-
fidelity collaborative cloud-based architectures, and a series of reconfigurable
and widely applicable workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.