* 2033578
* B1: Competency Catalyst Phase II
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Jeanne Kitchens, Eduworks Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Linda Molnar
* 02/29/2024
* USD 6,593,173.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator Phase II project aims
to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of reskilling America’s workforce.
To accomplish this, the Competency Catalyst has two major deliverables. The
first is an application called "Skillsync" that enables companies to communicate
specific reskilling needs and helps colleges respond with accelerated programs
that target them. The second is a “C2 platform” that describes and aligns job
requirements and reskilling opportunities in terms of knowledge, skills, and
abilities (KSAs). Skillsync is built on the C2 platform and replaces existing
manual processes with direct, real-time communication between human resource
departments and college programs. Skillsync will immediately improve the ability
of companies to reskill their workforce, while the C2 platform will catalyze and
support a larger ecosystem of workforce-related applications, including other
Convergence Accelerator projects and national efforts focused on improving the
talent pipeline. Skillsync and the C2 platform will be designed and developed by
a multidisciplinary team of learning technologists, AI researchers, education
and workforce development professionals, open data architects, and experts in
competency-based training. Skillsync will be piloted with multiple company-
college pairs to upskill a diverse population of workers. After completing the
pilots, the Competency Catalyst team plans to maintain the C2 platform as a
public good, and to offer Skillsync as a subscription service paid for by
companies and free to colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Competency Catalyst
will build on multiple enabling technologies, including (a) the Jill Watson AI-
based conversational assistant from the Georgia Institute of Technology; (b) the
Credential Engine’s open data infrastructure; and (c) digital competency
extraction tools and the open-source Competency and Skills System (CaSS)
developed by Eduworks. The development approach will include participatory
research, human-centered design, rapid prototyping, and pilot testing. The C2
platform will programmatically ingest data from national sources and apply
recent natural language understanding and machine learning methods to represent
these data as structured sets of KSAs with relations and links to external
resources. In Skillsync, these can be edited and ordered by importance to
represent company needs. The C2 platform will offer an open alignment score
service that Skillsync will use to analyze matches between desired KSAs and
available educational and training resources. In addition, Skillsync users will
be able to engage with Jill Watson to better understand how colleges view the
skills that learners acquire. This will assist companies in defining their needs
in terms that are meaningful to college partners. Equity and bias issues will be
considered throughout the design and development of the Skillsync and the C2
platform, including issues such as bias and fairness in AI and machine-learned
models. The project will also research the relative contributions of AI,
enhanced digital communication, and socio-technological behavioral change to
improving company-college reskilling partnerships. Anticipated contributions
include new techniques for evaluating and aligning jobs and training based on
KSAs and a new public open data resource consisting of the KSAs associated with
national repositories of jobs, course syllabi, credentials, and educational
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.