* 2033521
* A1: KnowWhereGraph: Enriching and Linking Cross-Domain Knowledge Graphs using Spatially-Explicit AI Technologies
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Wenwen Li, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 08/31/2023
* USD 5,598,096.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to improve data-driven
decision making and data analytics, specifically data analytics that involve
geographic data. This project will create the “KnowWhereGraph” – a knowledge
graph tool that specifically enables other data-analysis knowledge tools that
have a geospatial component. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GeoEnrichment describes the
process by which data becomes augmented with a wide range of auxiliary
information tailored to a geospatial study area (such as demographic data).
GeoEnrichment tools significantly reduce the costs involved in acquiring,
entering, and cleaning geo-data. Unfortunately, currently available
geoenrichment services provide access to only pre-defined categories of
information, do not effectively handle interconnected data, offer limited
support for data integration, and are generally expensive. This project plans to
make data-driven decision making and data analytics substantially more
effective, accessible, and affordable. The project will merge novel Artificial
Intelligence-based geoenrichment technologies with a knowledge graph that brings
together open, cross-domain, densely integrated data spanning the human-
environment interface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project’s work is enabled by
an open, freely usable knowledge graph. These graphs are a combination of
scalable, Web-standard technologies, specifications, and data cultures for
representing densely interconnected statements derived from structured or
unstructured data across domains, in both human and machine-readable ways. The
technology tools are designed to be useful to and useable by researchers,
analysts, decision-makers, and the interested public in any domain or cross-
domain activity requiring geospatial intelligence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project includes strong partnerships with non-academic and academic stakeholders
including 4 for-profit organizations, 2 government agencies, and one non-profit,
as well as five academic partnerships: ESRI (Geographic Information Systems);
Oliver Wyman, (commodity markets and supply chains), Princeton Climate Analytics
(weather and climate information services), In10T (digital agriculture, farm
partnerships); US Geological Survey (USGS), Natural Resources Conservation
Service within the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA): and DirectRelief
(humanitarian aid); as well as University of California Santa Barbara(UCSB),
Kansas State University (K-State), Michigan State University (MSU), Arizona
State University (ASU), and University of Southern California(USC). Additional
partnerships are expected to develop during this Phase II effort.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The “KnowWhereGraph” will be a valuable element of the
Convergence Accelerator Phase II cohort, providing geospatial tools to the other
projects within the cohort. In addition the project plans to focus on several
strategic application areas that are likely to benefit US society, including:
COVID-19 related supply chain disruptions and the US food, agriculture, and
energy sectors, and their attendant supply chains generally; environmental
policy issues relative to interactions among agricultural sustainability, soil
conservation practice, and farm labor; and delivery of emergency humanitarian
aid, within the US and internationally. Anytime knowing “where” is key, this
project’s tools may be helpful. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formally, a knowledge
graph consists of a massive set of statements, constructed from inter-connected
node- and edge-labeled resources, allowing multiple, heterogeneous edges for the
same nodes. A collection of definitional statements specifying the meaning of
the knowledge graph's vocabulary is called its (KG) schema or ontology. The
ontology is critical for rigorous logical interpretation and machine-
actionability. Several innovations in knowledge graph technology will drive the
project: (I) creating an open, web-accessible knowledge graph, with attendant
methods and tools, to enable contributions to the graph from a range of sources;
(II) developing strategies for semantically lifting imagery data, such as
remotely sensed imagery and drone imagery, into this graph, thereby integrating
vast amounts of data; (III) developing novel spatially-explicit AI-based
methods, models, and services to enable geoenrichment on top of this graph; and
(IV) developing both programmatic (application program interface, API) and
human-accessible interfaces for the KnowWhereGraph. By merging the flexibility,
expressive power, and community-driven features of open graph technologies with
multi-format geospatial data and advanced geospatial intelligence, the
KnowWhereGraph is designed to become a rich, integrative information resource
that can transform and converge discovery, analysis, and synthesis within and
across a multitude of fields and sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.