* 2033559
* I-Corps: A Multi-Antigen Vaccine Delivery System for the Effective Induction of Mucosal Immunity
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Tom Schryver, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a novel vaccine discovery platform. The COVID-19 pandemic has
opened our eyes to the urgent need for technologies capable of effectively
delivering vaccines that combat mucosal infections. Mucosal infections, such as
influenza and rotavirus, make up more than 70% of the yearly cases of infectious
diseases recorded in the US, and more than 50% of all infections worldwide. This
high infection rate is because most pathogens either infect mucosal tissues
directly or begin their invasion at mucosal sites throughout the body (i.e., the
nose, intestines, and mouth). The proposed technology solves the need to
effectively deliver vaccines to mucosal tissue, providing a robust immune
response, and can be rapidly developed and scaled up to respond to emerging
pandemics, saving potentially hundreds of thousands of lives. In addition to
being rapid response, the proposed vaccine delivery system can be used with
multiple antigens at once, potentially reducing the number of vaccinations
required throughout a patientâ€™s lifetime. The proposed vaccine platform is
needle-free, allowing it to be administered outside of clinics, reducing the
need for highly skilled personnel and administration costs especially in low-
income countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of outer cell membrane vesicles as a vaccine delivery platform.
Outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) are spherical lipid bilayers naturally produced
by bacteria that possess the ability to modulate the immune system. Previously,
OMVs were engineered to display antigens on their exterior surface, thereby
acting as a self-adjuvanted vaccine platform that has shown promise in animal
models as an injectable vaccine. Further modification of the OMV platform to
enable the co-delivery of multiple different antigens has been investigated for
its immunological potential in a mouse model. Preliminary work has shown this
feature to yield potential benefits for vaccine engineering. Additionally,
through buccal vaccination in swine, OMVs were shown to induce robust mucosal
immunity, without the need for injection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.