* 2033482
* EAGER: Temporal Occurrence, Spatial Dynamics, and Host Diversity of Betacoronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-2, with Implications for Mitigating Covid-19 Re-emergence
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Joseph Cook, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2022
* USD 199,652.00

Frozen museum collections provide a largely untapped biodiversity infrastructure
that would potentially allow for the study of pandemics, like that caused by
SARS-CoV-2, in substantially new and different ways. This project will leverage
a vast set of frozen samples from wild mammals and engage new expertise to
develop powerful interdisciplinary approaches to studying pathogens that emerge
from wildlife. This study will examine the frozen tissue collections of the
Museum of Southwestern Biologyâ€™s Division of Genomic Resources (DGR) with
specimens collected from Asian countries near China that are ideal for testing
for SARS-CoV-2 virus. Detailed understanding of the distribution of pathogens in
the wild and how they cross species boundaries, including switching to infect
humans, could provide a critical foundation for prevention and mitigation of
future zoonotic infections or reinfections. New workflows that fully leverage
this biodiversity and zoonotic pathogen infrastructure will be developed. This
project also provides training opportunities for students, including from
underrepresented minorities, as well as outreach to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the last few decades, disease ecologists and
evolutionary biologists have identified key factors involved in the spillover of
pathogens from reservoir host species into human populations. Understanding the
distribution of the virus in wild mammals will contribute to a better assessment
of the potential for direct contact between human populations and the virus.
Pathogen detection will be carried out via molecular methods in tissues from
1,000 target (bar-coded) mammal specimens from eastern Asia with a special focus
on SARS-CoV-2 and its coronavirus relatives. For positive tissues, sequencing of
whole genomes of viruses will be conducted using established techniques for
coronaviruses optimized for downstream comparative analyses. Phylogeographic
methods will be used to characterize the geographic variation and historical
demography of viruses and associated mammalian hosts. These efforts will
leverage already existing natural history collection materials to inform SARS-
CoV-2 evolution, Covid-19 emergence, and more generally pathogen emergence and
epidemiological models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.