* 2033307
* SBIR Phase I: Assessing Risk of COVID-19 Infection with Cell Mediated Immunity
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Chethan Ashokkumar, PLEXISION, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2021
* USD 218,396.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a widely available blood test to determine
the level of immune protection toward COVID-19 infection in previously
uninfected persons. As many as two-thirds of unexposed individuals could be
naturally immune due to prior exposure to structurally similar coronaviruses
that cause flu-like illness. This information is especially informative for
vulnerable populations with advanced age and underlying chronic disease.
Antibodies only occur after exposure to the virus, and have been seen in less
than one-third of tested individuals. This project will advance tests to
identify individuals who potentially have this natural immunity, potentially
lessening the severity of social distancing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will refine the applicantâ€™s
blood test for cell-mediated immunity (CMI) to SARS-CoV-2 for widespread use.
Preliminary studies suggest that cell-mediated immunity (CMI) to SARS-COV-2
could be present in over half of unexposed individuals. This project will create
user-friendly test formats for rapid and widespread use using major classes of
cytometers. The technical refinements to be developed and tested in this project
will include pre-fabricated assays in solid phase which can be read on major
classes of reference-lab-based and portable cytometers, and capabilities for
direct testing of unmodified blood samples. The objective is to advance
standardized kits for liquid phase assays, and pre-fabricated solid-phase assay
tubes with minimal manual steps for use on the most common reference-lab-based,
semi-portable and portable cytometers, closer to the point of
care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.