* 2033441
* RII Track-4: Molecular Visualization by Single Particle Cryo-Electron Microscopy
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Limei Zhang, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 01/31/2024
* USD 215,821.00

Visualization of biomacromolecules at atomic resolutions provides important
information&lt;br/&gt;for the in-depth understanding of the fundamental
biological processes and the rules of life.&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, X-ray
crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance have been the only
two&lt;br/&gt;available structural tools that can experimentally determine
three-dimensional (3D) structures of&lt;br/&gt;biomacromolecules at atomic
levels. Recent advances in the instrumentation and methodology of&lt;br/&gt;the
advanced microscopy technique called single-particle cryo-electron microscopy
(cryo-EM) is&lt;br/&gt;a game-changer for molecular visualization. The cryo-EM
technique has become the preferred&lt;br/&gt;technique for determining the 3D
structure of large macromolecular complex or membrane&lt;br/&gt;proteins that
have been dauntingly challenging to either of the two conventional
structural&lt;br/&gt;techniques. This fellowship will support the PI to develop
the cryo-EM expertise at the Cryo-EM&lt;br/&gt;Center of the California
Institute of Technology and apply the cryo-EM technique to the
structural&lt;br/&gt;characterization of biomolecules at the atomic level.
Adding cryo-EM to the PI’s structural toolbox&lt;br/&gt;will not only stimulate
new research directions in the PI’s research group at the University
of&lt;br/&gt;Nebraska-Lincoln, but also benefit many research groups across the
state of Nebraska, which is&lt;br/&gt;the only state that hosts a Big10
university but without expertise or instrumentation for cryo-
EM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of this fellowship, the PI and her
group member will receive&lt;br/&gt;comprehensive training on structural
characterization of metalloproteins and assemblies by cryo-&lt;br/&gt;EM, from
grid preparation, image collection to 3D map construction and model development.
In&lt;br/&gt;particular, this project will focus on the structural investigation
of two families of interconnected&lt;br/&gt;metalloproteins involved in
bacterial redox stress response and transition metal
homeostasis,&lt;br/&gt;respectively. The expertise in cryo-EM acquired from this
training will propel the PI’s group to&lt;br/&gt;successfully achieve research
goals in both the short and long term. The structural
information&lt;br/&gt;resulted from the proposal will fill critical gaps in
fundamental structural principles that govern&lt;br/&gt;the metalloproteins in
the bacterial response to biotic and abiotic redox stresses and
antibiotic&lt;br/&gt;resistance. In the long run, adding the cryo-EM expertise
to the PI’s interdisciplinary skillset will&lt;br/&gt;better position the PI to
play a leading role in structure-mechanism investigations
of&lt;br/&gt;metalloproteins in redox biology. From an educational aspect, this
proposal will provide direct&lt;br/&gt;training opportunities to graduate
students and postdocs using the cryo-EM technique. In addition,&lt;br/&gt;the
acquired knowledge of the application of cryo-EM will be integrated into the
teaching and&lt;br/&gt;training activities conducted by the PI at UNL, aligning
with the educational goal in the PI’s NSF&lt;br/&gt;CAREER award. Furthermore,
by working with the colleagues at the University of Nebraska&lt;br/&gt;system,
the PI’s cryo-EM expertise will enable new research explorations and catalyze
new&lt;br/&gt;collaboration across the campus and promote innovation
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.