* 2033337
* EAGER-Forgotten N-conjugate cytokinins and their active role during senescence
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Aaron Rashotte, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 06/30/2024
* USD 248,950.00

Cytokinin is a plant hormone that is essential to normal growth and development
in plants. One key function of cytokinin is to keep older leaves green and
growing efficiently by delaying their eventual yellowing and aging, called
senescence. Study of how cytokinin regulates the delay of senescence will help
researchers learn how to increase growth, performance, and yield of agricultural
crops. Cytokinin is a blanket term for a class of about 30 chemically related
compounds that regulate these growth processes. A sub-group of understudied
cytokinin compounds, known as N-conjugate cytokinins, are also involved in
delaying leaf senescence, yet their role and function are unknown. These
N-conjugate cytokinins have not been examined for nearly 35 years and only
recently were identified as being active regulators of this developmental
process. This research aims to understand the role of these forgotten cytokinins
in leaf aging using classical bioassays and physiological measurement paired
with cutting edge analyses. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained
in basic research, and summer research experiences will be offered to high
school students to increase exposure to the plant
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly all cytokinin research has focused on
cytokinin bases forms like trans-Zeatin (tZ) and isopentenyladenine (iP), which
are known to bind cytokinin receptors and trigger canonical cytokinin responses,
such as delaying senescence. Yet recently findings indicate that the unstudied
N-conjugate cytokinins forms can also delay senescence suggesting a re-
examination of the role of these N-conjugate during senescence. Bioassays will
be used to directly measure changes in the levels of all cytokinin forms and
will use GC-MS/MS to determine effects on the cytokinin biosynthesis pathway
during development. Transcriptome and proteome analyses during senescence will
be conducted in parallel with physiology and measurements of cytokinin levels to
characterize gene expression and protein changes that specifically occur in
response to N-conjugate cytokinin vs base cytokinin forms. This high risk and
high reward endeavor should uncover the role of these otherwise under-studied
cytokinins and explain how different cytokinin compounds delay senescence at the
molecular level over development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.