* 2033934
* NSF2026: EAGER: Identifying microbes’ population-level environmental responses using Bayesian modeling
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* James Clark, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,693.00

With support from the Directorate for Geosciences and the NSF 2026 Fund Program
in the Office of Integrated Activities, Professors Dana Hunt, Mark Borsuk, and
James Clark at Duke University conduct research that provides new insights into
the factors that shape microbial productivity and function in the oceans as well
as how this change during extreme events such as hurricanes. The driver of this
research comes from the fact that marine microbes provide essential ecosystem
services, including primary production (photosynthesis) and organic matter
turnover, that sustains all marine organisms. That said, it still remains
unclear as to what extent microbiomes are shaped by environmental factors, such
as temperature and primary productivity, that can be altered by season,
disturbances, global change, and other factors. This research combines long-term
observations at a coastal site at Beaufort Island, North Carolina and uses these
data to capture annual changes in microbiomes and their environments using high
frequency measurements that were taken before and after hurricanes Florence
(2018) and Dorian (2019). Examining the impact of hurricanes on marine biomes is
important because hurricanes are multi-factor disturbances that introduce both
foreign freshwater and terrestrial microbes into a stable system while altering
salinity, nutrients, and organic matter in the coastal ocean. This work combines
information from field observations and modeling to develop new approaches that
will allow the differentiation of factors that often co-occur in field samples,
such as warmer temperatures and higher primary production that occur during the
summer months in the coastal Atlantic Ocean. By integrating multiple aspects of
microbiome research, this work deepens current understanding of the coastal
ocean microbiome system and its functionality. It also develops new testable
hypothesis to guide future research. Broader impacts of the work include
advanced training for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students, as
well as translating research results into products for K-12 students and the
public. Additional impacts include the production of detailed user manuals and
training materials for software developed in the course of the project to
facilitate the use of research results for future microbiome research and
undergraduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research leverages an
established decade-long microbial time-series, the Piver’s Island Coastal
Observatory (PICO, Beaufort Inlet, NC USA) to improve the modeling of microbial
populations and their relationship to changing environments. With 10 years of
weekly (or more frequent) microbial community SSU rRNA gene sequence datasets,
coupled with the suite of sample, in-situ, and environmental parameters, the
PICO dataset is one of the most complete, long-term datasets for coastal ocean
microbiomes. The work carried out uses the application of Bayesian modeling to
the PICO time series to improve understanding and predictions of microbiome
responses to ocean conditions. Bayesian models are well suited to microbial
systems because they have the ability to handle sparse datasets, capture non-
linear responses to environmental changes, and include impacts of disturbances.
This research integrates microbiome applications and the Bayesian model
gjamTime. This combination has the potential to transform microbial ecology by
leveraging advances in multivariate time-series methods that accommodate the
dependence among individual taxa and their environment over time. One goal of
the project is to test model predictions using time-series data from natural
disturbances (i.e., hurricanes) at the Beaufort Inlet site and explore various
key environmental parameters such as temperature (+3 °C) and primary production
as key environmental parameters. Similar work will be done more broadly for the
ocean. Impacts of the research extend beyond the targeted coastal dataset as, if
successful, the approach can be applied to other diverse study systems such as
soil and human microbiomes. It can also be used to address questions about
environmental filtering, disturbance and stochasticity, each of which is
critical to understanding the factors and processes that govern microbial
responses to environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project responds to
the NSF2026 Idea Machine winning entries of "Global Microbiome in a Changing
Planet" and "Imagine a Life with Clean Oceans"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.