* 2033380
* RII Track 4: Heavy Element Isotopic Characterization of Stardust
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Manavi Jadhav, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2024
* USD 232,500.00

This project will study microscopic stardust grains in the laboratory to find
answers to the most fundamental question of the origin of elements in the
Universe and to understand the properties of the materials that formed our solar
system. The results from this study promise to bring about a potentially
transformative understanding of how heavy elements are created in supernovae and
some lesser-known exotic stars that contributed starter materials to our solar
system. The fellowship project will allow the PI to develop a long-term
collaboration with Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory that will enable her
to establish a productive and reputable cosmochemistry laboratory that excels in
a highly interdisciplinary field and contribute to the new Earth and Energy
Sciences multidisciplinary PhD program at the University of Louisiana Lafayette.
A successful project will enable her to obtain state-of-the-art analytical
equipment at her university; thus, increasing the PIâ€™s collaborations with
interdisciplinary scientists across the state of Louisiana and the world. This
grant will also be used to mentor and train an underrepresented PhD student in
cutting edge analytical techniques that can be used in pure research and/or
numerous industrial applications; thus, contributing to the imperative effort of
increasing diversity in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stardust grains are
bona fide microscopic to sub-microscopic pieces of stars that condensed in the
cooling ejecta of dying stars and pre-date the formation of our solar system.
The main goal of this project is to probe s-, r-, p-, and i-processes that make
heavy nuclei in stars, via nucleosynthesis, by studying these signatures in
stardust grains. This understanding will not only provide tighter constraints on
the nucleosynthesis models of these stars but also to the thermodynamic and
kinetic evolution models that aim to construct a clear picture of the chemical
and physical circumstellar environments in which these stardust grains
condensed. With the aid of this fellowship, the PI will gain extended access to
the new, state-of-the-art, Laser Ionization of Neutrals (LION) resonant
ionization mass spectrometry (RIMS) facility at Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory (LLNL) and collaborate with the scientist-in-charge. LION allows the
PI and her graduate student to systematically measure isotopic compositions of
heavy trace elements in individual micron-sized graphitic stardust grains from
supernovae and grains with i-process signatures. RIMS is a powerful technique to
measure heavy isotopes as it selectively ionizes elements of interest and
eliminates isobaric interferences. The PI and her graduate student will spend
time during the year preparing the presolar graphitic samples at the home
institution and then travel to LLNL to acquire measurements on grains. In order
to characterize the grains according to their stellar sources, the data obtained
will be compared to astrophysical nucleosynthesis models through collaborations
with theoretical astrophysicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.