* 2033452
* RII-Track 4 - Experiencing The Matrix of Power Dynamics For Undergraduate And Graduate Black Women In Computing to Understand their Intersectional Experiences
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jakita Thomas, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 05/31/2024
* USD 160,235.00

Understanding the experiences of Black women in computing, who experience racism
and sexism at the same time, provides insights that can help support Black women
more effectively. This research will study Black women’s unique perspectives in
Computer Science (CS) education and computing, including the trials and triumphs
experienced as Black women navigate various computing spaces (academic,
professional, personal, etc.). Additionally, this research will explore just and
equitable approaches to communicating those experiences to CS educators and
those outside of the community of Black women. This fellowship will take place
at the Constellations Center for Equity in Computing at Georgia Tech, working
with an internationally recognized researcher in equity in CS education. The
fellowship will provide training to the PI and a graduate student in approaches
to designing, enacting, and assessing more equitable computing spaces that can
better support Black women. By coupling those approaches with the PI’s approach
to describing the unique perspective into computing that Black women provide
through their lived experiences, the proposed research will develop theory and
practice that can be used to create spaces that broaden and deepen the
engagement of Black women in the field, bringing the nation closer to CS For
All.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fellowship will provide training for the PI and a
graduate student to understand the matrix of power dynamics that Black women
encounter in computing as well as the forms of agency they acquire and develop
to persist. The work will focus on examining the experiences of Black women in
different computing contexts at various stages to articulate a Black women’s
standpoint as they contend with racism and sexism, simultaneously, in computing.
This research will identify design principles that can be applied to create more
equitable spaces that are more inclusive, welcoming, and supportive for Black
women. Finally, this research will explore the affordances of approaches to
communicate those experiences in ways that authentically portray and honor the
complexities and range of experiences while also developing empathy for and
action around promoting equity and sustained engagement in computing. The
development of methodologies for articulating the matrix of power dynamics in
computing will be transformative for the PI’s research program. The fellowship
will generate new theories that can help the field better understand the
experiences of other marginalized groups, new principles for designing equitable
spaces for these groups, and non-traditional approaches for communicating those
experiences to others inside and outside of the field. The proposed project will
establish a collaboration between leaders in the fields of intersectional
computing and equity in computing education, as well as provide actionable
insights that will support the commitment to create and enact more equitable
computing spaces taken up by the PI’s department at the PI’s home
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.