* 2033988
* Collaborative Research: OOI Biogeochemical Sensor Data Workshop
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Sophie Clayton, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2022
* USD 8,859.00

The Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI) deploys sensors that measure key
biogeochemical properties on both moored and mobile autonomous platforms across
arrays in the Atlantic, Pacific and Southern Oceans. These sensors generate data
sets with great potential to support the oceanographic community in studying a
wide range of important and interdisciplinary questions. However, OOI
biogeochemical sensor data have thus far been underutilized by the oceanographic
community because the application of these rich data streams requires effective
calibration and validation, including post-deployment human-in-the-loop
processing. In order to broaden the use of OOI biogeochemical sensor data and
increase community capacity to produce analysis-ready data products, the PIs
will convene a 3-day in-person workshop on using OOI biogeochemical sensor data
that will bring together participants with expertise in biogeochemical sensor
calibration and analysis from both within and beyond the current OOI user
community. The goals of this workshop are to: 1) Develop a set of guidelines and
best practices for using OOI biogeochemical sensor data, which will be shared
with the broader community through a published white paper, and 2) Build a
community of practice among the workshop participants that will enable attendees
to use the OOI biogeochemical sensor data in new research projects and to
broaden participation and uptake of data produced by this community
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will address barriers to the
oceanographic community's utilization of OOI biogeochemical sensor data by
bringing together subject matter experts in the processing and analysis of
biogeochemical sensor data, along with current and future users of OOI
biogeochemical data streams. One outcome of the workshop will be a set of
community-vetted best practices for the calibration and validation of OOI
biogeochemical sensor data. These best practices will be published and widely
disseminated to the broader oceanographic community. This effort represents an
important step towards the acquisition of climate-quality data from OOI
biogeochemical sensors that can be qualitatively compared and integrated with
biogeochemical data streams from other ocean observing programs and networks.
The workshop will facilitate broader usage of biogeochemical data generated by
the OOI arrays for scientific research, as well as education and marine resource
management applications. Additionally, this workshop will provide an invaluable
professional development opportunity for the participants, including many
researchers who are early career and/or from underrepresented groups. Finally,
there is the strong potential for this workshop to catalyze the formation of
community-driven science teams around the OOI biogeochemical sensor data
streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.