* 2033382
* RII Track-4:  Statistically Significant Signatures of Dark Matter from Astrophysical Observations (WoU-MMA)
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Devin Walker, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 242,848.00

Dark matter composes 85% of the matter in the universe. Understanding the
properties of this unknown matter sets the stage for many important advances for
humankind as well as understanding the universe. Dark matter gathers
significantly around objects with strong gravitational fields, i.e. black holes
and very massive stars. Recent advances in gravitational wave and radio
astronomy have allowed unprecedented glimpses into black holes and very massive
stars. The proposed project computes the interactions between dark matter,
gravitational and electromagnetic waves in the environment surrounding black
holes and very massive stars. These calculations, combined with state-of-the-art
numerical simulations, are designed to provide a variety of telltale signatures
of dark matter. The PI and a trainee will travel to the Joint Institute for
Laboratory Astrophysics (JILA) to implement these numerical simulations. The
resulting work product seeks to turn black holes and very massive stars into
dark matter detectors. Broader impacts of this work include engaging local high-
school students and the greater New Hampshire-Vermont community to understand
developments in dark matter (particle physics) research. In addition, the PI
will also promote the inclusion of underrepresented groups in STEM fields, e.g.,
through giving lectures at Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs).
Finally, the trainee supported by this award will be exposed to advanced general
relativity, quantum field theory, and numerical techniques used to simulate the
environments surrounding black holes and compact
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dark matter congregates significantly around objects
with large gravitational fields such as black holes and compact stars. For this
project, the PI considers electromagnetic and gravitational wave signatures of
bosonic (axion) dark matter from these compact objects. Using effective field
theory techniques, the PI includes the most important interactions in order to
properly understand the evolution of this dark matter. The large gravitational
fields introduce a new scale, the Schwarzschild radius, which alters the dark
matter oscillations into gravitational and electromagnetic waves. This effect is
analogous to the Mikheyev-Smirnov-Wolfenstein effect for neutrinos. These
alterations affect both superradiant and non-superradiant enhanced processes.
The PI and a trainee will travel to the Joint Institute for Laboratory
Astrophysics (JILA) to vet the new, unique dark matter signatures with well-
vetted numerical simulations of the astrophysical backgrounds in order to
determine their efficacy in producing statistically significant probes of dark
matter. By leveraging multi-wavelength astronomy, very-long-baseline
interferometry (such as the Event Horizon Telescope) as well as the current (and
near future) capabilities of gravitational wave astronomy, the fellowship goal
is to generate viable search strategies to identify regions of parameter space
for bosonic (axion) dark matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.