* 2033882
* Multifunctional solid polymer electrolytes for all-solid-state batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Christopher Li, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2023
* USD 318,655.00

Lithium ion batteries are found in many daily use devices such as smartphones,
laptop and tablet computers, cordless tools, and electric vehicles. However,
there are safety concerns about these batteries, because failure in these
devices can lead to a fire. For safe and efficient operation, lithium ion
battery components have many requirements such as ionic conductivity,
electrochemical stability, mechanical robustness, processability and fire
retardance. In this research project, the investigators will use a tunable
chemical platform to address these simultaneous requirements. This battery
system includes a polymer network base that is made of chain-like molecules
bonded together to form a highly connected scaffold. The system also includes
comb-like structures that consist of polymers extending off the network
scaffold. Additional components, such as stabilizers or fire retardants, can be
added to the end of the combs to impart the corresponding properties to the
system. By changing the structure or composition of the network scaffold, the
investigators will study how the material properties can be altered to optimize
the overall performance of the system. Using the concepts learned during this
project, the participants will develop two class modules for a course on
nanostructured polymeric materials. Additionally, high school students and
teachers, particularly from groups under-represented in STEM fields, will be
involved in the research activities via the Summer Engineering Experience at
Drexel Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project the investigators
aim to design, synthesize, and implement a series of multifunctional and
versatile comb-chain crosslinker based network solid polymer electrolytes
(ConSPEs). The versatility element comes from the large number of functional
groups found on the ends of the chains and cross-linkers, which provide fast
cross-linking and an opportunity to add further components. Using this platform
the investigators will tune network chemistry, architecture, mechanical and
electrochemical properties to address the high performance electrolyte needs.
Specifically, components will be added to target a given, desired solid
electrolyte property. For example, poly(propylene carbonate) would improve
voltage stability and transference number, while grafted halogenated moieties
would improve fire retardance, solid electrolyte interface formation and cycling
performance. The investigators will characterize the materials using oscillatory
shear and classical tensile mechanical measurements, and small-length scale
dependent mechanical properties will be assessed using quantitative
nanomechanical mapping via atomic force microcopy. Electrochemical
characterizations include ion conductivity via electrochemical impedance and
cycling stability via cyclic voltammetry. After establishing a library of ConSPE
materials, the investigators will select two differing materials and combine
them into bilayer structures. Such asymmetric bilayer materials might be more
capable than a uniform materials of meeting the different requirements of the
anode- and cathode-facing sides of the solid
electrolyte.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.