* 2033389
* RAPID: Student and Instructor Perceptions, Attitudes, and Emotions Surrounding Online Spaces and Institutional Supports during a Pandemic (COVID-19)
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Marla Franco, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 05/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) supports RAPID projects when there is severe urgency with
regard to availability of, or access to, data, facilities or specialized
equipment, including quick-response research on natural or anthropogenic
disasters and similar unanticipated events, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. This
project aims to explore challenges faced by students and instructors at HSIs
after moving to online formats during COVID-19. Longitudinal surveys and
interviews seek to reveal how students and instructors cope with courses moving
online, and how course experiences are impacted by this move. The study also
aims to identify the resources and supports that are most helpful to students
and instructors and to catalog resources that are still needed. The research
will include examination of how findings differ for students and instructors
from underrepresented and underserved communities (i.e., Latinx and Native
American). Data collected will contribute knowledge regarding attitudes and
coping processes during crises. Results seek to inform best practices for HSIs
during recovery from this pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low perceived control
over outcomes and fear of performing worse than peers affect coping skills and
attitudes among undergraduates. College and minority stress, likely augmented by
this pandemic, exacerbate depression, in turn reducing persistence. Moreover,
resources necessary for success (e.g., internet) are not always accessible to
underserved communities. One-hour online surveys and 1.5-hour semi-structured
interviews will be conducted across Arizona HSIs in May-June, August-September,
and October-November 2020. Surveys will include rating scales (e.g., sense of
belonging). Interviews, oversampling from underrepresented populations, will
include think aloud protocols and questions about resources and course
experiences. This mixed methods project will contribute knowledge of attitudinal
and emotional processes and reactions to institutional supports. Identified
institutional and instructional practices will inform recovery from this
pandemic. Preliminary results will be shared with HSIs and the broader community
via the NSF HSI Hub, brief reports, webinars, and a project website. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the HSI
Program in the Division of Human Resource Development, Directorate of Education
and Human Resources, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.