* 2033860
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: NSF2026:  Is Plastic Degradation Occurring in the Deep Ocean Water Column?
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Rut Pedrosa Pamies, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2024
* USD 284,033.00

With support from the NSF 2026 program in the NSF Office of Integrated
Activities, a team of researchers from four institutions will investigate the
processes that affect plastic debris and its ultimate fate once it enters the
ocean interior. Since 1950, global production of plastic has grown
exponentially. An estimated 5 to 13 million metric tons of plastic flows from
the land and enters the ocean each year. However, model assessment indicates
that 99% or more of the plastic entering the ocean is currently unaccounted for.
The goal of the project is to understand the physical modification and
biochemical transformation of plastic debris by microbial communities in the
mid- and deep-waters of the open ocean near Bermuda. The project directly
addresses two of the top thirty-three Idea Machine entries: “Imagine a Life With
Clean Oceans” and “Global Microbiome in a Changing Planet.” The investigators
will deploy incubators to evaluate plastic degradation at 600 meters and 3600
meters water depth at the NSF-funded Oceanic Flux Program (OFP) mooring site.
Results from this project will further understanding of the mechanistic
processes that govern decomposition of plastic particles in the mid-depth (600
meters) and deeper (3600 meters) ocean, as well as the microbial communities
involved with biodegradation of plastics at those depths. The results will have
broad implications to the fields of ocean biogeochemistry, environmental
sciences, and microbial ecology. With the deep-sea incubator deployed inline on
the OFP mooring being a new method to study plastic polymer degradation
processes in situ, this research contributes significantly to technology
development for oceanographic research. Results from this project will also
provide insights into the global budget of plastics, potentially filling the
knowledge gap on the fate of plastic and thus affecting plastic management
policies. Knowledge of the role of deep ocean microbial communities in the
degradation of synthetic plastic polymers will be very valuable information for
industry and policymakers. The collaboration of the American Chemistry Council,
which is providing polymers for the project, will strengthen the cooperation
between academia and industry. Education is an essential part of this project,
which includes one postdoctoral researcher and multiple undergraduate students.
Project results will be incorporated into undergraduate courses and communicated
through outreach activities for the broader public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators propose to test three sets of hypotheses: (1) Different polymers
promote the assembly of distinct microbiomes, and these microbiomes differ
between the mesopelagic and bathypelagic ocean regimes; (2) Plastics are
degraded within the ocean interior, different plastic polymer types are degraded
at different rates, and these rates differ between the mesopelagic and
bathypelagic ocean regimes; and (3) Deep ocean microbiomes actively degrade
plastics and utilize plastic polymers as a carbon source. These hypotheses will
be tested deploying custom-built deep-sea incubators at 600 m and 3600 m
containing well-defined plastic polymer films and fibers on the OFP mooring,
located in the northern Sargasso Sea about 75 km south-east of Bermuda. The
polymers deployed will represent the diversity of plastics found in the marine
environment and have different stabilities against microbial degradation (e.g.,
polyethylene, polyethylene terephthalate, and others). This project will combine
state-of-the-art polymer chemistry analyses (pyrolysis-GCMS and Raman, and
micro-FTIR) with microscopy, and lipid (GCMS and GCirMS) and nucleic acid
sequencing analyses, to determine if microbial communities can degrade polymers
in the deep mesopelagic and bathypelagic ocean. The results will determine if
microbial communities living within the aphotic ocean interior actively degrade
and utilize the synthetic carbon polymers that make up plastics, and thus play
an important role in the removal of global plastics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.