* 2033265
* I-Corps:  Software that allows beekeepers to identify potential bee health issues
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2023
* David Firth, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
the health of bees. Pollination due to bees is responsible for more than $15
billion in increased crop value each year. The proposed technology uses
artificial intelligence to listen to bees and compare their in-hive sounds to an
extensive database of healthy and unhealthy bees. This technology has the
potential to significantly reduce the time commercial beekeepers spend
inspecting their bees, and as a result to improve the health of the bees. The
technology also has the potential to allow more people to become backyard
beekeepers as they now have a technology tool to help them asses their bees'
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project seeks to evaluate the
commercial potential of technology that listens to bees at the hive entrance for
30 seconds, and then compares that sound to an onboard proprietary database of
recorded reference sounds of bees having specific health issues. Using
artificial neural network software, the technology rapidly assesses whether the
sounds match those made by bees with one of seven bee health issues significant
to beekeepers. These health issues are Queenless, Varroa mite, Africanized,
Small Hive Beetle, Foul Brood, Nosema Ceranae and Failing Colony (sometimes
referred to as Colony Collapse Disorder). Extensive global research has been
conducted on listening to bees in the hive and matching those sounds to very
specific bee health issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.