* 2033387
* NSF2026: EAGER: Material morphogenesis using biohybrid vesicles as building blocks
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Sindy KY Tang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the NSF Molecular &amp; Cellular Biosciences, and the NSF 2026
Fund Program in the Office of Integrated Activities, Professors Sindy Tang and
Stanley Qi at Stanford University aim to build a tissue-like composite material,
and apply biological principles to change the shape, structure, and function of
the material. Specifically, the research will develop functional synthetic units
that can perform an elemental topological transition, or a rearrangement in the
positioning of the function units. Elemental topological transitions are
important in the morphogenesis of biological systems, such as tissue
development, wound healing, and regeneration. Achieving topological transitions
using synthetic components will open new opportunities to attain macroscopic
restructuring of the material towards material morphogenesis, and lead to new
classes of autonomous, self-structuring, and self-healing Engineered Living
Materials (ELMs). This project will provide an opportunity for undergraduate
education in an interdisciplinary area, supporting workforce development at the
interface of colloidal physics, material science, microfluidics, and DNA
technology, not possible in traditional, single discipline-based training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological systems are masters in building complex
structures and programming shape changes. Macroscopic shape changes in tissues,
or morphogenesis, is composed of a set of elemental topological transitions
(e.g., a “T1 transition” where 2 sets of cells exchange neighbors). The
morphogenetic capacity of current manmade materials is far from what biology can
achieve. The long-term goal of this project is to build a tissue-like composite
material, and apply biological morphogenesis principles to reconfigure the
shape, structure, and function of the material. As a first step towards this
goal, the specific aims of this research are to create a functional motif
consisting of an inducible vesicle, and to demonstrate an elemental topological
transition in these vesicles. The project is expected to advance knowledge at
the interface of material science and synthetic and cell biology. It is expected
to provide an experimental platform to investigate structured materials capable
of relaying both chemical and mechanical signals, where microscopic, elemental
topological transitions can be amplified to achieve macroscopic change in
material morphology. This project represents the novel adaptation of biological
principles in topological transitions towards material morphogenesis, and the
identification of the minimal set of synthetic components and forces needed to
drive a topological transition, by replacing a living cell with a minimal cell-
free vesicle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported to further expand
the NSF 2026 Idea Machine winning entry "Engineered Living
Materials".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.