* 2033786
* RAPID: COVID-19 and Suspensions of Law
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Brian Gran, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 76,797.00

The global response to COVID-19 provides a rare opportunity to study suspensions
of law in response to public emergencies across multiple societies over the same
time period. The project will assess utility of law suspension as a way to limit
the negative impact of a public emergency, specifically in reducing COVID-19
transmission. It will be one of the first to examine widespread law suspensions
across countries where the suspensions are used to address the same public
emergency (i.e., COVID-19). The project will identify whether legal suspensions
matter to COVID-19 transmission, while identifying which laws, when suspended,
have little impact. Factors that shape effective reduction of COVID-19 will be
identified, as well as impacts on transmission when law suspensions cease. This
project will provide critical guidance for decision makers who must balance
public health against other considerations. Proper crisis response should
advance health and welfare, promote scientific programs, and contribute to
national security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to
assess the utility of suspensions of law (derogation) for preventing or reducing
COVID-19 transmission. The project will model and assess socio-legal responses
to COVID-19—specifically, emergency measures that suspend laws. Three qualities
of derogation will be assessed: what laws are suspended, the degree to which
laws are suspended, and duration of derogation. Reinstatement of derogation will
be assessed according to the same three qualities. This project will gather
data, operationalize and calibrate the data, establish a dataset, conduct
analyses, and disseminate results, the dataset, and GIS map. The data will be
analyzed to compare whether combinations of conditions, such as moderate degrees
of legal limitations combined with strong health infrastructures, reduce degrees
of virus transmission and promote prevention. This project will examine whether
derogation is applied to specific social groups and what features shape use of
derogation. The project will identify tipping points when transmission increases
or decreases and the combinations of derogation and socio-legal factors for
which transmission increases or decreases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.