* 2033327
* RII Track-4: Experimentally-informed Mesoscale Modeling of Anisotropic Grain Boundary Solute Segregation in Nanocrystalline Alloys
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Fadi Abdeljawad, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 11/30/2023
* USD 183,638.00

Nearly all structural materials are polycrystalline systems; their
microstructures are comprised of crystalline grains that are joined at internal
interfaces, termed grain boundaries (GBs). Owing to their nanometric grain size,
nanocrystalline (NC) metals exhibit unique combinations of properties that are
not commonly observed in their coarse-grained counterparts. However, NC metals
are susceptible to rapid grain coarsening during processing or under service
conditions, which in turn limits their use in many engineering applications,
such as structural, energy, and electronics. Recent experimental findings
suggest GB solute segregation as a design strategy to manipulate interface
properties and develop thermally stable NC metals. Through coordinated
experimental and computational studies, the main research objective of this
project is to gain fundamental insights into the role of GB geometry in solute
segregation and the resultant impact on the thermal stability of NC alloys. The
experimental portion of this project will be conducted at the Center for
Integrated Nanotechnologies at Sandia National Laboratories (CINT-SNL). This
project will uniquely position the PI to be at the forefront of innovative
research on nanomaterials, metallurgy and interface physics, and it will serve
as a catalyst for future collaborations and partnerships between Clemson
University and CINT-SNL. Further, this project provides a fertile avenue to
train future generation of engineers and scientists with the interdisciplinary
skill set necessary for careers in knowledge-intensive industries in South
Carolina, which is an emerging advanced manufacturing
hub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While great strides have been recently made towards
the use of GB solute segregation to design thermally stable NC metals, our
current understanding is still lacking as most existing efforts rely on the
isotropy assumption in segregation - solute atoms segregate equally and
uniformly to all GBs. This is an overly simplistic assumption as GB properties
are greatly influenced by the boundary’s geometry. This project advances the
current understanding of interface segregation by elucidating the impact of GB
geometry on solute segregation behavior. The experimental thrust of this project
will be performed at the Center for Integrated Nanotechnologies at Sandia
National Laboratories (CINT-SNL), which will allow the PI to take advantage of a
suite of cutting-edge high-resolution microscopy facilities. The PI will use
tools, including aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy,
energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, and X-ray diffraction at CINT-SNL to
conduct in situ high-temperature experiments, detailed tomographic
reconstructions of samples, chemical mapping, and orientation imaging microscopy
of texture and GB character in NC systems with the goal of characterizing and
quantifying GB solute concentration for a wide range of GB types. The PI will
perform analysis, employing analytical models of interface adsorption, of the
experimental data to obtain segregation energies that serve as input parameters
to a recently developed mesoscale model of GB segregation and microstructural
evolution in NC alloys. Using the experimentally informed model, we will perform
systematic computational studies to elucidate the impact of anisotropic GB
solute segregation on grain growth and thermal stability of NC
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.