* 2033893
* RAPID: Income and Poverty in the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,09/30/2021
* Bruce Meyer, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 199,723.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In nine weeks at the start of the COVID-19
pandemic 39 million people filed for unemployment insurance, while GDP for the
first quarter of 2020 was down 4.8%. The federal government responded with
unprecedented stimulus legislation that committed more than two trillion dollars
to countering the effects of the pandemic. Effectively targeting and calibrating
the government's fiscal response requires tracking changes in income and poverty
by demographic group and geography in a timely way, which there is extremely
limited ability to do. Official estimates of income and poverty for 2020 will
not be available until September of 2021. This project responds directly to this
need to develop new processes to help address the economic impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic by providing timely and accurate information on the impact of
the current pandemic on income and poverty to inform the targeting of resources
to those most affected. The project aims to construct new measures of the income
distribution and poverty with a lag of only a few weeks using high frequency
data for a large, representative sample of U.S. families. This project will have
immediate impact in advancing basic knowledge in the fields of economics and
related social sciences and providing tools for policy makers by constructing
new, near real-time estimates of income and poverty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will validate new, timely measure of income by comparing historical
estimates that rely on these data to estimates from data on income and
consumption that have been used much more broadly. Importantly, these validation
exercises will utilize new data that links survey data to tax and program data
at the individual level. The validation will help researchers understand the
advantages and limitations of using more timely income data to study changes in
economic well-being. This project will also address key questions regarding the
impacts of large economic shocks and survey income measurement, both critical
elements of much economic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.