* 2033519
* Building Research Cyberinfrastructure in EPSCoR Jurisdictions: Assessment, Planning and Partnerships
* O/D,OIA
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2023
* Scotty Strachan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 04/30/2023
* USD 10,000.00

The University of Hawaii, in collaboration with Montana State University and the
University of Nevada Reno, will host a workshop to gather the necessary baseline
data to characterize cyberinfrastructure (CI) capabilities across EPSCoR
jurisdictions and institutions. As these resources are required to drive data
and compute-intensive science forward, this workshop will address the issues of
historical underinvestment in CI resources and services in EPSCoR jurisdictions
and the uneven distribution and availability of these resources across the
nation. Activities and deliverables of this workshop aim to enhance CI access
and capability for research and education across EPSCoR jurisdictions, including
under-resourced institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this workshop
are to increase knowledge of, and aid access to, CI capabilities across EPSCoR
jurisdictions and beyond. Data generated by participants will allow insights
into existing gaps, priorities, and challenges at local and national levels.
First, participants will use the Research Computing and Data Capabilities Model
(RCDCM) assessment tool paired with trainings to generate baseline CI data and
ideas on how to increase CI access, planning, and partnerships. The workshop
will include facilitated discussion, a case-study panel on regional
collaboration, and group working sessions. The resulting open access report,
publication, and related outreach activities will present aggregated and
analyzed baseline data, interpreted findings, and planning and partnership
initiatives to advance knowledge and understanding of participating EPSCoR
institutions’ CI capabilities and intentions. The workshop will be co-located
with the EPSCoR Project Directors and Project Administrators meeting in
Portland, Maine (or online, per circumstances).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.