* 2033614
* I-Corps: RNA-adenylation sequencing for rapid ribosome profiling
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2022
* SHU-BING QIAN, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a next generation sequencing technology that aims to quantify
ribosome-protected mRNA fragments, to infer protein synthesis with superior
resolution. Given the central role of individual protein production in disease
diagnosis and treatment, the proposed technology aims to bridge bench-side to
bedside by accelerating personalized medicine. The proposed technology is
readily applicable to cells in culture and solid tissues obtained by needle
biopsy, and is expected to have application for a wide range of scientists and
healthcare professionals. Further, the ability to explore the translation of
protein production inside cells towards disease progression may offer novel
strategies for treatment and prevention. The technology may enable a genetic
testing approach that may have far-reaching impacts on basic research and
clinical diagnosis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of an RNA-adenylation sequencing, a next generation sequencing
technology. To date, monitoring individual protein production remains a
formidable challenge in biomedical and clinical laboratories. Ribosome profiling
(Ribo-seq) captures protein-producing mRNAs and reveals their translation step-
by-step. This effort defines the requirements to provide a snapshot of ribosome
positions and density across the transcriptome at a sub-codon resolution. The
current Ribo-seq methodology requires a large amount of starting material, needs
expensive equipment and reagents, and is time-consuming. Compared to the
conventional Ribo-seq method, the proposed RNA-adenylation sequencing technology
dramatically reduces the amount of starting material (~1 ng RNA), shortens the
library processing time (~6 hour), and increases the footprint resolution
(&gt;90% in-frame accuracy of 5' end). The proposed technology may improve
genome-wide evaluation of translation with superior sensitivity at single-
nucleotide resolution. In addition, the proposed technology may be adapted for
RNA sequencing technology. The technology may be used for broad RNA next-
generation sequencing in both laboratories and clinical
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.