* 2033772
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing a Rapid Antibody Generation Platform for Emerging COVID-19 Variants
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Randolph Lopez Barrezueta, A-Alpha Bio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to improve and accelerate the development of antibody therapies to
fight the COVID-19 pandemic. Antibody therapies are in development to target
SARS-CoV-2, the virus responsible for COVID-19, but emerging virus mutations may
result in resistance and require the development of new therapies. Antibody
therapies typically enter the clinic after a year of development or longer, and
the medical and economic consequences of this delay are severely felt throughout
the world. To reduce the time to produce an antibody against an emerging SARS-
CoV-2 mutant, this project develops a computational platform trained using
massive experimental datasets to rapidly predict the therapeutic potency. This
platform will enable drugs against SARS-CoV-2 mutants to more rapidly reach the
clinic, saving thousands of lives. Moreover, the proposed platform can be
utilized to predict therapeutic efficacy against future coronavirus strains
unassociated with the COVID-19 pandemic, providing an invaluable tool to fight
future pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will demonstrate the
feasibility of using quantitative and library-on-library protein interaction
datasets to train machine learning models for predicting antibody binding to
novel SARS-CoV-2 variants. Existing approaches to build computational
predictions for antibody drug development have been limited to few target
variants, since datasets with binding measurements against hundreds or thousands
of targets are not available. This project involves optimizing and validating a
cell-based platform for generating a sufficient quantity and quality of
antibody-antigen binding data for training computational models. The platform
uses genetically engineered yeast cells and next generation sequencing to link
protein interaction strength with cellular mating frequency. To demonstrate
feasibility, large multi-chain antibody libraries will be genomically integrated
in yeast and enriched for binding to SARS-CoV-2 and related coronaviruses. Next,
a large network of antibody-antigen interactions will be measured and validated
for quantitative accuracy by comparing to biophysical measurements. Finally, the
resulting data will be used to train machine learning models and evaluate their
predictive power using cross-validation. Training of computational models with
sufficient predictive power will demonstrate the feasibility of using
quantitative and library-on-library binding data coupled with machine learning
to develop a platform for rapid antibody development to a novel SARS-CoV-2
mutant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.