* 2033714
* ECO-CBET: Electrodeless Electrochemical Valorization of Lignin
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Mark Mba Wright, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,697,131.00

Plant-based materials, also known as biomass, are energy-rich substances that
have been recognized for decades as a renewable resource ultimately formed form
atmospheric carbon dioxide. Biomass also can be produced at a scale large enough
to meet the world’s fuel and organic material needs. In this research project,
the investigators will develop fundamental processes to convert plant matter
into chemicals that have similar utility to those derived from petroleum
feedstocks. Renewable electricity will be used to excite gasses into plasma,
which is a partially ionized gas containing free electrons. These free electrons
are chemically reactive and will start a lignin decomposition processes. Lignin
is a component of woody plants, and its decomposition products are comprised of
various chemicals that can be useful as fuel or as starting materials for other
chemicals and materials. This research project also includes middle school
students participating in “Researcher for a day” activities, so they can
envision their future selves in college and on a STEM career track.
Undergraduate students will be mentored by the faculty investigators to compete
in national programs such as the EPA P3 Sustainable Design Competition and the
NAE Grand Challenges Competition. Graduate students will gain experience in
planning and hosting an academic conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
objective of this project is to conceptualize the plasma-liquid interface as a
controlled means to promote selective organic redox reactions without solid
electrodes or intentionally added electrolyte. The goal is to describe the
thermodynamics, kinetics, and transport associated with organic redox reactions
in a liquid driven by a plasma-liquid interface, with and without
electrocatalysts. The outcome will be to establish a broader framework to
understand the dependence of conversion, reaction rate, yield, and selectivity
on plasma process variables, electrocatalyst molecular structure, and liquid
medium properties. The specific research aims include determining the
relationship of plasma properties to reactivity at the plasma-liquid interface.
An emphasis will be placed on studying reactive oxygen and nitrogen species and
the reduction potential on the liquid side. The researchers will elucidate the
role of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species in the selectivity of organic redox
reactions driven by the plasma-liquid interface. They will also use hydrogen
atom transfer electrocatalysts to achieve selective oxidation and reductive
cleaving of beta-O-4 linkages in lignin and model lignin compounds. Based on
these studies the investigators will develop design principles for new hydrogen
atom transfer electrocatalysts that can be used to mediate organic redox
reactions driven by the plasma-liquid interface. Finally, the researchers will
perform a technoeconomic and lifecycle assessment of plasma-liquid chemical
conversion processes. This analysis will focus on the dependence of atmospheric
carbon dioxide mitigation potential and economic viability on process inputs and
operating conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.