* 2033800
* RECODE: Rules-based Morphogenesis of Brain Organoids through Synthetic Gene Circuits
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2024
* Ethan Lippmann, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 11/30/2024
* USD 1,499,912.00

Brain disorders cost the US an estimated $800 billion each year. In general, the
human brain cannot be experimented on directly. However, patient-sourced stem
cells can be used to create organoids, which partially resemble the tissue of
origin. Brain-derived organoids have proven to be helpful in understanding brain
development and disease, but currently do not fully replicate the complexity and
connectivity of the human brain. In this project, brain organoids will be
engineered to more reliably develop into an interconnected network resembling
the brain. The project tightly integrates research with education. It provides
direct support for scientific outreach programs to Metro Nashville Public
Schools and recruitment of high school students to participate in the research
project. These efforts will help develop the next generation of scientists and
STEM-career workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brain organoid generation exploits the
ability of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) to integrate global and local
morphogenetic cues to self-assemble and differentiate. Building brain organoids
requires addition of external cues that activate or suppress specific signaling
pathways. The hPSCs interpret this signaling cocktail through networks that
establish internal gradients of morphogen agonists and antagonists. Signaling
centers coordinate embryo development. Without them, organoid production can
lead to inconsistencies in size, shape, and cellular organization. These
features must be faithfully replicated in brain organoids. The goal of this
project is to establish the molecular logic and design rules required to
generate cerebral cortical organoids. The objective is to create a self-
contained system with reproducible and defined architecture, size, and cellular
composition. Rewiring cellular networks will direct cells to autonomously
respond to their microenvironment. These cells will reproducibly template early
corticogenesis while balancing progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation
during later stages. The principles uncovered will guide the utilization of
brain organoids for understanding development and disease, and for screening
potential therapeutics. Understanding the design rules that govern higher-order
structure formation in the brain may potentially be applied to other types of
tissues. This further opens the possibility of engineering tissue replacements
for transplantation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
supported by the Engineering Biology and Health Cluster in ENG/CBET and the
Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in BIO/MCB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.