* 2033723
* RECODE: Materials-directed differentiation of intestinal organoids of uniform size and shape
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Kristi Anseth, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

Organoids are lab-grown clusters of cells that mimic organ functions. They are
often grown from stem cells that are embedded in three-dimensional (3D)
scaffolds. Organoids could help screen new drugs for personalized medicine and
repair damaged tissue. Organoid reproducibility is critical for these
applications. This project will develop new knowledge and tools to direct the
production of uniform intestinal organoids. Tracking of modified human
intestinal stem cells, in 3-D and real time, will indicate the differentiation
trajectory of each cell. In addition, the effects of mechanical forces
surrounding the organoid will be investigated and mechanical properties will be
modulated to drive differentiation. The project will develop new biomaterial and
imaging technologies, as well as recruit a diverse workforce into this emerging
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organoids represent state-of-the-art systems for
studying organ structure and function in vitro. They have several shortcomings.
No two organoids are structurally or functionally identical. They can only
achieve a limited extent of maturity. To address these limitations, the
objective of this RECODE project is to develop a highly controllable intestinal
organoid culture system. The influences that initial conditions and dynamic
mechanical environment exert on organoid development will be investigated.
Biomaterials-based strategies will exert extrinsic control over intestinal
organoid growth, symmetry breaking, and crypt patterning in an arrayed, high
throughput fashion. The research is organized around three objectives. Objective
1: Grow arrays of uniform intestinal organoid colonies and study the effects of
matrix mechanics on organoid growth and cell fate. Objective 2: Photopattern
changes in local matrix mechanics to direct symmetry breaking events during
organoid differentiation. Objective 3: Investigate methods to grow intestinal
organoids into tubular structures that will allow for long-term culture. The
outcomes of this research are broadly applicable to the field of organoid
studies, as these same rules can be applied to other shapes and organoid
systems. This work also probes life science ‘rules’ related to symmetry
breaking, pattern formation and self-assembly across scales that could provide
directed development of organoid systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being jointly supported by the Engineering Biology and Health Cluster in
ENG/CBET and the Biomechanics and Mechanobiology Program in
ENG/CMMI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.