* 2033921
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapid, pre-symptomatic detection of COVID-19 and unknown viruses using a novel biosensor chip, computer vision and machine learning.
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Stephen Turner, NANOCRINE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2021
* USD 248,706.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a novel device to detect COVID-19,
its derivative strains, and new, unknown viruses in pre-symptomatic
environments. Current methods depend on knowing the viral structure and/or
producing antibodies to specific, known viral proteins. This project will
provide pre-symptomatic virus detection using a standard throat or nasal swab in
a rapid point-of-care format (20 minutes) for preemptive detection of emerging
viral infections of both known and unknown origin. The project integrates
machine learning with novel devices. This could potentially alleviate social
distancing concerns, particularly in special environments, such as nursing homes
and schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project employs cellular phenotyping to detect viral infection of
cells. A cell’s phenotype is the particular cell’s morphology, functionality and
otherwise observable characteristics which result from the specific combination
of its present genomic and protein expression. This project combines a novel
computer vision algorithm with lithographically-prepared, highly-characterized
microchip substrates that impart specific, quantifiable, physical, and chemical
cues to cells. This enables in-vitro observation of their responses and to
quantitatively characterize cell phenotype and detection of meaningful cell
behavior deviations or anomalies due to the onset of cellular viral infection.
This project will demonstrate: 1) the capability of a machine vision image
analysis algorithm to extract the most relevant datasets; and 2) the ability to
detect meaningful feature vectors due to infection onset. The anticipated
technical results are to characterize cell phenotype through in-vitro studies,
demonstrate the use of infected cell phenotype features to diagnose viral
infections with traditional modes of light microscopy, and describe the
phenotyping of cell lines infected with a SARS-CoV-2-like
coronavirus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.