* 2033433
* MIMO Radar With Sparse Linear Arrays - Theory, Implementation and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Athina Petropulu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) radars have several advantages as compared
to traditional phased arrays. They can achieve higher resolution with the same
number of antennas. They can also achieve wide field of view, illuminating
multiple targets at the same time, which translates to faster detection time.
Reduction of the number of active antennas without hurting the radar performance
would reduce the cost of the radar, while a low-cost, high resolution radar
would advance the state-of-art of autonomous driving, smart environment, smart
home, and IoT sensing, and would enable applications such as smart patient care,
elderly monitoring, fitness assistant, etc., that rely on sensing. In an era
where COVID-19 forced home isolation with limited supervision of vulnerable
segments of the population, a radar device could provide information on vital
signs, or detect falls without invading people's privacy in the way surveillance
cameras would. MIMO radar using specially designed Sparse Linear Arrays (SLAs)
can enjoy reduced hardware cost without losing the MIMO radar advantages. An SLA
can be thought of as a uniform linear array with only a small number of active
antennas. By careful selection of the active antennas and optimal design of
transmit waveforms, one can maintain a radar performance close to that of the
fully populated array. However, finding an optimal sparse array geometry in
terms of the fewest antennas is a difficult combinatorial problem. The proposed
project will advance the state-of-art of SLA based MIMO radar as a cost-
effective imaging radar by (i) providing a novel framework for antenna
selection, (ii) developing an SLA MIMO radar prototype based on frequency-
scanning metamaterial (MTM) antennas, and (iii) developing real-time activity
monitoring and user identification schemes that leverage the high resolution and
wide field of view of MIMO SLA radar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several
novel aspects in the proposed work. (i) A novel machine learning approach for
antenna selection is proposed, which offers a unifying framework for dealing
with any performance metric. The novelty of the proposed approach lies in its
ability to get multiple softmax models to work together. (ii) The use of MTM
antennas brings in the added advantage of allowing for easy change of the beam
elevation by varying the antenna frequency. That advantages will be exploited to
look for targets in the 3-D space while still using a linear array. By varying
the frequency of the MTM antennas, one can select the elevation direction of the
transmit beam, and by applying the proposed SLA design method, one can design
the beam pattern in the 2-D space corresponding to the selected elevation
direction. The frequency scanning capability resulting from the dispersive
nature of MTM allows a real time and low complexity beam scanning mechanism,
whereas the SLA MIMO radar with proper waveform engineering will generate a
large scale virtual array with enhanced angular resolution. As such, the
combination of SLA MIMO radar with MTM antennas will enable an unprecedented
radar architecture with larger field of view, finer resolution, and small number
of antenna RF fronts. (iii) Low-latency signal processing algorithms will be
developed for leveraging the large field of view and high angle resolution, that
will have the capability to construct 3D user models and identify multiple
targets simultaneously. Innovative neural network structures will be devised to
enable device-free user activity monitoring. It is expected that the multi-user
identification mechanisms will reveal unique user-specific activity
characteristics embedded in the movements of high-resolution point clouds,
facilitating a broad range of emerging mobile
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.