* 2033970
* NSF2026: EAGER: Understanding Team Science to Help Reinvent Scientific Talent:  Exploring the Knowledge, Skill, and Attitude Competencies Associated with Interdisciplinary Team Eff
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Stephen Fiore, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project explores one of the NSF Idea Machine Winning Entries: "Reinventing
Scientific Talent." While much has been written about the challenges of the kind
of interdisciplinarity present in convergence research, a thorough understanding
of the knowledge, skill, and attitude competencies associated with scientific
teamwork is still needed. The goal of the project is to develop a better
understanding of team science competencies contributing to effective convergence
science. (Team science is a collaborative effort to address a scientific
challenge that leverages the strengths and expertise of professionals trained in
different fields.) The project will address these gaps through an integrated set
of activities that survey scholars and practitioners to examine similarities and
differences in these perceptions across disciplines and experience levels.
Complementing these are in-depth workshops where stakeholders provide their
insights so that a richer understanding is gained. From this, a more
comprehensive framework of science team competencies can be developed to inform
how to reinvent scientific talent and to suggest future directions for the
research of team science. Outcomes from this research will help extend the
nation’s scientific capabilities by teaching scientists how to better engage in
“reciprocal learning”, that is, how to leverage their expertise and share their
knowledge to nurture a stronger foundation for successful convergence research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers on understanding interdisciplinary
team science competencies in relation to levels of experience and types of
disciplinary expertise. Although research is beginning to examine some of these
issues, no studies have simultaneously examined the relation between perceptions
of team science competencies, how they contribute to team effectiveness, and how
scientists learn while engaged in collaborations. The project will examine
interdisciplinary clusters of researchers, each addressing their own form of
convergence science. It will explore perceptions of team science competencies,
how they are best acquired, and how to create learning cultures capable of
supporting the development of the teamwork skills foundational to convergence
and generalizable across problem domains. Through workshops held with these
clusters, and surveys of scholars and practitioners affiliated with team science
projects, the project will develop research findings and a framework
representing the varied nature of convergence competencies and how these relate
to learning while engaged in scientific collaborations. The project’s
complementary research tasks will provide the foundation for identifying the
competencies associated with team science effectiveness, and how these
contribute to reciprocal learning while engaged in scientific collaborations.
The project will disseminate a report presenting findings and research
recommendations through peer-reviewed publications, presentations at
professional conferences, and additional outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning Program (AISL) in
the Division of Research on Learning and the NSF 2026 Fund
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.