* 2033896
* NSF2020: EAGER: Collaborative Research: Enhancing Employment for Neurodiverse Individuals through Next-Generation, AI-Enabled Assessments of Visuospatial Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Zachary Warren, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 60,000.00

Each year in the United States, approximately 70,000 new adults on the autism
spectrum will seek employment. At the same time, employers in technology,
finance, healthcare, and many other critical job sectors seek highly skilled and
highly trained individuals to fill specialized positions. With support from the
DRK-12 Program in the Division of Research on Learning and the NSF 2026 Fund
Program in the Office of Integrated Activities, this research will investigate
new tools and methods for matching individual job-seekers on the autism spectrum
to employment opportunities that leverage their unique cognitive skills, with a
focus on visuospatial cognitive skills. Numerous jobs require strong
visuospatial cognitive skills, such as visual inspection and quality control,
process monitoring, document review, surveillance, software testing, and data
visualization, to name a few. Many people on the autism spectrum show strengths
in visuospatial cognitive skills, but these strengths are not fully understood,
including how they differ from person to person and how they map onto workplace-
relevant capabilities. Understanding visuospatial cognitive skills in
individuals on the autism spectrum or other neurodiverse conditions has high
potential impact for enhancing the neurodiversity of the workforce by enabling
more effective programs for the recruitment, selection, and retention of such
candidates in the public and private sectors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF2026
EAGER project enriches the NSF2026 Idea Machine winning entry Harnessing the
Human Diversity of Mind. It seeks to develop and evaluate integrated, AI-enabled
technologies for measuring a personâ€™s visuospatial cognitive skills in new ways
and then using these measurements to predict performance on workplace-relevant
tasks. The research conducted during this two-year project will include
conducting a large pilot study with individuals on the autism spectrum and
neurotypical individuals, in which participants will be given several
visuospatial tests, and detailed data about their actions will be recorded using
sensors such as eye trackers and cameras. Then, data mining and machine learning
techniques will be used to extract meaningful patterns from these rich streams
of behavioral data, and analyses will be conducted to examine how these patterns
in foundational behaviors map onto individual skills and interests in realistic,
workplace-relevant activities. This research will also gather and analyze
detailed feedback from industry partners to identify specific job types and
sectors that would benefit from recruiting employees who are strong in
visuospatial cognitive skills. In addition, this project will involve
neurodiverse students and staff in many of its activities, in particular by
involving graduate trainees supported by the NSF Research Traineeship in
Neurodiversity Inspired Science &amp; Engineering (NISE) and by leveraging the
skills of neurodiverse interns at the Frist Center for Autism &amp; Innovation
at Vanderbilt University's School of Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.