* 2033675
* ECO-CBET: A holistic effort to decarbonize diesel for heavy duty transportation: Targeted combustion &amp; exhaust catalysis research to improve life-cycle performance
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Lisa Peterson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,700,000.00

Freight is predominantly transported via heavy-duty road vehicles and container
shipping vessels. The heavy loads characteristic of each of these transportation
modes require high-density fuels sources. That restriction, in combination with
the impracticality of recharging batteries aboard marine vessels, will limit the
penetration of electric vehicles into these markets for the near term.
Therefore, diesel fuel consumption by heavy-duty road vehicle and marine engines
is expected to continue to rise. This research project investigates how low
greenhouse gas emissions technologies can be used to support this increasing use
of diesel fuels. Combustion and catalysis research are combined to understand
the impact of fuel composition and combustion strategy on the emissions of
greenhouse gases - namely, nitrous oxide, methane, and diesel particulates. In
addition, several current diesel fuels, including biorenewable ones, are
evaluated to assess various scenarios for reducing the overall global warming
potential of diesel-type fuels and the corresponding combustion strategies. The
outcomes of this project will contribute to U.S. leadership in clean diesel
technology. The project also will provide cross-disciplinary training to
graduate and undergraduate students, while emphasizing increased participation
by underrepresented minorities in STEM fields at all educational
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to track the
chemical relationships between fuel composition, combustion products, and
exhaust emissions on the overall global warming potential of heavy-duty diesel-
type compression-ignition engines. The research aims include 1) the construction
of an optically-accessible reactor to study combustion of vaporized diesel,
biodiesel, and surrogate fuels under conditions relevant for low temperature
combustion engines; 2) the use of novel, in-situ techniques to measure
temperature, hydrocarbon species and particulate formation throughout the
combustion reaction zone; 3) the determination of the nitrous oxide formation
mechanism over an exhaust oxidation catalyst; and 4) the integration of results
via life cycle analysis to evaluate the global warming potential of various
diesel and diesel-alternatives. The types of fuels to be evaluated include
standard fossil fuel diesel plus three classes of “low carbon” diesel
alternatives, namely soy biodiesel (fatty acid methyl esters, FAME), “green
diesel” from the thermochemical conversion of waste biomass, and “carbon-neutral
hydrocarbon fuels” produced using reclaimed carbon dioxide as feedstock. Using
the optically accessible combustion chamber and a new time- and frequency-
resolved nonlinear spectroscopy measurement method, species will be measured as
a function of the fuel type and combustion mode. Standard diesel engine
combustion conditions will be compared with low temperature combustion
conditions relevant to homogenous charge compression ignition and premixed-
charged compression ignition. The mechanism of nitrous oxide formation over a
diesel oxidation catalyst as a function of hydrocarbon type will be derived via
experiments and computational modeling. A life cycle analysis will be performed
combining the nitrous oxide, methane, particulate and carbon dioxide results for
each fuel type, such that an overall perspective of fuel source and combustion
mode impact can be evaluated. The outcomes of this research project will allow
the community and public policy decision makers to better understand how diesel
fuel source and combustion technologies can deliver meaningful reductions in the
global warming potential of diesel-type fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.