* 2033961
* NSF2026: EAGER: Homeostasis and soft robotics for the construction of feeling machines
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Antonio Damasio, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,631.00

With support from the Robust Intelligence program in the Division of Information
and Intelligent Systems and the NSF 2026 Fund Program in the Office of
Integrated Activities, investigators at University of Southern California are
investigating a radical new approach to creating machines with the foundations
for nature-inspired feeling as a primary basis for its action in the world.
Recent theoretical work has raised the possibility that an analogue of feelings
could be constructed in robots with bodies that are physically vulnerable to the
environment. The possession of a body that can exist in better or worse
condition, and the capacity to recognize and respond to such states are key
elements in the generation of feeling in living creatures. This project will
study a new class of machines organized according to the principles of life
regulation, or homeostasis. The fundamental innovation of these machines is the
introduction of risk-to-self. This project will explore how robots might respond
to risk-to-self based on homeostasis rather than rely on the robustness provided
primarily by e.g. increases in computation or protective encasement. The work
aims to explore the nature-inspired question of the material basis for feelings
and their potential value to an AI agent. By investigating machine-based
homeostasis as the foundation of machine “feeling” this project might lay the
foundations for safer and perhaps even “empathetic” robots in the spirit of the
2026 Idea Machine entry, “Promoting Empathy-Based AI”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will integrate recent breakthroughs from two disparate research fields:
soft robotics and deep learning for multisensory integration. The field of soft
robotics presents exciting new opportunities for machines to generate
homeostatic data that are far richer than those achievable in rigid-bodied
robots. The special properties of soft materials allow for greater flexibility,
compliance, self-repair, and dense multimodal sensing. The tools of deep
learning will be specifically applied to build multimodal representations that
can bridge across internal and external sensory representations. The studies
will be performed in computer simulations of voxel-based soft robots controlled
by cross-modal neural networks. The behavioral advantages that accrue to soft
robots possessing a homeostatic architecture will be quantified, both for robots
in isolation and for societies of robots. This project's simulation work will
lay the necessary preparations for future studies of machine feeling in
physically realized robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.