* 2033779
* The Role of Fabric on the Behavior of Granular Materials Subjected to Cyclic Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Jose Andrade, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 12/31/2024
* USD 409,256.00

Predicting the cyclic behavior of granular materials remains a major engineering
challenge that is not yet sufficiently captured by existing computer models
developed in the last few decades. Cyclic behavior of granular materials is
critical in a large number of applications, including soil behavior under
earthquake loading and clean energy harvesting offshore. A missing link in the
current models is the inclusion of internal granular structure (fabric), which
is known to control the overall behavior in granular materials, especially under
cyclic loads where the material experiences load reversals. The objective of
this research is to extend the predictive capability of computer models for
granular materials subjected to cyclic loading by carefully investigating the
effects of the fabric. This research will use cutting edge computational,
experimental and in situ techniques to develop next-generation models for
granular materials such as sands. This research is a collaboration between
Caltech and the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute. Furthermore, this project will
contribute to the training of students at the undergraduate and graduate levels.
Undergraduate students will be involved via the summer undergraduate research
fellowship at Caltech. This research will also have significant impact on
continuing to expand the international educational infrastructure in
geotechnical engineering, especially between the United States and
Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The working hypothesis of this research is that
continuum behavior is encoded at the scale where neighboring grains interact.
These interactions establish a stress path network, or fabric, that adapts
dynamically to changing loading conditions; giving rise to meso-scale features
like force chains, which are unique to granular materials. The upshot of this is
that the evolution of fabric induces continuous change in the meso-scale and the
continuum response of the material. The dearth of continuum models capable of
predicting accurately the cyclic behavior of granular materials could be
attributed to a general lack of understanding of how fabric evolves as a
function of cyclic loading and how it influences the granular material behavior.
This research aims to fill this gap by accomplishing three central research
tasks: 1: Characterization and reconstitution of inherent fabric; 2: Modeling
fabric evolution in cyclic stress paths; 3: Continuum description and validation
of fabric evolution relations. This research will motivate the design of new
experimental apparatuses and inspire a new generation of predictive constitutive
models for granular materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.