* 2033171
* I-Corps: Restorative cement for remineralization in tooth decay following minimal invasive restoration
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Stefan Habelitz, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a dental restorative addressing dental cavities. Dental caries
remains the most common chronic disease in humans, children (25%), teenagers
(59%), and adults (92%); it consumes 5-10% of healthcare budgets in high-income
countries. The proposed technology provides a low-cost solution to functionally
repair and mineralize the damaged tooth, instead of merely removing the tissue,
reducing the time and costs associated with surgical intervention. It may be
readily adopted by dental professionals as it requires only minor modifications
to the existing restorative workflow, and as a minimally invasive approach, it
may simplify and shorten surgical interventions compared to conventional
restorations. The core technology of mineralization opens a significant
potential for the in vitro synthesis as well as in vivo repair of mineralized
tissues like bone, and cementum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a dental restorative to address dentin incipient
cavities. The proposed technology is based on the incorporation of the polymer
induced liquid precursor (PILP)-method into a dental restorative. This material
releases biomimetic molecules that transport calcium and phosphate ions to
collagen fibrils in the damaged dentin tissue and facilitates mechanical
reinforcement by functional remineralization. The proposed approach introduces a
remineralization agent for the dentin and can augment the standard restorative
protocol in dental procedures. This treatment restores the function of dentin
through the recovery of the elastic modulus and hardness of the damaged tissue,
thus facilitating repair through remineralization. In addition, the technology
enables a special cement liner to deliver targeted and sustained mineralizing
agents to repair and reverse caries in dentin. The final formulation will be
developed by tuning bioactive compositions mixed with biomimetic
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.