* 2033922
* RAPID: Making the Transition to Remote Science Teaching and Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Joseph Krajcik, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Gavin Fulmer
* 06/30/2021
* USD 198,674.00

Across the nation, teachers have shifted to delivering instruction remotely due
to COVID-19. This transition to remote instruction has presented challenges for
secondary science teachers who previously engaged their students in hands-on
learning through empirical tests and observations of real-world phenomena, but
whose students might not now have the equipment or materials in their homes to
enable hands-on investigations. In this project, Concord Consortium will develop
and test a remote professional development program that is designed to support
secondary science teachers in making the transition from face-to-face to remote
instruction, while still providing their students with engaging opportunities to
learn from empirical data. Through this professional development program,
science teachers will gain practice in using an open-source tool that teaches
data-based modeling in the context of complex systems. For example, this tool
will enable students to use data related to the pandemic to develop models that
can predict relevant outcomes. As students develop skills related to modeling,
they will be better prepared for the STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) workforce of the future, which increasingly requires the ability to
interpret and use large-scale data. Research will identify the features of
professional development that support teachers in providing remote instruction
that is aligned with the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) related to
modeling and systems thinking.

Concord Consortium will provide remote professional development to ten secondary
science teachers on modeling using complex systems via open-source software.
They will collect surveys, interviews, and teacher-generated curricular
materials to ascertain how the teachers develop pedagogical strategies for
remote instruction, which are designed to support the development of their
students' modeling skills and practices. Additionally, they will collect data
from student work, including log files from the software, to determine how the
students demonstrate modeling practices and knowledge of systems in the context
of this remote instruction. The results from inductive descriptive analyses of
these data will be submitted to empirical journals. Other dissemination
materials will outline the design principles that support teachers in modifying
NGSS-aligned curricular materials for remote delivery. This project is funded by
the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT) careers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.