* 2033137
* RAPID COVID-19 DCL response: Wastewater Pathogen Tracking Dashboard
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Jared Schuetter, Battelle Memorial Institute
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2021
* USD 197,375.00

Monitoring the spread of COVID-19 within communities is essential to enable
outbreak control measures such as social distancing or contact tracing to be
effective. The goal of this project is to build a system to detect and quantify
COVID-19 from city wastewater to identify neighborhoods that are at highest risk
as the virus spreads. Low or undetectable COVID-19 counts are expected to be
observed in wastewater from neighborhoods where the outbreak is under control,
whereas they will be higher in regions where social distancing or contact
tracing is needed to stop viral spread. This tracking system is adaptable to
other pathogens that cause outbreaks of public health concern as well, and it
will help ensure public safety as the economy is re-opening and afterwards by
detecting second-wave outbreaks of which the public should be aware. This
tracking system will provide real time insight into community spread and
prevalence of COVID-19 by building risk models from wastewater data and
comparing those to models built from other public health data. A broader impact
from this research will be the development of a publicly accessible, web-based
Wastewater Pathogen Tracking Dashboard (WPTD).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Several
studies have demonstrated that the virus that causes COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, is
detectable in human waste and in the influent of wastewater treatment plants
using diagnostic techniques such as qPCR. Compared to traditional public health
risk estimation models, sampling of wastewater offers a more immediate and
passive approach to population surveillance that can be tied to source tracing
and socioeconomic impacts without depending on an already overburdened
healthcare system. This work will go beyond the state of the art to include
virome sequencing to determine prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 and other viral
pathogens and long read sequencing from four locations to quantify and detect
viral mutations, that may correlate with differential disease severity. The
project will produce a predictive risk model to identify neighborhoods where
contact tracing should be implemented due to high abundance of SARS-CoV-2 in the
wastewater relative to the number of confirmed cases. This model will be
developed and compared to models built from public health data to enable
prediction of neighborhoods that have cleared the virus or are having new
outbreaks. Virome analysis will enable extension to other pathogens of public
concern and development of a dashboard for data presentation to public officials
to enable informed policy decisions regarding pandemic
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Ecology and
Evolution of Infectious Diseases Program in the Division of Environmental
Biology, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.