* 2033788
* NSF2026: EAGER: Harnessing Protein Disorder in the Design of Ordered Cellular Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Sambeeta Das, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,393.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Biomaterials
Program of the NSF Division of Materials Research, and the NSF 2026 Fund Program
in the Office of Integrated Activities, Professors Das and Kiik at University of
Delaware are awarded for their proposal "Harnessing Protein Disorder in the
Design of Ordered Cellular Materials". The research involves the fact that
synthetic biological materials must include “smart” functional properties –
self-regulation, self-healing, environmental responsiveness, and self-
sustainability – to function as engineered living materials (ELMs), which are
poised to revolutionize present-day materials technologies. ELMs can offer
insights into the development of living organs, the organization of multiple
organ systems, and the production of autonomously sensing and healing materials.
However, the large-scale manufacture of engineered living materials has been
difficult to achieve, owing to a lack of control of both materials’ organization
and cell and molecule placement over multiple length scales. This proposal
addresses this gap by developing microstructured hydrophilic polymer hydrogels.
The polymer solutions used in this proposal have the unique capability of
reversibly changing concentration in the presence of specific compounds, which
will allow the use of micron-scale robots to deliver these compounds to produce
patterned hydrogels. These approaches will be integrated with cells to generate
highly ordered cell-gel materials with high cell viability. The precise and
programmable spatial control of hydrogel properties will enable localized
differentiation of stem cells to form engineered living materials, and
subsequent manufacture of complex tissues for advancing national health. The
project includes a plan to engage K-12 girls and their caregivers in hands-on
robotics activities that will enhance learning strategies and stimulate interest
in science and engineering. Graduate and undergraduate students will receive
training in an interdisciplinary environment blending materials science and
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop a new approach
for making addressable, microrobotically-controlled engineered living materials
(ELMs) with functional properties. The large-scale manufacture of ELMs requires
the reliable control of both materials’ organization and cell and molecule
placement over multiple length scales. The overarching goal of this proposal is
to generate polymer hydrogels with regular microstructured regions of distinct
mechanical properties, based largely on resilin-like polypeptides (RLPs) derived
from the bioelastomer resilin. RLP-based solutions have the unique capability of
reversibly changing concentration in the presence of small-molecule and
polymeric co-solutes. The working hypothesis in this proposal is that the
microrobotic delivery of polyethylene glycol (PEG) will rapidly trigger a
locally increased concentration of RLPs near microrobots, leading to the
formation of mechanically distinct microstructured regions in the bioelastomer.
The coincident use of a digital micromirror display (DMD) system will permit the
co-localization of light, thus initiating crosslinking and generating localized
microstructures with unprecedented precision. The development of magnetic
microrobot control strategies will enable control of microrobotic swarms for
large-scale delivery of PEG. Microrobots capable of triggered delivery of
molecules at desired coordinates with high precision will also enable
spatiotemporal control of bioactive molecules and factors which can be used to
temporally alter cellular function. To confirm the survival, metabolic activity,
and proliferative capacity of cells in/on these microrobotically patterned,
cytocompatible bioelastomeric hydrogels, commercially available human
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) will be encapsulated in/on the patterned RLP-
based hydrogels and their proliferation will be tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research was submitted in response to the NSF2026 Idea Machine winning
entry "Engineered Living Materials".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.