* 2033467
* Understanding Heat-transfer Regimes in Past, Present and Future Climates
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Tiffany Shaw, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2024
* USD 574,359.00

The Earth's climate is a product of heat transfer, as the warming effect of heat
energy gains, including the latent heat released in precipitation, must over
time be balanced by equal heat losses to achieve a persistent climate state in
any given region. An atmospheric column can transfer heat energy through its top
and bottom by radiation, for instance when it cools by emitting infrared
radiation to space, and by evaporation and thermal conduction at the Earth's
surface. Lateral heat transfer is also critical, as in the tropics the Earth
receives more energy from the sun than it radiates back to space and the
opposite is true near the poles. Thus the tropics must export heat energy to the
poles to balance the budgets of both regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under
this award seeks to understand atmospheric heat transfer in low, middle, and
high latitudes, considering both changes in heat transfer over the the seasonal
cycle and differences in heat transfer between warmer and colder climates. For
example simulations of modern climate show strong seasonal variations in
latitudinal heat balances, with radiation largely balancing local evaporation
and surface heat conduction in the middle latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere
in summer, while lateral heat transfer is more prominent in other seasons. The
situation is quite different in simulations of the "snowball earth" climate,
where lateral transfer is prominent throughout the year over most of the globe.
The underlying mechanisms that determine atmospheric heat balances in different
climates, and drive changes in heat balances during transitions between climate
states, are explored through analysis of existing simulations and through novel
simulations using a variety of model configurations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heat
transport plays an essential role in maintaining Earth's climate, and research
on the topic has societal value given the need to better understand how the
climate system works and how it is likely to change under the influence of
greenhouse gas increases and changes in aerosol pollution. The project also
provides support and training for a graduate student and an undergraduate, the
latter recruited through a campus-wide program dedicated to increasing
participation of underrepresented minorities in scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.