* 2033569
* A1: A Multi-Scale Open Knowledge Network for Biomedicine
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Sharat Israni, University of California-San Francisco
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 08/31/2023
* USD 5,299,996.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create an organization of data
called a knowledge network that will allow doctors, researchers, the
pharmaceutical industry, and citizen scientists to much more effectively
understand and explore biomedicine. It will connect vast amounts of data in a
way that allows important new questions to be asked, helping to discover the
root of a biological process, identify cures for diseases, recognize
pharmaceuticals that could be relevant previously unexplored conditions, and
much more. The platform will enable and support biomedical applications created
by third parties. The adoption of those enabled tools has the potential to have
significant societal impacts: reducing healthcare costs, health disparities and
accelerating therapeutics, ultimately improving the quality of life for every
American.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Healthcare costs Americans almost one-fifth of
the entire US GDP. Health disparities, major public health issues, drug
discovery complexity, and overall costs continue to grow dramatically. The
mechanisms underlying human health are so complex that the human brain cannot
integrate the ever-growing body of available knowledge relevant to treating
patients or discovering therapies. This hampers the generation of new knowledge,
specifically in the biomedical sciences and its implications for human health.
The goal of this project, a biomedical open knowledge network (OKN), is to
integrate billions of biomedical concepts into a knowledge engine that will
enable doctors, drug developers, researchers, and citizen scientists to produce
biologically meaningful answers to biomedical questions – rapidly and cheaply.
This OKN will incorporate billions of factual relationships among biomedical
concepts, allowing specialists to generalists to explore biomedicine in its
whole might.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team supported by this project is part of
a group pioneering the paradigm of knowledge networks in biomedicine. The effort
brings together partners with expertise in search tools (including Google),
graph theory (from Lawrence Livermore National Labs), and collaboration with the
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences’ Biomedical Data Translator
(part of the National Institutes of Health), as well as working with other
academic nonprofit institutions (the Institute for Systems Biology, Indiana
University, UC San Diego, and Stanford. The ambitious effort represents
convergence research including expertise across all aspects of biomedicine and
data science, integrating doctors, researchers, epistemologists, database
specialists, computer scientists, and statisticians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During
Phase I of the Convergence Accelerator Program, the team developed and made
available a fully functional biomedical knowledge network, the Scalable
Precision Medicine Knowledge Engine (SPOKE, spoke.rbvi.ucsf.edu). This success
supports the likelihood that the team will produce deliverables in this Phase II
project that will have a positive impact on society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.