* 2033801
* The Center for Aviation and Automotive Technological Education using E-Learning: Providing E-learning Resources and Increasing Knowledge about Their Effectiveness
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Kevin Cooper, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 4,018,818.00

As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, all levels of education have shifted to
greater reliance on electronic technologies or e-learning. This shift creates
new needs for e-learning materials as well as for knowledge about which
strategies support student learning in diverse settings. This project will build
on the success of prior NSF funding for the Center for Aviation and Automotive
Technological Education using Virtual E-Schools (CA2VES). This funding supported
early initiatives to create and deliver accessible e-learning resources to
support aviation and automotive technological education. Through its
EducateWorkforce platform, which emphasizes engaging and effective online
teaching and learning, CA2VES is uniquely positioned to support technological
instructors who are making a transition to online learning. In addition to
helping meet the aviation and automotive technician education needs of today,
the project will also focus on educational needs relevant for future
manufacturing technologies. The project is directly relevant to NSF’s funding
priority areas (e.g., Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier) and the
National Academy of Engineering’s Grand Challenges (e.g., Enhancing Virtual
Reality; Advancing Personalized Learning).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Informed by
industry, governmental agencies, and academia, the project will: 1) support
aviation and automotive technological fields with a scalable, cost-effective,
and flexible e-learning model; 2) grow and broaden the aviation and automotive
network of scholars; 3) use e-learning to assist technical and community
colleges in support of diverse communities; and 4) conduct evidence-based
research and pursue longitudinal studies on the efficacy of e-learning and
virtual reality/augmented reality for diverse settings. This e-learning delivery
model will integrate classroom and hands-on laboratory experiences for a diverse
aviation and automotive technician education audience. The project outcomes will
provide practical guidelines and resources for school administrators and system
designers for developing and deploying e-learning curricula for diverse
audiences. Additionally, the project is intended to serve as a national resource
for curated e-learning materials for aviation and automotive technology and
provide an online resource for awareness of career pathways. A key component of
the project is its integration of Universal Design for Learning principles into
curriculum development. As a result, the materials developed by the project will
serve all learners, including veterans, women, economically marginalized
students, first-generation students, and students with learning differences. The
project intends to generate new knowledge about e-learning through evidence-
based controlled and longitudinal studies on the efficacy of e-learning
approaches to broaden the aviation and automotive talent pipeline and its
application to diverse populations. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.