* 2033717
* ECO-CBET: Transforming the Nitrogen Bioeconomy
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* Alexander Hristov, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 10/31/2024
* USD 1,700,000.00

Non-point source water pollution generally results from land runoff, drainage,
or seepage where tracing pollution back to a single source is difficult. Non-
point source pollution remains a significant cause of impairment to water bodies
despite decades of investment in management strategies. Agriculture is a major
activity linked to non-point source pollution from which massive amounts of
nutrients (carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus) are currently released into the
environment as waste. However, via novel engineered solutions these waste
nutrients hypothetically could be recovered and transformed back into
agricultural resources, such as soil amendments and feed supplements. Fast
growing aquatic plants, like duckweed, have the potential to treat agricultural
run-off and extract the unused nutrients. By using recovery processes based upon
duckweed, local farms and communities could manage their own polluted water and
generate a resource that could help reduce farmersâ€™ operating costs. Doing so
near the point of use would reduce energy consumption and greenhouse gas
emissions that would otherwise be required to produce and transport new nutrient
supply. The retention of nutrient run-off locally would also reduce downstream
water pollution and contribute to global ecosystem health. In this project, a
series of interconnected experiments will be used to evaluate the mechanisms of
nutrient recovery and upcycling via duckweed, and the best processing and
implementation practices for duckweed as an animal feed and soil amendment will
be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate the mechanisms and
environmental benefits of using duckweed to capture nutrients from agricultural
waste sources within the context of the nutrient-impaired Chesapeake Bay
Watershed. Rather than nutrient treatment being a burden, this project aims to
demonstrate how leveraging duckweed can generate significant economic value when
returned into the agricultural system as a protein-rich feed supplement for
dairy cattle or as a soil amendment for crop production. A successful project
will have global relevance for creation of a unique and sustainable nitrogen
bioeconomy. Both techno-economic and life cycle analysis will be used to
evaluate the overall cost efficiency and environmental sustainability of the
system. Focus groups and surveys with local stakeholders in the Chesapeake Bay
Watershed will be employed with the target of ensuring feasibility of the
approach and preparing for pilot implementation. This circular bioeconomy
strategy represents a new paradigm for nutrient management that could help
decrease the severity of the looming food-energy-water crisis by making
ecological water treatment and regenerative agriculture more
practical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.