* 2033681
* CCSS: Collaborative Research: Towards a Resource Rationing Framework for Wireless Federated Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jie Xu, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Federated learning (FL) is an emerging distributed machine learning paradigm
that has many attractive properties. Despite the early studies that have
demonstrated the potential of jointly optimizing communication and computation,
existing designs are not tailored to the unique characteristics of FL. This
project aims at developing a novel and rigorous resource allocation framework
for wireless FL, which we term resource rationing to emphasize balancing
resources over time so that the long-term impact to the final learning outcome
is explicitly captured. Resource rationing is built on a rigorous theoretical
foundation and guides the algorithmic development that solves specific resource
allocation problems in both physical and Media Access Control (MAC) layers.
Federated learning is an emerging new application for wireless communications,
and this project has potential to advance the technology development of this new
use case. Meanwhile, the theoretical foundation, algorithms, and validation will
broadly advance the state of the art in machine learning, communication theory,
and wireless networking. Developing such practical and impactful technology
would also help maintain the leadership of the United States in wireless
technologies as well as keep the pipeline to supply high-quality, well-trained,
and innovative engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project pursues synergistic
activities for the successful design and implementation of resource rationing
for wireless FL. Novel convergence analysis of FL with varying resource in each
learning round is carried out, which establishes the general later-is-better
principle. Guided by the theoretical foundation, the project further builds a
comprehensive algorithmic framework for specific resource rationing designs,
ranging from physical layer bit loading and adaptive coding and modulation to
the MAC layer client selection, bandwidth allocation, and power
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.