* 2033334
* I-Corps: Mobile App for Nursing Handoff for Use in Education and Practice
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Mikyoung Lee, Texas Woman's University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an effective electronic solution for nursing handoffs to support
accurate patient information exchange, facilitate information access at the
point-of-care, eliminate redundant documentation, and increase patient safety
and quality of care. Handoff in health care is defined as the communication
process that transfers essential patient information among healthcare providers
during patient transitions in care. The importance of nursing handoff education
is validated by research findings that handoff failures have been implicated in
seven out of eight novice nurses' near miss and adverse events in practice.
However, there have been few handoff trainings in nursing education and these
are limited or unrealistic. The challenge of creating reliable and repeatable
nursing handoffs has led to delays in the competency development of students and
novice nurses in navigating and collecting patient condition information,
negatively impacting patient treatments. A mobile nursing handoff app may serve
as a cost-effective and handy tool to provide opportunities to learn and
practice nursing handoffs in an educational setting. A mobile nursing handoff
app, designed with evidence-based, structured content will foster appropriate
clinical judgment and ensure accuracy, completeness, and consistency in handoff
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a mobile app for nursing handoff communications, allowing nurses
to view and edit electronic patient data. Responsive web design is built in this
app to be used on diverse range of sizes of mobile devices. There are multiple
structures or formats for handoff communication in the health care industry;
however, there are inconsistencies in the information included in these tools.
This inconsistency is a particular problem for students or novice nurses who may
have difficulty in identifying the necessary assessment parameters that need to
be captured and reported. This app integrates nursing evidence and a well-known
clinical nursing practice model to support holistic, systematic, and practical
assessments of patients. The app promotes reliable, reproducible nursing
handoffs. The app has a rating system to assess and report patient acuity, and
color alerts to highlight key concerns. The text data entry fields enable nurses
to add notes and communicate priorities in care. Information is updated as the
patient condition changes with an audit trail. The features of the app help
nurses attend to significant and urgent elements of patient care and support
effective and accurate nursing handoff at the bedside, leading to an increase in
patient safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.