* 2033939
* RAPID: Molecular Insights into the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein Activation via a Novel Interaction with a Human Cell Surface Target Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Tina Izard, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2021
* USD 199,844.00

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is an
enveloped, single-stranded RNA virus that belongs to the subgenus sarbecvirus of
Coronaviridae. Members of the Coronaviridae family include the SARS-CoV and the
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), which are the
responsible human pathogens for the common cold and other emerging severe
respiratory conditions. SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 attach to the host cells by
binding to the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor. Viral entry is
facilitated by the binding of the receptor binding domain (RBD) of the
coronavirus spike protein to the ACE2 receptor. However, SARS-CoV-2 targets type
II alveolar cells in the lung that have relatively low ACE2 expression compared
to ACE2 expression in other organs. Thus, other co-receptors have been
identified that are targeted by the virus and which likely provide for an
alternative entry point for the virus. While SARS-CoV-2 infects fewer organs
compared to SARS-CoV, the mechanisms remain inconclusive. This research project
will provide structural insights into the novel role of a human cell surface
protein in SARS-CoV-2 entry and replication. There is an urgent need for gaining
insight into this possible second entry point for the virus into cells.
Additionally, this project includes an educational outreach component geared
towards the underrepresented minorities and in particular the younger
population, an incredibly important sub popular who might be underestimating the
impact of SARS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will use the first
300 kV cryo Atomic Resolution Microscope (ARM), installed to date in the US, to
determine the near atomic resolution structures of the novel interaction between
a human cell surface protein and the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. Biochemical
assays will additionally validate the structural findings. Thus, significant
mechanistic insights into viral pathogenesis will be published rapidly from data
obtained on a new cryo-electron microscope in the US that has aided near atomic
resolution insights into many biological processes from several laboratories
overseas, including from Europe and Asia. By determining the mechanistic
insights into how SARS-CoV-2 infects fewer organs compared to SARS-CoV, the
findings obtained in this research project could explain the lower mortality of
SARS-CoV-2 compared to SARS-CoV. Collectively, the structural insights into the
mechanism of the interaction of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein with a human cell
surface protein will: (i) further the understanding on how COVID-19 is
spreading, (ii) shed light onto some of the key differences of SARS-CoV-2 versus
SARS-CoV, and (iii) provide mechanistic insights into the higher
transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2. Such virus-host study will contribute to a
broader understanding of viral pathogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID
award is made by the Cellular Dynamics and Functionl Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid,
Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.