* 2033507
* Collaborative Research: Complex Effects of Telecoupled Activities in the Changing Environment of the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jianguo Liu, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 06/30/2024
* USD 897,357.00

Arctic communities and ecosystems are experiencing dramatic changes, not just
from a changing climate, but also from economic globalization and increased
development of Arctic natural resources. Although these economic and climate
forces are often studied separately, they may interact, generating potentially
complex effects on ecosystems and the wellbeing of Arctic human communities. As
an essential step toward mitigating threats and promoting human wellbeing, this
research project seeks to understand how forces from outside Alaska, such as
marine traffic, tourism, and natural resource extraction, combine to affect
marine ecosystems and coastal human communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
examine the interactive effects of multiple distant drivers on Arctic systems,
the researchers will develop a dynamic systems model focusing on the Bering
Strait region of Alaska. As the only marine access point to the Arctic from the
Pacific Ocean, the Bering Strait represents a critical corridor for both
migratory marine wildlife and marine vessel traffic, making it an ideal study
region for this project. The model will be based on the framework of
telecoupling, which examines socioeconomic and environmental interactions across
long distances. The interdisciplinary team will apply this model to address
three important and interrelated objectives: (1) understand how telecouplings
influence the habitat of marine mammal species crucial to subsistence economies
and cultures, (2) determine the effects of telecouplings on community economies
and wellbeing, and (3) develop different telecoupling-induced change scenarios
and assess their potential effects on human communities and marine mammal
habitats. Researchers and community partners will collaborate to incorporate
local knowledge into the model and improve its ability to reflect on-the-ground
experiences, as well as document concerns and local knowledge. Furthermore, the
team will train four junior interdisciplinary systems scientists, and will
disseminate research results widely to various stakeholders to help with the
sustainability of Arctic human and natural systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.