* 2033926
* RAPID: Psychosocial Determinants of Successful Remote Learning During the Covid-19 Pandemic: A Study of Promoters and Barriers faced by HBCU Students
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2020,08/31/2021
* Anna Lee, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Rogers
* 08/31/2021
* USD 199,997.00

The unprecedented and fast evolving nature of the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted
STEM education, negatively impacting students’ persistence and success. Social
aspects of race and class predict health and education outcomes. Public health
crises, like COVID-19, disproportionately impact African Americans (AAs), lower
income Americans, and individuals with psychosocial risk factors. This disparate
impact has been linked to poor baseline health and environmental factors that
make it difficult to adhere to social distancing orders. National education-
related disparities show similar patterns across sociodemographic groups. Low-
income college students have unequal access to computers, electronic devices,
and internet service. They also encounter, higher instances of barriers, such as
family violence and hunger, and greater concerns around stress and coping. At
North Carolina A&amp;T State University (NC A&amp;T), the nation’s largest
Historically Black College and University (HBCU), over 1,700 students failed to
show up for classes when COVID-19 forced transition of all classes to online
instruction modes in March 2020, placing them at risk for dropping out of
college or extending their time in school; an additional financial burden.
Furthermore, many of the students at HBCUs work part-time while attending
school, mostly in the essential services sector. This places them at greater
risk for exposure to COVID-19, exacerbating their anxieties and stress levels. A
multidisciplinary team of investigators from NC A&amp;T seeks to understand the
risk factors for these college students and use the information to develop
effective interventions to prevent disruptions in remote learning success in
preparation for fall 2020 and subsequent semesters. This is critical because
resumption of classes using “normal” face-to-face formats is unlikely to happen
until a drug or vaccine for COVID-19 is developed, a scenario that could take
years. If the barriers to online and remote learning are not addressed, these
students will literally be left behind. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study seeks
to highlight the extent to which psychosocial risk factors, including poor
access to technology resources, related to the current COVID-19 pandemic and
extenuating circumstances are having an impact on student learning outcomes. To
better understand the correlations between psychosocial risk factors and remote
learning success in times of crisis, this study will utilize a mixed-methods
approach for students at NC A&amp;T. An online survey will be administered to
collect data on various metrics: sociodemographic characteristics, experience
with COVID-19, attitudes and behaviors in response to COVID-19, perceived stress
and coping, depression, family violence perpetration and victimization, food
insecurity and self-efficacy, and familiarity with computers and technology.
This will be followed by interviews with randomly selected survey respondents to
contextualize quantitative findings and uncover additional barriers and
promoters. Survey data will be analyzed using regression modeling, and interview
data will be analyzed using content analyses. The survey and interview data will
be triangulated by comparing and contrasting findings to develop a comprehensive
understanding of psychosocial risk factors that impact remote learning success.
The outcomes will inform development of a mobile Application (App) to engage
these students and connect them to resources needed to sustain their learning in
these disruptive conditions. Findings from this study will produce new knowledge
regarding psychosocial determinants of successful remote learning during a
critical disruption in the academic journey. As the nation’s largest HBCU and
top producer of African American STEM undergraduates, NC A&amp;T is positioned
to evaluate how the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted vulnerable students and
develop suitable interventions for academic success. This work will inform
future policy and development of prevention strategies so that institutions are
better prepared for future pandemics that make remote and online learning
necessary for all students. This work will produce insights that may be applied
more generally to how HBCU students’ and students from similar backgrounds
transition to online learning. This research will aid intervention development
by identifying factors impacting student success under extreme disruptive
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.