* 2033376
* RII Track 4: Illuminating the Dark Subsurface using Fiber Optic Distributed Acoustic Sensing (DAS) Array
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Xiaowei Chen, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 01/31/2023
* USD 227,876.00

Seismologists use seismic networks to record ground vibrations (e.g.,
earthquakes/explosion monitoring) and probe the dark subsurface, just as
computerized tomography (CT) scans in hospitals. An emerging technology,
Distributed Acoustic Sensing (DAS), can convert pre-existing telecommunication
fiber cables into thousands of densely spaced seismic sensors for every few
meters. This spacing is significantly denser than the tens of kilometers spacing
from traditional seismic networks, providing unprecedented opportunities in
science. This award will support data collection of co-located DAS/seismic array
to address important research questions, such as 1) what is the rupture process
of very small earthquakes and characteristics of induced earthquakes from
industry operations; 2) why ground motion can change significantly from block to
block, and how shallow soil structure changes; 3) how the ground surface
responds to extreme weather events and traffic and other environmental changes.
This award will support a female PI and a graduate student from the University
of Oklahoma, and collaborations between two early-career investigators. This
project will transform the PI's research into a DAS array, which is potentially
the next generation of seismic array, and address scientific questions closely
related to environmental hazards in Oklahoma. The project will support
collaborations with other state agencies and improve overall research
infrastructure in Oklahoma. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismologists use seismic
networks to record ground vibrations (e.g., earthquakes/explosion monitoring)
and probe the dark subsurface (e.g., subsurface imaging). In recent years,
seismic array have been applied to environmental studies, such as extreme
weather events, groundwater changes. Owing to the cost of complex individual
seismometers, expansion of the seismic network is challenging. An emerging
technology, Distributed Acoustic Sensing (DAS), can convert pre-existing
telecommunication fiber cables into densely spaced seismic sensors. It works by
sending a laser pulse into the fiber, recording the interrogation with an echo
scattered back by intrinsic defects every few meters (acting as trackable
waypoints), and inferring strain changes due to ground vibration. Fiber networks
have been rapidly expanding for telecommunication purposes, including areas that
have sparse seismic coverage but a high seismicity rate in Oklahoma. Leveraging
existing infrastructure, DAS array can significantly expand seismic monitoring
capabilities and open unprecedented opportunities in science. This RII Track-4
EPSCoR Research Fellows award will support data collection of co-located
DAS/seismic array in northern Oklahoma. Datasets from California will be
included as a comparison. These datasets will be processed with high-performance
computing techniques to exploit the full potential of fiber network, and will
address important research questions, including: (1) Earthquake seismology: How
can DAS improve resolution small earthquake detection and source characteristics
(e.g., stress drops and complexity)? How does the performance compare to
seismometers? (2) Structural response: Are site responses and waveform behaviors
from DAS and nodal array consistent, and how are they related to properties of
subsurface structure? (3) Environmental seismology: What are the manifestations
of weather events on DAS array? The data collected and research products will
further strengthen the PIâ€™s research in earthquake seismology and transform her
research into the next generation of seismic array to environmental problems in
Oklahoma. The project will support collaborations with other state agencies and
improve the research infrastructures in Oklahoma. The research dataset will be
integrated into classroom activities, and students will have hands-on
experiences with a next-generation seismic network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.