* 2033695
* RAPID: Building a visual consensus model of the SARS-CoV-2 life cycle
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Miriah Meyer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2022
* USD 173,405.00

The COVID-19 epidemic has motivated hundreds (if not thousands) of biological
researchers around the globe to redirect their research efforts towards the
understanding of SARS-CoV-2. This is leading to an explosion of data and it will
be essential to find ways to rapidly digest and integrate new information into a
context that facilitates consensus building in the research community. How do
researchers and the broader community stay abreast of this flood of information?
And how can we quickly move towards building a consensus model of the SARS-CoV-2
life cycle that builds on this explosive body of scientific data and expertise?
This work proposes to take a novel and intuitive approach to facilitate
scientific discourse and dissemination through the development of: (1) detailed
molecular 3-D depictions that put a diverse dataset into the context of the
SARS-CoV-2 life cycle, and; (2) provide for annotation tools to be used by
researchers to explore and capture scientific discussions that will speed up
consensus building to promote a mechanistic understanding of how this virus
works. If successful, the work will reduce the time of consensus building from
years to months. In addition, a graduate student and postdoc will receive
training at the intersection of biological and computer sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, researchers will work with an international
group of SARS-CoV-2 experts to develop detailed and accurate visualizations of
all stages of the viral life cycle including cellular entry, RNA replication and
transcription, and viral assembly and egress with known energy states, rates,
and spatial accuracy. These 3-D visualizations, which will be made freely
available online, will be used to stimulate discussions within the scientific
community, and will be iteratively updated based on community feedback and new
data. To facilitate consensus building, annotation tools will be developed to
interactively describe the data used to generate the visualizations and will
also mediate and capture scientific discourse surrounding the various molecular
mechanisms involved in viral infection. This project will rapidly produce a rich
and publicly accessible collection of knowledge about SARS-CoV-2 biology for the
global community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.