* 2033673
* RECODE: Real-time Monitoring, Modeling and Manipulation of Progenitor Co-differentiation in Heterotypic Cell Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Pak Kin Wong, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

Developing tissue grafts and models from stem cells is a complex process.
Mimicking the structure and function of natural tissue requires coordination of
signals from many cell types. How these signals interact to direct development
of complex tissues is not well understood, and effective predictive tools are
lacking. The goal of this project is to monitor, model, and modulate the
differentiation of stem cells to produce tissues. This project will provide a
clearer picture of dynamic tissue development and new tools to predict and
manipulate stem cell fate. This will lead to a strategy for engineering of
accurate and reproducible tissues, leading to improved tissue engineered
therapies and better models for drug development. This project will involve
undergraduate research experiences, a capstone design component, a student
summer internship program, and an industry immersion program for graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RECODE project will apply a systems reverse
engineering of stochasticity (SRES) approach to monitor, model, and modulate
heterotypic co-differentiation of progenitor cells in 3D organoids. SRES will
advance the science which underlies the co-differentiation of cells in complex
tissues. Crucial to this project is the development of nanoscale biosensors
providing dynamic multigene expression analysis in single cells within complex
heterotypic organoids. Spatiotemporal differentiation marker expression,
combined with proliferation measures in sorted populations will be monitored.
The data will be used to develop stochastic agent-based models of mesenchymal
stem cell (MSC) function and differentiation. The models will predict the
relative proportions of osteogenic, endotheliogenic, chondrogenic and adipogenic
lineages based on multiplexed stimuli, and be updatable using real-time
biosensor data. The predictive models will be tested by modulating heterotypic
differentiation trajectories with temporally controlled siRNA differentiation
factors to create heterotypic bone and cartilage organoids. This new knowledge
will provide a systematic means for engineering heterotypic 3D tissue models
necessary for realizing intricate skeletal architectures. The technical goals of
the project are to: (i) develop new multiplex real-time intracellular reporters
for differentiation markers, (ii) develop stochastic models of progenitor cell
proliferation and fate based on dynamic differentiation marker expression and
(iii) validate the agent-based stochastic models of organoid development using
siRNA targeting pathways known to de novo regulate
differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported by
the Engineering Biology and Health Cluster in ENG/CBET and the Cellular Dynamics
and Function Cluster in BIO/MCB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.