* 2033621
* RESEARCH-PGR: Genetics and Mechanisms of Microbe-dependent Heterosis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Peter Balint-Kurti, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/29/2024
* USD 899,970.00

In corn and many other crop and wild plants, hybrid cultivars are larger, more
resilient, and more productive than their inbred parent cultivars. This
phenomenon, called hybrid vigor, is a cornerstone of modern crop breeding
efforts and has immense value for global food security. Despite over a century
of intensive research, the causes of hybrid vigor are still poorly understood.
Recently, the first evidence has arisen that microbes in the soil play an
important role in hybrid vigor. This project will investigate the microbial
contribution to hybrid vigor in more detail, combining classic and cutting-edge
scientific approaches, including field experiments, microbial culture, DNA
sequencing, and advanced molecular techniques such as metaproteomics.
Specifically, this study will (1) test a wide range of microbial strains and
soil microbiomes for the ability to induce hybrid vigor in corn; (2) identify
genetic variants and regions of the corn genome that are associated with
responsiveness to soil microbes; and (3) characterize the behavior of microbes
within the roots of inbred and hybrid corn at the molecular level. Together, the
results will advance knowledge of how, when, and why soil microbes affect hybrid
vigor which could potentially lead to applications in agriculture and ecological
conservation. This project will also grow the American scientific workforce by
supporting the training of two post-doctoral researchers, one Ph.D. student, and
two undergraduate student researchers. It will also support four high-school
teachers to attend researcher-led workshops to learn about soil microbes and
agricultural ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was motivated by
preliminary data showing that hybrid vigor (i.e., heterosis) of maize root mass
was eliminated or greatly reduced in sterile conditions or diminished soil
microbial communities in the field. The overarching goals are to determine the
generality of this phenomenon with respect to the microbes and host genotypes;
to investigate the genetic architecture of microbe-dependent heterosis; and to
characterize molecular mechanisms of microbial interactions with inbred and
hybrid hosts. An existing collection of maize root endophytes will be screened
for the ability to induce maize heterosis, in monoculture and in simplified
communities. Metaproteomics will be used to quantify in planta protein
expression by heterosis-inducing and non-inducing bacterial strains while
colonizing roots of inbred vs. hybrid hosts, while RNA-seq will be used to
quantify host gene expression aboveground. The generality of microbe-induced
heterosis will be assessed by measuring better-parent heterosis in a genetically
diverse panel of maize hybrids and their parent lines, under sterile and
inoculated conditions. Finally, a high-resolution mapping population (“IBM”)
will be backcrossed to each parent line, generating a test population that will
be used to map genomic loci that interact with microbes to affect phenotype when
in the heterozygotic state. The same test population will be scored for disease
resistance in the field to investigate the interplay with plant immunity.
Together, these experiments will help clarify how inbred and hybrid maize plants
interact with their microbial neighbors, and how these interactions relate to
the expression of phenotypic heterosis. All data and genetic resources will be
made available to the general public through long-term
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.