* 2033577
* NSF 2026: EAGER: Accelerated carbon mineralization sequestration in cation rich rock formations via microbial augmentation and stimulation
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Rajesh Sani, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 11/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems and the NSF 2026 Program in the Office of Integrated
Activities, Professors Lingwall, Sani, and Ustunisik and their team at South
Dakota School of Mines and Technology explore biologically accelerated carbon
mineralization processes in cation rich rock formations. One approach for
mitigating excessive carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere, a factor that
contributes to extreme weather and wildfires, is to reduce excessive CO2 levels
by capture and storage. However, storage runs the risk that CO2 injected
underground as a fluid can migrate and escape. Fortunately, nature has provided
a solution through carbonate mineralization in deep rock, which has recently
been shown to sequester large quantities of CO2. This award develops laboratory
data that would be needed for the design of a potentially high-capacity, long-
term carbon sequestration system. As opposed to other processes that rely on
fluid CO2 to stay contained below a caprock, this system stores the carbon in
the rock as part of the rock itself. A future benefit of such a system is that,
as opposed to fracking which induces seismicity, this can be used to reduce
seismicity through binding of deep faults. Another potential impact of such
technology, if deployed at scale, would be to contribute to sustainability and
resilience by reducing extreme weather and wildfire risks. The educational goal
of the project is to create interest and curiosity among a diverse range of
students by developing demonstrations on greenhouse gas biomineralization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The teamâ€™s recent work in biomineralization and the
evaluation of recent demonstrations shows that biology accelerates carbon
mineralization in basalts. Moreover, natural and injected recovery brines at
depth contain high concentrations of calcium and magnesium, providing additional
cation sources. Thus, the team has the opportunity to identify natural processes
for sequestration via carbonate mineralization from either bioaugmentation or
biostimulation in deep rock. This award is to perform laboratory experiments
using extremophiles from the database of biomineralizing microbes to observe and
measure this phenomenon. The goal of this project is to produce unique data on
microbially accelerated carbon sequestration through laboratory core scale
bioaugmentation and biostimulation experiments at appropriate temperatures and
pressures. In this research, various extremophiles known to initiate
biomineralization will be tested for the conversion of liquid CO2 into calcite
polymorphs in deep basalt environments. This project has four principle
components: 1) select and characterize rock to be optimal candidates; 2) select
biomineralizing extremophiles that can tolerate the pH induced by CO2 injection;
3) study the mineralization of these rocks with CO2 without microbes; and 4)
study the biomineralization of these microbes through biostimulation or
bioaugmentation. This work is transdisciplinary in nature and is a convergence
of expertise from geologic sciences, engineering, and microbiology to use
different instruments and methods across conventional disciplinary boundaries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project further explores the concepts emerged from
several NSF 2026 Idea Machine winning topics: Bioinspired energy utilization;
Engineered living materials; Geomimicry; Global microbiome in a changing world;
Public carbon capture and sequestration; and Terraforming
earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.