* 2033838
* RAPID: Screening and Prognosis of COVID-19 by a Novel RF Stethoscope
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Edwin Kan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has brought disasters to our society, but the public
screening technology as our first line of defense remains weak. Fever alone is
not sufficient; difficulty in breathing, chest pain and anosmia rely on self
report, and hence not reliable or accurate. However, without effective and fast
screening against respiratory contagious diseases, it is difficult to resume
normal social contacts without serious concerns of a new wave of COVID-19
infection or a new coronavirus that causes equal or more damages. The source of
symptomatic observation of COVID-19 is pneumonia. The tissue inflammation causes
fever and anosmia; the congestion from water in lung tissues causes difficulty
in breathing and chest pain. Human respiration, like many other body functions,
will self compensate in the presence of damaged tissues, which makes the early
stage of pneumonia “asymptomatic” under the present screening criteria. This
project seeks to develop and test an effective sensor technology to detect the
lung tissue damage using radio-frequency (RF) signals. The technology borrows
the ideas of listening to breathing sounds by century-old stethoscopes. Damaged
tissues in the lung and airway will cause abnormal sounds, or different tissue
vibration characteristics, that can be identified quickly as another indication
of COVID-19 infection. However, conventional stethoscopes require bare skin
contact for quality recording and quiet ambience to minimize interference. The
project will develop a new RF stethoscope, which can measure tissue vibration
characteristics over clothing and can operate reliably in very noisy environment
such as public transits. The research will build a database of breathing
features from healthy and confirmed COVID-19 patients. Based on the mature
wireless technologies, the radio stethoscope can be inexpensively and broadly
deployed. The user can go to a checkpoint and finish the screening within a few
seconds for early screening of COVID-19. Further pathological tests and social
isolation can then follow through the necessary management of this pandemic.
This new RF stethoscope technology provides a fast and convenient way to measure
lung tissue vibration characteristics and can be applied to other healthcare
applications related to cardiopulmonary functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to establish a symptomatic screening and continuous prognosis
platform for COVID-19 by a novel RF stethoscope, which can be deployed as a fast
and cost-effective screening in public transit and as a recurrent prognosis tool
in point-of-care facilities or at home. The sensing modality in the proposed
method is the lung tissue vibration characteristics which will change in all
stages of a pneumonia. The method is similar to that of the conventional
acoustic stethoscope, but the readout is by the RF signals instead of the sound
signals. A small amount of the electromagnetic energy will be coupled deeply
into the trachea, bronchus and lung parenchyma by the RF sensing probes over
clothing, and the tissue vibration features will be measured to distinguish
healthy persons from potential COVID-19 patients by the tissue viscoelasticity
and water content. The major research tasks include the RF sensor development,
testing on healthy adults, and long-term continuous monitoring of potential
COVID-19 patients at the Weill Cornell Medical Center in New York City. Features
for COVID-19 infection will be distinguished against the normal breathing
database by auscultation physiology and machine learning
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.