* 2033368
* RAPID: Exploring the Effects of Parent-Child Interactions on Children’s Learning about Handwashing Behavior and Disease Prevention
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2021
* David Sobel, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 12/31/2021
* USD 103,596.00

This RAPID project will study connections between children's hygiene habits and
learning about science, such as the science of disease transmission. It builds
upon findings from the investigator’s prior research of parent-child
interactions observed in children’s museums and will extend this research to
home settings. This research will focus on understanding how goal-setting,
whether it is parent-directed, child-directed, or jointly-directed, affects
children’s engagement with a handwashing activity and their subsequent learning
about handwashing behavior and preventing the spread of disease. More
specifically, the intent is to examine how goal-setting during an interactive
demonstration between parents and children relates to children’s recollection of
the activity and their handwashing behavior afterwards. This project is funded
by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program which seeks to advance
new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During a pandemic, it is vital that children establish
good hygiene habits and understand the importance of handwashing for the
prevention of disease transmission. What is most important is that young
children wash their hands frequently and follow good hygiene habits, such as
using soap, when doing so. This study examines the role parents might play in
engaging children to wash their hands. The project team has developed a short 10
minute intervention that parents and children can participate in while using
everyday household items. Utilizing remote technology, parents and children will
be guided through this intervention while video recording their behavior.
Families will be presented with a structured activity for parents and children
to participate in together. This activity will be focused on how handwashing,
and particularly the use of soap during handwashing, helps prevent the spread of
germs. Parent-child interactions will be coded using schemes for goal setting
that the investigator developed in prior work. Directly after their
participation and one week later, children will be asked to reflect on the
activity to understand what they remember about it, and to understand whether
they have encoded the importance of handwashing for preventing the transmission
of disease. Parents will also be asked to track their children’s handwashing to
see whether aspects of these reflections, as well as individual differences in
how parents and children interact during the activity, promote better engagement
with handwashing. The data generated will allow researchers to develop best
practices for interventions centered on children’s handwashing and the
prevention of disease transmission. Knowing such practices is critical for
reintegrating children into social settings such as schools and children's
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.