* 2033343
* Selective Ethylene Production from Carbon Dioxide Electroreduction via Gas Diffusion Electrode Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* John Weidner, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2023
* USD 449,003.00

Electrochemical conversion of carbon dioxide into value-added hydrocarbons and
oxygenates, compounds that contain oxygen atoms, offers a promising chemical
means of storing intermittent electricity from renewable energy sources. This
capability would reduce dependence on fossil fuels and mitigate the negative
impact of anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions. Copper is a promising metal
electrocatalyst capable of converting carbon dioxide into hydrocarbons such as
ethylene. However, state-of-the-art copper catalysts exhibit low selectivity and
low production rates of a single target product. Mechanistic pathways for the
electrochemical conversion of carbon dioxide on heterogeneous copper catalysts
are sensitive to extrinsic factors such as the local reaction microenvironment.
This research project focuses on customizing the microenvironment within a gas
diffusion electrode to simultaneously increase current and energy efficiencies
as well as the yield for the carbon dioxide-to-ethylene conversion. The outcomes
of this research project will address the national interest in producing
sustainable alternative fuels and chemicals from greenhouse gases such as carbon
dioxide. The research efforts will be complemented by outreach activities
designed to communicate the outcomes of renewable energy research to diverse
audiences, including undergraduate researchers, middle school students, and
teachers, especially those groups that are underrepresented in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To deliver the electrochemical conversion of carbon
dioxide into chemicals at industrially relevant production rates, systems will
need to transition from conventional H-type glass cells to modular and scalable
solid-state electrolyzers incorporating gas diffusion electrodes. The gas
diffusion electrode is the critical component that determines the performance of
gas-fed electrolyzers. Control over the local reaction microenvironment, such as
the partial pressure of gas reactants, water concentration, and pH value, around
the copper catalyst within the gas diffusion electrode could potentially steer
the activity and selectivity towards ethylene generation. This research project
aims to manipulate the local reaction microenvironment by finely tuning the
macro- and micro-structures of the gas diffusion electrode. The investigators
will characterize relationships between macro- and micro-structures of the gas
diffusion electrode and carbon dioxide reduction performance through a series of
experimental measurements and characterizations as well as multiscale numerical
modeling. At first, the macro- and micro-structures of the gas diffusion
electrode will be studied in a custom flow cell that features a flow liquid
electrolyte between the cathode and ion exchange membrane. The project will
translate optimized gas diffusion electrode structures into a membrane electrode
assembly-type cell that achieves higher energy efficiency at elevated current
densities. The outcomes of this research project will advance our understanding
of the interplay between reactant species transport and carbon-carbon coupling
reaction kinetics. Such knowledge can be applied to improving carbon dioxide-to-
ethylene conversion with simultaneously high production efficiencies and
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.