* 2033924
* RAPID: Translating Basic Research Into Actionable Guidance Through the Societal Experts Action Network (SEAN)
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Michael Stebbins, Federation of American Scientists
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 198,000.00

Decision-makers at the state, national and local level are facing a range of
complex issues as they lead the COVID-19 recovery efforts in their communities.
These issues include increased unemployment, disruption of schools and
education, unhealthy practices, increased domestic violence and many other
critical problems affecting the well-being of virtually every person in the U.S.
In order to make informed decisions on how to mitigate these issues, decision-
makers need rapid access to the best possible evidence and information. That
evidence and information can be provided by experts in the social, behavioral,
and economic sciences through the newly formed Societal Experts Action Network
(SEAN). SEAN will include researchers from leading social and behavioral science
institutions and will be guided by an executive committee that will coordinate
with the National Academies’ Standing Committee on Emerging Infectious Diseases
and 21st Century Health Threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEAN is a multi-faceted
effort and will include a number of organizations collaborating together while
each managing different components. The purpose of this project is to create and
manage the SEAN component responsible for rapidly translating the wealth of
scholarly research, data and other materials provided by social, behavioral and
economic science experts into actionable guidance that can be used immediately
by decision-makers, businesses and other community leaders. The translation
component of SEAN will be based at the Federation for American Scientists and
will be home to consultants who are skilled at translating scholarly research
and data into plain-language guidance that can be applied to current real-world
events. Using the model of “Rapid Expert Consultations,” SEAN will provide
expert guidance on a range of issues to decision-makers, while also making the
same guidance available to the general public. We expect SEAN to greatly expand
the use of “Rapid Expert Consultations” beyond medicine and virology into a
broad range of subjects, such as how to best use remote-learning technology to
teach children, how to bolster our supply chains and small businesses, how to
address social isolation and domestic violence and many other public issues
facing our communities now and into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.