* 2033997
* Bio-MAPS: BioMolecular-Array Patterns for Precision Differentiation of Intestinal Stem Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Jan Genzer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2024
* USD 510,838.00

Controlling cell differentiation is critical when manufacturing products for
tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. In the body, cell differentiation
is governed by patterns of biochemical and mechanical features in tissues.
Numerous techniques have been proposed to mimic these patterns, but their
precision and reproducibility need improvement. In this effort, the research
team aims to establish a new technology to build biochemical patterns directing
the differentiation of intestinal stem cells, which are important for
understanding gastrointestinal function and disease. Differentiated cells will
be harvested and used as building blocks to construct models of the gut wall.
The results of this effort will transform our understanding of how tissue
biochemistry determines cell behaviors in the intestine. This will in turn
provide a unique toolbox to formulate new “biomaterial recipes” for
manufacturing cells that are “regenerative medicine-ready." To broaden impact,
the technological outcomes of this research will be integrated in academic
curricula, new tutorials via the Comparative Medicine Institute, and create ad
hoc courses on cell production for biotech professionals. The research team will
also connect with research and industrial stakeholders at NIIMBL, an institute
in the Manufacturing USA network, to evaluate the use of their technology for
the engineering of therapeutic cells and tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Of
paramount interest to tissue engineers is the precise differentiation of stem
cells that are utilized as building blocks to construct organoids and
microphysiological models for investigating developmental biology, pathology,
and drug discovery. The project's approach to cell differentiation materials
introduces Bio-Molecular-Array Patterns (Bio-MAPs), i.e., combined 3D gradients
of cell signaling factors integrated within polymer matrices via ligand-mediated
(non-covalent) adsorption. This concept will be demonstrated for the precision
differentiation of multi-potent intestinal stem cells. Accordingly, the project
will adopt a biomolecular palette comprising collagen (COL), BMP-2, Wnt-3A, and
Jagged-like ligands (which stimulate the Notch pathway), whose intersecting
gradients in the intestinal crypt and villus are known to direct cell
differentiation. Single-gradient Bio-MAPs (constant collagen plus gradients of
laminin, BMP2, or Wnt3) will be developed to correlate Bio-MAP architecture
(i.e., concentration and gradients of combined factors) to the adhesion,
proliferation, and differentiation of human ISC and subsequent lineages and to
identify design rules and patterns that maintain stem-like phenotypes vs. direct
differentiation towards secretory (mucus-producing) lineages or absorptive
enterocytes. The project will develop complex-gradient Bio-MAPs (COL,
BMP-2,Wnt-3, and Jagged-like ligands), where combinations of coherent or
opposing signaling factors are utilized as backgrounds against tertiary
presentation of Notch-binding ligands - herein, Jagged-like ligand (JLL) - to
identify synergistic patterns that direct the differentiation towards
quantitatively predictable phenotypic and genotypic outcomes. Complementary
analytical and cytological techniques will be coupled to elucidate fundamental
synergistic mechanisms of the select signaling factors and their geometric
display.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.