* 2033292
* RII Track-4: Ecological Community Responses to Global Change: Predicting Effects on Community Dynamics and Ecosystem Stability
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Lauren Shoemaker, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 180,120.00

This Research Infrastructure Improvement RII Track-4 grant will explore how
ecological communities respond to increased environmental change, with a focus
on alpine ecosystems. Global change factors, such as increases in temperature
and changes in precipitation represent severe threats to the stability of
ecological communities. This is especially true in alpine ecosystems where the
climate is changing at a rapid rate with high variability among years in both
temperature and precipitation patterns. The project will examine how these
global change factors alter ecological communities and their stability through
time. The proposed work will yield transformative and sustained benefits in
jurisdictional research capacity within Wyoming, positively transforming the
career trajectory of the non-tenured investigator. The work will foster a new
collaboration between the investigator, a PhD student, and the Niwot Ridge Long-
Term Ecological Research Network in the Colorado Rocky Mountains. The
investigator and collaborators will host workshops at Niwot Ridge for Wyoming
and Colorado scientists, spearheading cross-state collaborations. Additionally,
the project will produce an educational module on data visualization and
biological statistics that will be integrated into a newly developed course
required for undergraduate biology majors. The module will be disseminated
broadly through an open-source publication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anthropogenic
global change, such as increases in temperature, more variable precipitation
regimes, and nitrogen deposition, have previously been demonstrated to have
severe ramifications for species persistence, but how these factors may alter
ecological communities, including their synchrony patterns and stability remains
an open question. The proposed project will examine the effect of multiple,
simultaneous global change drivers on alpine community dynamics and ecosystem
stability. It will specifically address the following objectives: (1) determine
if global change drivers yield increased synchrony of species’ fluctuations and
decreased temporal stability of ecosystems; (2) quantify if locations that have
historically experienced higher environmental variability are buffered in their
responses to current anthropogenic changes; and (3) build a theoretical model
for predicting community synchrony and ecosystem stability that incorporates
multiple simultaneous global change factors and species interactions. The
project will integrate the investigator’s expertise in ecological modeling with
50 years of alpine community monitoring at Niwot Ridge, including collecting and
analyzing community composition data from several ongoing experiments. The
investigator and PhD student will additionally conduct a species germination
experiment and will create a new dynamical model of species fluctuations and
ecosystem stability through time under global change. The model will be coupled
with empirical results to create a predictive framework for future community
dynamics. This project will enhance our ability to predict how community
synchrony and ecosystem stability will change with increasing global change,
especially in alpine ecosystems. The project is additionally expected to yield
sustained jurisdictional benefits and enhanced research capacity at the
interface of ecological theory and alpine ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.