* 2033628
* EAGER: Device for Prevention of Endotracheal Tube Biofilm Formation for the Prevention of Ventilator Associated Pneumonia
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Eric Seibel, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 07/31/2023
* USD 266,161.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;There is an increased need for ventilators for
patients suffering from the current SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. This project aims to
reduce the burden of ventilator associated pneumonia on hospitals that will lead
to an overall reduction in the length of required mechanical ventilation. VAP is
a worldwide problem that penetrates all echelons of intensive care units
throughout the world, and biofilms are regarded as a significant source of this
persistent problem. This research project proposes to build and investigate a
novel device for the prevention of VAP by reducing or eliminating the burden of
biofilm formation on the inside of endotracheal tubes (ETT). The proposed device
has the potential to destroy bacteria before they have a chance to form biofilms
on the inner lumen of endotracheal tubes), reducing the incidence of this
significant burden on healthcare systems across the globe in a practical and
cost efficient manner. Specifically, the device will be used to reduce
colonization and biofilm formation on the inner lumen of ETTs by regular
application of deep ultraviolet (UVC) radiation via a thin catheter to be fed
down the ETT. This portable handheld device would be used by respiratory
therapists and/or bedside nurses as part of routine care of mechanically
ventilated patients. Short wavelength UVC would not penetrate out and through
the ETT, thus sparing the oropharyngeal and respiratory mucosa from radiation
exposure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The risk of developing
VAP is 2-16 per 1,000 ventilator-days, and a diagnosis of VAP has been
associated with an additional cost of $40,000 per patient. If the proposed
device reduces the burden of VAP, its adoption into regular ICU care could save
thousands of lives and billions of dollars per year. The proposed research will
further the body of knowledge on the timeline by which biofilms form inside ETTs
and will also contribute to our knowledge of antibiotic-free decontamination
strategies, especially those for use at the bedside of critically ill patients.
Additionally, the research will contribute strongly to the present body of
knowledge on diffuse UVC radiation and its safety for use inside standard ETTs
in healthy humans. This work will also contribute to the knowledge of
antibiotic-free decontamination strategies, especially those for use at the
bedside of critically ill patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.