* 2033397
* RII Track 4: Understanding Defect Chemistry in Sodium Chalcogenide Superionic Conductors by Advanced Neutron Technology
* O/D,OIA
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Hui Wang, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 11/30/2023
* USD 252,491.00

Solid-state sodium (Na) superionic conductors play a significant role in
applications for sensors and solid-state Na batteries. Chalcogenide Na-ion
conductors have attracted intense attentions due to high Na+ ionic conductivity
and cold-press included densification. For these conductors, the presence of Na
defects (i.e. vacancies or interstitials) in their crystal structures strongly
influence their ionic conductivities. Thus, it is essential to better
understanding on the subtle structural change for the synthesis and doping of
chalcogenide Na-ion conductors. One main challenge is the difficulty to
accurately catch the subtle defect structure through regular X-ray diffraction
technology. This project takes advantages of high resolution of neutrons to
access advanced neutron facilities at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL),
where the PI and her collaborators will investigate the crystal structures of
Na3SbS4-xSex materials to obtain the fundamental knowledge of defect chemistry
in chalcogenide conductors. The findings of this research will promote the
development of new solid electrolytes for high performance solid-state Na
batteries. In addition, this project will establish a longstanding collaboration
between University of Louisville (UofL) and ORNL, which is a bridge to benefit
other faculties at Kentucky to foster more collaborative research in boarder
materials science fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chalcogenide Na superionic
conductors (i.e. Na3PCh4 and Na3SbCh4 (Ch=S, Se)) have great potential for
applications in solid-state Na batteries. In these conductors, defect chemistry
such as Na vacancies significantly affect the ion transport across crystal
frameworks. The goal of this proposed research is to use Na3SbS4-xSex conductors
as model materials to understand the physical principle underlying the defect
changes and reveal how the defect local structures influence the Na+ ion
diffusion. Through a collaborative research with neutron scientists in
Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) at ORNL, we aim to advance the current state-of-
the-art understanding on defect chemistry and their effects on the polymorphs as
well as ion transport in chalcogenide Na-ion conductors. This research will
involve: (1) Employ in situ neutron diffraction to closely observe phase
formation and track the subtle structure changes such as Na defects for
Na3SbS4-xSex conductors; (2) Reveal the Se doping effects on the crystal
structure (phase stability and Na defect dynamics) as well as the ion diffusion
across crystals of Na3SbS4-xSex conductors. The successful demonstration of the
proposed work will provide a new fundamental understanding on the synthesis and
ion transport in Na3SbS4-xSex chalcogenide conductors. The obtained knowledge
will not only pave the way to understand other defects-contained crystalline Na-
ion conductors, but also promote the development of new solid electrolytes in
solid-state Na batteries for future energy storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.