* 2033938
* Collaborative Research: NSF2026: EAGER: A Playground and Proposal for Growing an AGI.
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Joshua Hartshorne, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 09/30/2023
* USD 198,663.00

With support from the Robust Intelligence program in the Division of Intelligent
and Information Systems (IIS) and the NSF 2026 Fund Program in the Office of
Integrated Activities, investigators at Boston College and Brandeis University
are addressing the challenge of creating Artificial General Intelligence by
synthesizing symbolic or logical reasoning, learning through interaction with
the environment, as well as state-of-the-art neural networks. Inspired by the
structure of natural (e.g., human) intelligence, the resulting mental
architecture deploys each of these strategies for the problems they excel at
(the "Best of All Worlds‚Äù, or BAW, approach). Successful completion of this
project will facilitate a range of research projects in AI and
psychology/neuroscience. Long-term, the development of AGI is expected to have
significant benefits to society, by enabling computers to develop abstract
concepts grounded in experience with the world, and to generate novel ideas and
inventions. This project will also help broaden student training and
participation of women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to prototype a new
architecture and test it against an open-ended task that is difficult for
artificial intelligence but mastered by human toddlers everywhere: uncovering
the affordances of blocks, containers, and other small objects. The primary aims
are to build a virtual world that a simulated infant can explore, manipulate,
and learn from; build a working prototype of a simulated infant incorporating
key aspects of the BAW mental architecture; and evaluate the performance of the
agent on several difficult, open-ended tasks. This architecture facilitates
incorporation of key concepts from the study of natural intelligence that are
infrequently used in artificial intelligence: mental models, exploratory play,
and chunking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.