* 2033046
* RAPID: Identifying the Role of Mucus in COVID-19 Pathogenesis
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Rama Bansil, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2022
* USD 232,365.00

In December 2019, a novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) was identified to cause
COVID-19, a highly infectious respiratory disease that has rapidly spread around
the world. Cases are on the rise in the United States, and hospitals are in
danger of being overwhelmed by severe cases, but there is currently no specific
treatment. Improving our understanding of virus transmission and disease
progression is critical to identifying the preventative measures and therapeutic
options needed to address this pandemic. This project focuses on mucus, a
critical host factor, and its role in two aspects of the infection: how the
virus reaches and penetrates the epithelium, and how mucus properties relate to
symptom severity. This project uses a two-pronged approach to identify the role
of mucus in COVID-19 pathogenesis, which will begin to reveal critical steps
underlying infection through the mucus barrier. Aim 1 shall identify the
mechanisms by which SARS-CoV-2 binds to and transports through mucus, which will
establish an understanding of binding between SARS-CoV-2 surface proteins and
native human mucins and how these binding interactions affect virus transport
across the mucus barrier. Aim 2 shall identify structural, biochemical, and
virus binding properties of nasal mucus that distinguish asymptomatic from
severe COVID-19 patients, leading to the identification of mucus structure
(degradation, mucin concentration, degree of crosslinking) and glycosylation
profiles in clinical nasal mucus samples from asymptomatic and severe COVID-19
patients to identify how these groups differ and whether these properties impact
virus mobility and susceptibility to infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virus
transport will be assessed by tracking the motion of fluorescent SARS-CoV-2-like
particles embedded within native mucus and purified human mucins under different
conditions and treatment with specific glycosidases. Effects of mucus
permeability on virus transport will be assessed using microfluidics-based live
cell fluorescence microscopy. This project will advance the understanding of a
poorly understood transport phenomenon of virus particles through the mucus
barrier. This knowledge will advance the fundamental understanding of the role
of mucus in COVID-19 pathogenesis and provide the foundation for therapeutic
targets. With a carefully-chosen collaboration between MIT and BU, the data
obtained within this project will provide essential results needed for the
generation of cutting-edge models for selective, facilitated passage of SARS-
CoV-2 through the mucus barrier. This project will help the development of
processes and actions that are needed to combat the COVID-19
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is being awarded using funds made
available by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act
supplement allocated to MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.