* 2033488
* RAPID: Reimagined Virtual STEM Laboratory Experiences in Response to COVID-19 Pandemic Impacts on Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Frank Gomez, California State University Channel Islands
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 197,870.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this RAPID project will address critical
instructional challenges in undergraduate STEM education that result from the
COVID-19 pandemic. Specifically, it will produce and deploy virtual labs in
upper-division chemistry, physics, and math courses. The rush to online course
delivery in response to COVID-19 has revealed limitations of commercially
available online virtual labs. Existing virtual lab experiences are generally
poorly focused on student exploration. In addition, the effectiveness of virtual
lab activities is not well understood, particularly for specific student
populations such as Hispanic/Latinx students. To address these opportunities,
the California State University system will design three virtual labs that focus
on community building, are culturally responsive, and relate to real life events
brought about by the pandemic. The project will also study the effectiveness of
these virtual labs, thus adding to the body of knowledge about effective online
instruction. The creation and delivery of the proposed labs have the potential
to positively affect many students, as well as increase equitable access to
high-quality learning opportunities. Beyond its immediate impact on improving
online laboratory instruction in a time of crisis, this work may provide models
for other STEM education initiatives and contribute to institutional and
educational changes to better support STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to develop and test three virtual labs that are purposely designed
to create and sustain a culture of inclusion and equity that supports the
success of all students, particularly the large population of Hispanic/Latinx
students served within the California State University system. The project seeks
to increase opportunity and achievement by providing students with avenues to
grow STEM identity, self-efficacy, and sense of belonging. The design criteria
for the three virtual labs will be informed by culturally responsive and trauma-
informed teaching practices. The virtual labs will support instruction across
the California State University campuses and beyond, beginning as early as Fall
2020. The overall goal is to directly improve students’ knowledge and ability,
STEM identity, and integration of identities. The project plans to examine
disciplinary best practices in student learning through an informed equity
perspective. The project will investigate how to best implement culturally
responsive and relevant teaching in virtual science and math laboratory
environments and gather and analyze data about the shift to online
teaching/learning modalities. Data will be collected every three months from
students participating in the virtual labs via pre/post assessments to provide
insight into the role of metacognition in their learning. Results of the
research will be disseminated through peer-reviewed scholarship, virtual and
face-to-face workshops, and reports. This RAPID award is made by the Hispanic-
Serving Institutions Program in the Division of Undergraduate Education,
Directorate of Education and Human Resources. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at
HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.