* 2033305
* RII-Track 4: Hidden Sectors at the Fermilab Short-Baseline Neutrino Program
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Ahmed Ismail, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 05/31/2022
* USD 0.00

Current and upcoming experiments at Fermilab are establishing the United States
as the world leader in the study of neutrinos, the least well understood
fundamental particles known today. Neutrino detectors are very sensitive as they
are designed to detect minute depositions of energy caused by collisions of
neutrinos with matter. Because of this sensitivity, these detectors can be used
to search for particles other than neutrinos. For instance, multiple theories of
dark matter, the unknown extra mass in our universe, predict new particles that
could be produced and observed with the Fermilab neutrino facilities. This
project initiates a collaboration between researchers at Oklahoma State
University and Fermilab to investigate such applications of neutrino detectors
as probes of new particles. The goal is to develop searches for theories beyond
the Standard Model of particle physics, our current best understanding of nature
at a subatomic level. Collaboration with Fermilab physicists with expertise in
neutrino physics will give Oklahoma researchers a detailed understanding of
world-class particle physics experiments, ultimately allowing them to contribute
to studies at Fermilab as the neutrino program continues through the 2030s. By
building research capacity in particle physics, the work will enhance STEM
research and education in Oklahoma over the long term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
fellowship supports the visits of the PI and a graduate student to Fermilab to
develop techniques to search for new light, weakly coupled states using the
unique timing capabilities of the Short-Baseline Neutrino (SBN) program and Deep
Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE) detectors. The PI and student will
collaborate with host scientists in the Fermilab Theoretical Physics Department,
performing phenomenological studies that apply the nanosecond-scale resolution
of these detectors to isolate signatures of certain hidden sector models. The
research has two specific objectives. The first objective is to compute the
sensitivities of Fermilab neutrino experiments to sub-GeV dark matter scattering
off nuclei. The participants will construct analyses that combine timing and
kinematic cuts to discriminate dark matter scattering from neutrino-induced
backgrounds. The use of timing is expected to allow for light dark matter
searches without the need for a dedicated run-in beam dump mode, so that dark
matter and neutrino scattering off nuclei can be studied simultaneously. The
second objective is to quantify the hidden sector reach of the Fermilab neutrino
facilities from pions and muons that are stopped in the detector apparatus and
subsequently decay at rest. The decay products of these particles are expected
to have distinct directional and timing properties. The participants will
simulate the production of hidden sector mediators from the decays of stopped
pions and muons. In particular, they will develop searches for new particles
produced in the NuMI absorber whose arrival in the SBN detectors is delayed
relative to the usual neutrino scattering signal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.