* 2033946
* RAPID: Neighborhood-level U.S. Internet Accessibility Assessment through Dataset Aggregation and Statistical and Predictive Modeling
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Elizabeth Belding, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2022
* USD 149,439.00

The U.S. has long suffered from digital inequities in multiple dimensions: rural
and tribal regions are far less likely than urban cities to have high speed
Internet access. Internet availability and quality within communities can often
be predicted based on demographic and socioeconomic factors. The COVID-19
pandemic has brought to the forefront these inequalities; due to shelter-in-
place orders, the lack of high quality Internet access has had dramatic impacts,
including on the ability to participate in remote learning, remote work, and
telehealth. While new government programs have been created to try to broaden
access, a fundamental problem persists: no one accurately knows who does and
does not have high quality access. There are many datasets of Internet
measurements, but each on its own represents too incomplete a picture to provide
the fine-grained information needed to discern which communities, or, ideally,
neighborhoods lack quality Internet access. However, these datasets, when
combined, is expected to provide a rich and geographically broad data source
through which it may be possible to accurately assess Internet connectivity and
performance. Furthermore, this study can let one learn trends from these
datasets to predict Internet accessibility in regions for which no measurement
data is currently available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
threefold: (i) to aggregate data from public and private sources to produce the
most fine-grained analysis and detailed maps, to date, within states, at the
community and, ideally, neighborhood level, of where fixed and mobile Internet
access exists, where it does not, and where it is of too poor quality to be
usable; (ii) to build statistical models that use demographic and other social
variables to understand variation in Internet availability and quality; and
(iii) to use what is learned to build predictive models of Internet service in
areas for which there exist insufficient measurement data from available
sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will have broad impacts, including the
informing of local, state and federal governments about where investments must
be made to ensure all Americans have access to high quality mobile and/or fixed
Internet. The project website, digitalaccess.cs.ucsb.edu, will contain
information about research methodology and outcomes, including a report on what
is learned about the state of California, the first state of focus for this
award. Prediction models will also be made available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.