* 2033515
* RAPID: Supports and Challenges in an Educational Crisis: The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Youth STEM Pathways
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Timothy Podkul, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 199,981.00

Across the country, educators and mentors in informal settings have provided
youth with opportunities to persist and thrive along STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) trajectories. Unfortunately, the current COVID-19
pandemic may limit youthsâ€™ opportunities to continue pursuing STEM pathways by
removing their access to important resources, such as mentors in science labs
and other STEM learning spaces. The impact of the pandemic may be especially
harmful for youth from underrepresented groups whose families have been
disproportionately affected by this crisis. The purpose of this project is to
study the impact of COVID-19 on the STEM trajectories of teenagers from
underrepresented groups who had previously worked with scientists as mentors
before the pandemic. A survey, which will be administered to hundreds of
teenagers, will identify the supports that they used to successfully navigate
disruptions as they continued to pursue college and career pathways in STEM. For
teenagers who decided not to actively pursue STEM pathways during the pandemic,
this survey will illuminate how loss of supports and new challenges discouraged
their active pursuit of STEM. By identifying supports and challenges that
encouraged or discouraged STEM pursuits, this project will advance knowledge on
how informal learning programs can support underrepresented teenagers in
persisting along STEM pathways during national crises and
emergencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Museum of Natural History will
conduct mixed-methods research to explore the impact of the pandemic on the STEM
trajectories of underrepresented teenagers. They will administer surveys to 560
teenagers from underrepresented groups who previously participated in the New
York City Science Research Mentoring Consortium. The survey will ascertain
whether and how the youth found access to new supports or lost access to former
supports; whether they face new challenges and how they have responded to those
challenges; and whether and how their feelings about pursuing STEM in college
and beyond have changed. Teenagers who complete the survey will identify adults
in their lives who have been important in supporting their pursuits in STEM, and
two adults per teenager will also be invited to complete surveys on perceived
disruptions. Latent class analyses, cognitive interviews, and consultation with
youth and survey experts will be used to establish survey validity, while the
survey results will be analyzed via two-mode social network analysis.
Additionally, 16 teenagers will participate in in-depth interviews regarding the
impact of the pandemic on their STEM trajectories. Findings and implications for
practice will be disseminated widely to researchers, educators, and mentors in
informal science education. These findings will help stakeholders to provide
better supports for underrepresented youth during the current pandemic and
during future national emergencies. This project is funded by the Advanced
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program. As part of its overall strategy to
enhance learning in informal environments, the AISL program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.