* 2033905
* Collaborative Research: Origins and drivers of extinction of Caribbean Avifauna
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Robert Guralnick, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 01/31/2024
* USD 278,919.00

Current vertebrate diversity has been dramatically shaped by an ongoing mass
extinction event that began after the last ice age ended, approximately 18,000
years ago. The timing of at least some of these extinctions often coincides with
human arrival into newly colonized areas. While extinctions since the last ice
age have occurred worldwide, the islands that make up the Caribbean have been
perhaps the single hardest hit region. This island system, rich in well-
preserved paleontological and archaeological sites, has preserved a spectacular
record of both past bird diversity and human occupation. Still, our knowledge of
the patterns, causes, and consequences of long-term changes to Caribbean bird
communities remains surprisingly limited. This knowledge gap hampers our
understanding of past diversity changes and its causes, and thus our ability to
manage and conserve remaining diversity into the future. This research focuses
on closing these knowledge gaps using DNA from fossils (ancient DNA) to
understand taxonomic affinities of extinct species, and radiocarbon dating to
determine the last occurrence of a species. This approach provides critical
information to determine who these species were, and to time their losses in
relation to climate change and waves of human arrivals to the islands. This
project also focuses on the characteristics of species that have made them more
vulnerable to extinction (for example, flightlessness) as a means to more
completely understand the causes of extinction in the past and forecast the
extinction risk for existing species. This project has broad societal impact
through its educational and outreach components. The project will provide
training for underrepresented students in science, focusing on extinction and
ancient DNA, and develop classroom content for K-12 classes in Florida in
partnership with the University of Florida Thomson Earth Science Institute’s
(TESI) Scientist in Every Florida School (SEFS) program. And to further public
understanding of science, and to bolster conservation efforts for threatened
Caribbean birds, the researchers will develop a documentary video in both
English and Spanish and work with museum-based outreach efforts to inform wide
audiences across the Caribbean islands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is estimated
that 12% of the bird species in the Caribbean either went extinct or were
extirpated since the late Pleistocene, with many more now considered to be
endangered or threatened. Less well understood is the role humans have played in
these extinctions and population losses. Because human arrival to these islands
occurred much later than on the mainland, archeological and paleontological
evidence can be used to determine how humans interacted with the local fauna
upon their arrival to domesticate, translocate, and cause the extinction of some
species. Evidence of this lost avian diversity is fragmentary, often represented
by only a few specimens with limited morphological characters. This causes
challenges for proper phylogenetic placement, especially given potential for
convergence due to shared life histories such as flightlessness. In this project
researchers will build phylogenetic trees of clades of birds including modern,
extinct and extirpated taxa to determine the phylogenetic and trait affinities
of these species. This work will also elucidate biogeographic patterns of the
full endemic fauna of the Caribbean, that has been obscured due to extinctions
of enigmatic taxa, and build a picture of the level of biodiversity loss in
terms of phylogenetic and trait diversity. A key next step is to then integrate
new phylogenetic knowledge into a larger context of overall avian diversity
patterns to explicitly quantify past loss of phylogenetic diversity across the
Caribbean. We will generate a new metric, diversity loss risk, that integrates
insight from phylogenetics, traits, and past extinction events to reveal which
extant species are of greatest concern for preventing permanent phylogenetic
diversity loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.