* 2033500
* CAREER: Advancing the Search for Ultra-High-Energy Tau Neutrinos with High-Elevation Radio Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Stephanie Wissel, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 03/31/2024
* USD 490,453.00

Ultra-high-energy neutrinos are unique astrophysical messengers as they interact
only weakly with intervening matter and can therefore be used to probe high
energy sources and extreme conditions throughout the universe, and to test
physics at energies beyond the standard models. This award will support the
development of a novel concept for the detection of the highest energy tau
neutrinos. The group at the California Polytechnic State University will design
and deploy a prototype detector for a mountaintop telescope sensitive to the
radio emission generated when high-energy tau neutrinos interact in the Earth.
Undergraduate students will be engaged in all aspects of the project from the
initial simulations to detector design, deployment and operation. The group will
also engage in efforts to broaden participation among underrepresented groups in
physics through both new and existing programs such as the California-Arizona
Minority Partnership for Astronomy Research and Education (CAMPARE) and the
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(LSAMP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support comprehensive optimization
studies of the sensitivity and energy threshold of a radio-frequency tau
neutrino telescope located on a high-elevation mountain pointed at the horizon.
The neutrino telescope will target both the diffuse astrophysical flux of
neutrinos as well as neutrinos generated by the highest energy cosmic rays as
they propagate through the universe. Simulations as well as site
characterization studies will guide the design of the prototype telescope. The
prototype will be deployed and a measurement of cosmic ray rates will be used to
estimate the expected exposure of a full-scale neutrino telescope. This award
will support students from traditionally underrepresented groups with the goal
of increasing the diversity of physics majors at the University. In addition to
participating in the CAMPARE and LSAMP programs, the group will design and
conduct a new workshop to provide lower division students with the skills needed
for experimental research and upper division students with teaching
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.