* 2033942
* NSF2026: EAGER: Emergent Collective Behavior in a Developmental Model
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Alison Patteson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Herron
* 08/31/2023
* USD 367,200.00

With support from the Division of Environmental Biology (BIO/DEB) and the NSF
2026 Fund Program in the Office of Integrated Activities, Professor Alison
Patteson of Syracuse University is awarded this EAGER grant. This project
addresses the NSF 2026 Idea Machine topic of Emergence of Complexity from the
Bottom Up, focusing on a subfield of the biological sciences. The overarching
goal of this project is to identify the underlying principles governing emergent
collective behavior in the model bacteria Myxococcus xanthus. Bacteria are often
thought of as single celled, but many species act as multi-celled groups.
Behaviors such as aggregation, swarming, and predation require cells to
coordinate their actions. We know that the capacity for these behaviors is
genetically controlled, but it is not yet possible to understand the resulting
patterns from genetics alone. Cells rely on complex signaling pathways to sense,
integrate, and respond to a variety of signals from other cells and from
environmental cues to coordinate their behaviors. This project will produce a
publicly available video archive of swarming behaviors in genetically distinct
bacteria. This will provide a unique resource for developing models of emergent
collective action and provide insights into the evolution of
multicellularity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs two approaches. The
first is to assemble a large video database of collective fruiting body
aggregation in wild-type and mutant strains using a high-throughput video
microscope. The second approach is to develop and extend self-propelled particle
models of Myxococcus xanthus aggregation based on the effects of genetic
knockdown on the resultant collective behavior. Identifying how bacteria self-
organize from interacting signaling networks would be a significant step forward
in understanding emergence in living materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.