* 2033044
* EAGER: Enhancement of Piezoelectric Properties in two-dimensional materials and its application
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Mona Zaghloul, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 07/31/2023
* USD 158,000.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Piezoelectricity was discovered in 1880 by
Jacques and Pierre Curie. This property allows materials to convert mechanical
stress into electrical signals and vice versa. Piezoelectric devices have
important applications in medicine, aerospace, transportation and consumer
electronics. For example, piezoelectric elements are used as pressure sensors
mobile phones and to monitor combustion in internal combustion engines. For
future applications, sensors should operate at nanoscale or microscale level, be
flexible and transparent, and easy to integrate with conventional electronics.
This project will investigate piezoelectricity in novel two-dimensional (2D)
materials, with the aim of realizing next generation devices. 2D materials are
atomically thick and have unique optical and electrical properties. Their
piezoelectric properties could be used realize mechanically powered transparent
flexible charge-generating devices. This project will enable the fabrication of
innovative devices at the microscale and nanoscale with unprecedented
applications in medicine, industry, environmental engineering, and consumer
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Piezoelectric
properties in materials are due to non-centrosymmetric structure of the material
crystal structure. It is also known that some materials are non-piezoelectric in
their bulk structure. However, when they are thinned in monolayer or several
layers, they show piezoelectricity properties. In this work the piezoelectric
properties for 2D materials are studied. It presents a novel technique for
enhancement of piezoelectric properties in weak piezoelectric two-dimensional
materials. Surface Acoustic Waves (SAW) are used to enhance the piezoelectric
properties of 2D materials. The SAW device will be built on an island of strong
Piezoelectric material. The traveling acoustic wave would cause stress and
strain on the two-dimensional materials placed on the substrate, which would
increase the piezoelectric properties of the two-dimensional materials. The
technique of using Surface Acoustic Waves (SAW) to activate acoustic waves that
couple to the weak piezoelectric material and cause changes in the piezoelectric
coefficient of the weak piezoelectric material is novel. In this work we are
planning to apply this technique to several two-dimensional materials and
measure improved piezoelectric coefficients and their applications, such as in
sensors. The proposed method in this research greatly enhances the piezoelectric
effect of 2D materials and eliminates the disadvantages of other techniques
reported in the literature. The drawbacks in current methods include high demand
of fabrication complexity and precision, high cost, and the limitation of the
number of stacked layers of 2D materials. Different 2D materials such as
molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) and indium selenide (InSe) will be tested and
evaluated, including those commonly used and less-studied ones. The outcome of
this proposed work will largely extend the utilization range of piezoelectricity
of 2D materials, and will turn into more practical and novel devices in
electronic, electromechanical, sensors, and optoelectronic
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.