* 2033260
* EAGER:Immune Response of Jamaican Fruit Bats Experimentally Infected with SARS-CoV-2
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2022
* William Schountz, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 299,998.00

The goal of this project is to understand the immune response in bats infected
experimentally with SARS-CoV-2. Bats are the natural reservoirs of hundreds of
coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19 disease. It
is evident that infection of bats with these viruses does them no harm, yet the
viruses are capable of replicating and transmitting to other bats.
Unfortunately, some of these viruses can spill over into humans and cause
disease outbreaks that lead to aggressive inflammatory immune responses that
contribute to the disease. It is unclear why these viruses fail to cause disease
in bats, nor how the immune systems of bats control the infection without
inflammatory disease that is observed in humans. This project will examine the
role of the immune system of Jamaican fruit bats experimentally infected with
SARS-CoV-2 in a controlled laboratory setting. The objective of the project is
to understand how bat immune systems can limit virus replication and shedding
but without disease. This, in turn, may lead to a better understanding of
spillover events into humans, permit novel approaches to mitigate those events,
and identify new therapeutic strategies for the treatment of human disease. In
addition to these therapeutic broader impacts, this project supports the
training of one graduate student and the research will be disseminated by public
outreach and formal science meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
determine the roles of the innate and adaptive immune responses in bats
experimentally infected with SARS-CoV-2. In humans, there is compelling evidence
that much of the COVID-19 pathology is caused by the immune response that leads
to pronounced inflammation due to excess cytokine production. In bats naturally
infected with coronaviruses, signs of disease are not apparent and experimental
challenge with virus leads to innocuous infection. Experimental infection of
Jamaican fruit bats show abundant SARS-CoV-2 antigen only in the intestines,
particularly in cells of the Peyer’s patches, mononuclear cells of the lamina
propria, and crypt cells, yet the intestinal architecture remains nominal.
Virtually nothing is known about how bats serve as reservoir hosts of
coronaviruses, thus this project will provide the greatest detail yet on how
bats control viruses that cause substantial disease burden in humans. The
project aims to achieve three objectives with SARS-CoV-2-infected bats: (1)
disabling of the type I interferon pathway to determine the role of the innate
response during infection; (2) determining the immune cells of Peyer’s patches
that respond during infection and which of these cells are infected; and (3)
what is the role of T cells in control of the virus by impairing clonal
expansion and activation. Collectively, these aims will provide the first
experimental manipulation of bat immunity during infection and will define how
bat immune responses control infection. This RAPID award is made by the
Physiological and Structural Systems Cluster in the BIO Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.