* 2033379
* RII Track-4: Partnership Between the University of Wyoming and the Missoula Fire Sciences Laboratory in Multi-Scale Wildland Fire Research
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Erica Belmont, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 01/31/2024
* USD 190,322.00

Wildland fire modeling entails prediction of ignition, spread, emissions, and
other fire characteristics. Accurate predictive modeling can lead to better land
management decisions, climate modeling, and public health management. Such
modeling is a challenging endeavor, however, due to myriad complexities
including variability in fuel composition, fuel geometry, and environmental
conditions such as wind speed and humidity. Field- and laboratory-based
experimental measurements are utilized to develop sub-models, such as models of
quantities and types of emissions produced from fires, and validation of
integrated models. This NSF RII Track-4 Fellowship will enable the University of
Wyoming (UW) PI and her graduate student to visit the Missoula Fire Sciences
Laboratory (MFL) in Missoula, MT, over the next two years in order to engage
with MFL researchers in multi-scale wildland fire-related experiments and
modeling. Specifically, the UW researchers will work with MFL researchers to
evaluate and improve a model for wildland fire emissions that the UW researchers
have developed and tested at a small, laboratory scale to-date. This model
allows for the prediction of emissions as a function of factors such as fire
fuel composition and environmental conditions, including ambient oxygen level
and humidity. This Fellowship will allow the UW researchers to work with MFL
researchers to test this model under larger-scale and more complex, but well-
characterized, fire conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RII Track-4 Fellowship
will offer the UW team access to world-class facilities and collaborators to
scale their research and test a research hypothesis regarding wildland fire
emissions over different scales. The hypothesis is that aerosol emissions
formation can be predicted by coupling quantification of key influential effects
on emissions formation at micro-scales and accurate prediction of relevant
variables in full-scale fires. Effects of biomass composition and fire
environment on aerosol emissions have been demonstrated at the micro-scale at
UW, and findings will be tested at larger scales where conditions are less
tightly controlled than in micro-scale experiments. At larger scales, additional
factors such as heat and mass transport limitations and complex entrainment of
ambient gases into combustion products may confound the measurement of such
effects, making experimentation on well-defined and well-controlled platforms
critical to elucidation of these factors. The MFL has not only the facilities to
enable the UW researchers to perform these scaled-up experiments, but also fire
science experts with whom collaboration will be invaluable to ensuring maximal
relevance of this work to current and future wildland fire modeling efforts. The
UW team will work with MFL research engineers with expertise in fire
experimentation using platforms including a burn box platform and a wind tunnel
platform in which the combustion environment can be well-controlled and well-
characterized. Additionally, the UW team with work with MFL research engineers
with expertise in fire and smoke modeling to ensure the relevance of the UW
team’s work to emissions modeling efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.