* 2033390
* RAPID: Improving Computational Epidemiology with Higher Fidelity Models of Human Behavior
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Christian Lebiere, Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 211,999.00

Forecasts of how the COVID-19 epidemic will progress, in terms of regional rate
of infections and deaths, are made by epidemiological models. The projections of
these models influence the decisions of public health and other officials, as
well as members of the general public. In the absence of a vaccine, it is
crucial that epidemiological models accurately predict how the rate of
transmission changes in response to non-pharmaceutical interventions such as
advisories about social distancing, wearing masks, washing hands, etc. This
requires accurate and precise modeling of how people respond both
psychologically and behaviorally to this guidance. People in different regions
and subgroups may have very different individual mindsets and capabilities so
that they respond differently to different guidance, which may change over time,
e.g., “shelter-in-place fatigue”. Current epidemiological models are do not
incorporate scientifically established computational models of human psychology
and behavior change. This project is about developing agents that represent an
individual, and populations of agents simulating the human population of a given
area to be part of a new kind of epidemiological model for forecasting Covid-19
cases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual agents will be built upon prior models
of decision-making and behavior-change. This will model relevant individual-
level responses and resulting population dynamics for a select set of US
regions. Online media and datasets will be used to seed populations of agents to
model populations of the selected US regions. New algorithms for cognitive
content mining of attitudes, beliefs, intentions, and preferences for a regional
population will be developed and validated quantitatively against observed
behavior and epidemiological data in a set of US state-level data (four states
and their sub-regions) using a mix of statistical modeling and agent-based
modeling. Improvements in regional forecasting of Covid-19 incidence rates,
estimated transmission rates in response to community guidance, and behavior
compliance using cell-phone mobility and non-essential visit data to measure
effectiveness of the newly designed agents and enhance the design of messages to
contain COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.