* 2033413
* B1: Inclusion AI for Neurodiverse Employment
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Brian Scassellati, Vanderbilt University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Linda Molnar
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,065,532.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neurodiversity is an emerging concept through which
certain neurological differences—Autism, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder, Dyslexia, and others—are considered a natural part of human
neurocognitive variation, associated not only with impairments but also with
unique strengths. Indeed, many neurodiverse people have capabilities that are in
high demand across many sectors. Yet, while some 70,000 Americans with autism
enter adulthood every year, currently 85% of them will be unemployed or
underemployed relative to their skill levels, representing a cost to the United
States of $175 billion annually. Thus, optimizing workforce engagement for
individuals with autism holds the potential to transform great cost into great
value. This National Science Foundation Convergence Accelerator (C-Accel) award
to Vanderbilt University will address this grand challenge by bringing together
cutting-edge Artificial Intelligence (AI) innovations with transdisciplinary
expertise—spanning engineering and computer science to organizational
psychology, clinical translation, and implementation science—to create a suite
of commercially viable technologies that integrate AI within virtual
environments, robotic systems, human-human interactions, and novel assessment
tools. These technologies will be created using input from stakeholders,
including employers of individuals with autism, companies that develop
technological products to help employment, state vocational and rehabilitation
services that provide job training, and advocacy groups that provide guidance
regarding community needs. The technologies will be transitioned to practice
through deployment with private- and public-sector partners, together with
analysis using implementation science to ensure long-term sustainability and the
broadest impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This C-Accel Phase II program will advance
the scientific and technological methodologies of the projects initiated in
Phase I that are designed to create a pipeline to employment for people with
autism. Specifically, the suite of tools to be developed include: (1) Visual and
Cognitive AI Tools to Assess Autistic Talent; (2) Virtual Reality (VR)-based
Simulator for Improving Job-Interview Skills; (3) Collaborative Virtual
Environments with Embedded Intelligent Agent for Social Interaction Assessment
and Support; (4) Social Robotic System to Assess and Train Tolerance to
Interruption; and (5) Computer Vision Tools to Measure and Improve Non-verbal
Communication. Across these projects, we will make fundamental scientific and
technological advancements in: (i) data-driven visual AI for innovative
assessment tools to identify strengths, talents, and job-relevant skills, as
well as employer-identified work needs; (ii) novel VR-based platform for job
interview training that utilizes real-time closed-loop multimodal affective
computing for stress and attention recognition; (iii) a collaborative virtual
environment that create new skill estimation algorithms and a peer-based
learning paradigm mediated by an AI agent; (iv) a home-based skill assessment
and training systems using socially assistive robotics; and (v) novel computer-
vision and deep learning methods and algorithms to assess real-world
generalization of nonverbal social communication. The project’s intellectual
property plan includes advancing each of these technologies from prototype to
minimum viable product (MVP) stage and into commercial use through licensing
agreements within the two-year project period. Through Vanderbilt University’s
Frist Center for Autism &amp; Innovation, graduate students and neurodiverse
interns will participate in all aspects of the C-Accel research and development
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.