* 2033399
* RII Track-4: Exploiting Thermoacoustic Assonance to Enrich Multifunctional Meta-Structures
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* James Manimala, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 12/31/2023
* USD 256,124.00

Airborne noise mitigation is a significant challenge in several engineering
applications, particularly in the aerospace realm where it diminishes
efficiency, hampers stealth, contributes to environmental pollution and curtails
commercial viability. Conventional technologies have reached practical limits in
addressing airborne noise, especially for low-frequency (&lt;~1000 Hz) spectra.
In partnership with NASA’s Langley Research Center, Thermo-Acoustic Meta-
Structures (TAMS), a new class of multifunctional structures will be explored
with a focus on mitigating aircraft turbofan engine’s core-noise. A confluence
of innovative multi-physical mechanisms within a novel design framework termed
‘assonance’ will be investigated to enrich broadband, low-frequency performance
for TAMS. It is expected that new insights will be gained into underlying
phenomena enabling the development of modeling tools to create prototype TAMS
for evaluation in NASA’s facilities. Successful completion of this project will
deliver a new technology for airborne noise mitigation, enhancing critical
mission capabilities in several military and commercial engineering
applications. This project has substantial congruence with the economic vision
and strengths of the regional industrial and educational ecosystem of the State
of Oklahoma while also contributing to national aerospace and defense interests
and directly enabling technological solutions for sustainable global
aviation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to educe
new insights into scaling laws and structure-performance relationships for
Thermo-Acoustic Meta-Structures (TAMS) aiding the development of impactful
solutions for multifunctional applications, especially in the aerospace realm.
Specifically, opportunities to address the aircraft turbofan engine core-noise
mitigation priorities of NASA will be explored. Core-noise has significant low-
frequency (&lt;~1000 Hz) components, as yet unaddressed using conventional
acoustic liners. Utilizing available thermal gradients across the engine’s core-
wall, a confluence of innovative designs for structural materials and
interactive multiphysical mechanisms thereof will be employed to embed
thermoacoustic elements into liner meta-structures. A new, computationally-
efficient modeling tool based on a mulitphysical model for TAMS embedding the
Rott’s model for thermoacoustics in conjunction with vibroacoustic elements
within NASA’s Zwikker-Kosten Transmission Line (ZKTL) model for acoustic liners
is proposed to be developed. An emergent metamaterials-inspired design framework
termed ‘assonance’ will be explored to enrich broadband performance for TAMS. In
partnership with NASA, state-of-the-art structural material configurations and
fabrication processes will be utilized to construct prototypical test articles
for evaluation using NASA’s experimental facilities. Generation of extensive
data sets under varying acoustic conditions will help validate the model,
extract scaling laws for power-to-volume ratio, influence of radiation impedance
and frequency-thermal gradient dependencies and establish new insights into
structure-performance relationships for assonant meta-structures. Successful
completion of this project will deliver a new technology for airborne noise
mitigation, enhancing critical mission capabilities in several military and
commercial engineering applications and directly contributing to sustainable
global aviation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.