* 2033580
* Managing Epidemics by Managing Mobility
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Benedetto Piccoli, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 771,695.00

This NSF grant will study the coupling between personal mobility and the spread
of infectious disease. Recent experiences with COVID-19 have highlighted the
importance of directly modeling transportation flows within epidemiological
models and understanding the impacts of complex, local-scale travel patterns and
their network effects. In particular, the project will help address questions of
the following nature: i) Which communities are most likely to accelerate disease
propagation throughout the network? ii) Which recurrent travel patterns are most
likely to become disease vectors? iii) What combination of social-distancing and
travel restriction measures are needed to safely reactivate a region? iv) Where
should preventive screening be administered (when resources are limited) to
minimize contagion throughout the network? The project aims to engage with
public health experts and deliver implementations of the models in publicly
accessible forms to support policy maker engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical contributions of the project include : i) development of enhanced
spatial meta-population susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered (SEIR) models
that explicitly capture complex high fidelity travel patterns and their nuanced
interactions with the dynamics of the disease; ii) extensions that can go beyond
the traditional notion of a meta-population to explicitly model infections that
occur en-route (e.g. while using a transit system); iii) network analysis tools
for strategic planning that can explain the implications on contagion of
different mobility patterns and mitigation strategies that alter these patterns;
iv) optimal control strategies for managing outbreaks and planning for the
reopening phase using advanced analytical and numerical methods; and v) data-
driven Bayesian auto-calibration techniques that utilize a combination of real-
time case data, historic data, and local expert knowledge. The team will build
an open source simulation tool that allows the outputs of this project to be
accessible, reproducible and extensible by others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.