* 2033991
* Mechanics of Crystallization, Deformation and Phase Transformation in Granular Materials with Engineered Grain Geometries
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Francois Barthelat, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 391,525.00

This grant will focus on the engineering, modeling, fabrication and testing of
new types of solid granular materials. Granular materials like sand are
seemingly simple, but their mechanics is remarkably rich and complex. In this
project, the geometry of individual grains will be manipulated to generate
crystallization and deformation mechanisms not seen in traditional granular
materials, creating “granular materials by design”. This project will establish
a mechanics-based fundamental understanding of crystallization in granular
materials, enabling manipulation and assembly at large scales. This project will
also generate mechanics-based models for the inelastic deformation of granular
crystals based on contact mechanics and geometrical hardening. The new granular
materials that will emerge from this work will have high strength, unique
combinations of assembly / disassembly, strength and self-healing, making them
attractive as lightweight materials and aggregate architectures. The reversible
nature and the large deformation capabilities of these granular materials will
also make them attractive as shape morphing materials, programmable “smart”
matter, robotics and biomedical materials. Vigorous outreach activities will be
developed in this project including curriculum development at the University of
Colorado, research projects for undergraduate students, active learning module
for high school students, as well as promotion and improvement of diversity in
STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major scientific objective for this project is to
create a unified and mechanics-based framework that captures the assembly, phase
transformations, deformation and failure of engineered granular materials.
Granular systems of specific interest and critical scientific questions include:
(i) high packing and space filling in “granular crystals” with stiffness and
strength orders of magnitude higher than traditional granular materials; (ii)
steering of grains through amorphous-crystalline transitions using mechanical
stimuli; (iii) effects of confinement and unlimited deformations to create and
control attractive functionalities such as shape morphing, healing, tuning of
stiffness and strength; (iv) mechanics of interlocking in branched particles to
generate high strength and toughness in tension. Methods include discrete
element modeling using geometry-sensitive contact algorithms, 3D printing of
grains, and mechanical experiments with in-situ 3D imaging (refractive index
matching scanning). A fundamental understanding of these new “engineered”
granular materials will lead to new paradigms for the manufacturing and
mechanics of granular materials and structures, and for the generation of
advanced functionalities such as adaptability, shape morphing or self-
healing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.