* 2033851
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Bridging Automated Formal Reasoning and Continuous Optimization for Provably Safe Deep Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 01/16/2020,06/30/2024
* Swarat Chaudhuri, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Deep neural networks have emerged as a transformative computing technology in
the last few years. However, as illustrated by recent research on adversarial
machine learning, they can behave in obviously erroneous ways on anomalous or
adversarial inputs and cannot be debugged using traditional software development
methods. Thus, there is an urgent need for developing formal methods techniques
that can assure the safety of neural networks, particularly in safety- or
security-critical application domains. Motivated by this problem, this project
investigates automated formal reasoning techniques for provably safe deep
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the investigators explore
verification methods for certifying robustness properties of trained networks as
well as new verified training methods for finding network parameters that are
safe by construction. The technical approach closely couples techniques for
automated formal reasoning about systems (in particular abstraction) and
continuous optimization. In particular, the project explores the use of
automated abstraction techniques, originally developed for reasoning about
human-written programs, in the analysis of neural networks. The project
investigates the coupling of abstraction and gradient-based optimization in
searching for correctness proofs and network parameters. The project introduces
undergraduate and high school students from underrepresented groups to research
on programming languages and formal methods through outreach programs centered
around the topics on artificial intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.