* 2033823
* RII Track-4: Collaborative partnerships at the cusp of wildlife ecology and molecular biology
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Tyler Kartzinel, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 259,569.00

This Research Infrastructure Improvement RII Track-4 grant will examine how the
migratory wildlife of Yellowstone National Park adjust their diets in response
to seasonal change. Scientists need to understand how the plants that wild
animals eat are able to fuel migrations in order to anticipate how the diversity
of migratory wildlife and the routes that they select might change. This is
especially important for large wildlife, such as bison and pronghorn antelope,
that naturally engage in long-distance migrations across both public and private
lands. This project will use cutting-edge molecular technologies to forensically
identify the food plants that five species of wildlife eat during the course of
their seasonal migrations. Each step of the work will enhance university
teaching within Rhode Island, strengthen academic-government collaboration
across multiple jurisdictions, and positively transform the career trajectory of
the investigator. The proposed work establishes a new course-based undergraduate
research program that enhances access and inclusion in mentored research at
Brown University. In collaboration with scientists from the National Park
Service, students will develop forensic methods to characterize animal diets and
report results publicly. These goals will ensure the training of a diverse
workforce with the experience needed to develop and communicate about the types
of rapid genetic tests that are essential in modern environmental science,
healthcare, and epidemiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approaches emerging in
wildlife biology and molecular biology can help advance ecology across scales
from individual animal behaviors to the functioning of entire ecosystems. Animal
diets are known to be important across these scales because food availability
influences both individual movements and the ability of many species to coexist
in a world of limited resources. However, theoretical frameworks that have
developed with a focus on each of these different scales can generate
conflicting predictions about how species will respond to environmental change.
In this proposal, we focus on reconciling predictions about seasonality in the
diets of an extensively studied assemblage of migratory large herbivores from
Yellowstone National Park, which is North America’s most diverse large-herbivore
community. Our proposal combines the investigator’s expertise in dietary DNA
metabarcoding with the host site’s long-term GPS-tracking and field experimental
data. We will test the hypotheses that (1) seasonal dietary shifts are
predictable at scales spanning individuals to food webs and (2) feedbacks in
seasonal plant-herbivore interactions modulate dietary overlap and
specialization across these scales. The investigator, postdoctoral research
associate, and students at Brown University will collaborate with scientists
from the National Park Service to test these hypotheses. In the process, the
team will generate and make publicly available a suite of biological resources
that will have a long lifecycle of usefulness to research and education,
including digital herbarium collections and a DNA reference library that are
relevant across multiple EPSCoR jurisdictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.