* 2033020
* How bacteria sense and respond to fluid flow
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Howard Stone, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,162,068.00

This project seeks to address a fundamental problem at the intersection of life
science and engineering: how do bacteria sense and respond to fluid flow? Flows
are everywhere in both nature, as in rivers or plant and animal circulatory
systems, and in our built environments, as in plumbing. We know that fluid flows
can significantly affect bacterial lifestyles, but how do bacteria know that
they are in the presence of flow and how do they transduce that information into
changes in gene expression? This project will answer this important question by
combining the expertise of a microbiologist (Gitai) and an engineer (Stone).
Together these investigators have shown that a specific bacterial species,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, can actively sense the presence of flow and have built
systems to both apply specific flows to these bacteria and to read out how
bacteria respond to these flows. The current research is focused on applying a
combination of microbiology and engineering approaches to understand, at the
molecular and biophysical levels, how exactly these bacteria sense and respond
to the flow around them. This research will establish a new area of science
focused on bacterial flow-sensing termed rheosensing, as rheo is Greek for
flow). This work will also advance a wide range of future applications for
understanding and manipulating bacterial behaviors in complex environments that
mimic those that they encounter in the real world. The Broader Impact of the
research include the intrinsic nature of the research, as the behavior of
bacteria in aquatic environments have a host of implications to human
activities. Additional activities will involve the training of undergraduate and
graduate students, along with two post-docs. Various outreach programs targeting
K12 students and the general public will be carried
out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers on combining expertise in
microbiology, engineering, and physics to understand how bacteria sense and
respond to fluid flow, which is an important yet largely understudied feature of
bacterial environments. Fluid flow is a ubiquitous feature of bacterial
environments, including freshwater ecosystems, oceans, industrial plumbing, and
plant and animal vasculature or gastrointestinal systems. Gitai and Stone have
recently shown that Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a ubiquitous environmental bacterium
that can also infect a wide range of hosts, actively senses fluid flow and
responds to flow by altering gene expression. The investigators termed this new
sensory modality rheosensing. Furthermore, they found that whereas flow sensing
was previously assumed to be based on force-sensing, P. aeruginosa rheosensing
is force-independent. The current research will determine how rheosensing works
in P. aeruginosa and in other bacteria through three parallel approaches that
characterize the pathway responsible for P. aeruginosa rheosensing, the
biophysical mechanism of P. aeruginosa rheosensing, and the generality of
rheosensing across the genomes of P. aeruginosa and other bacteria. Together
this project will integrate biological and engineering approaches to establish a
new field of bacterial flow-sensing that will have significant impacts on both
understanding bacterial physiology and ecology, and establish a new system for
understanding force-independent responses to mechanical
cues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.