* 2033969
* Understanding Capacity Fade in Organic Flow Batteries by Combining Experiments with Modeling and Uncertainty Quantification
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* David Kwabi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2024
* USD 529,709.00

Redox-flow batteries (RFBs) are among the most promising future technologies for
cheaply storing grid-scale electricity from intermittently available renewable
(e.g. solar and wind) power. Hence, they are important for reducing dependence
on energy from fossil fuels. These batteries require liquid electrolytes
containing electro-active species. Organic molecules are attractive candidates
as electro-active species because they may allow the overall cost of RFBs to be
less than conventional (e.g. Li-ion) batteries. However, most laboratory-scale
organic flow cells exhibit high rates of capacity loss over time during cycling,
which render them unsuitable for commercial use. The project will advance
knowledge of the origins of these capacity losses by combining experimental
measurements with modeling and statistical methods. Also, in collaboration with
the University of Michiganâ€™s Museum of Natural History, the investigators will
construct a research station highlighting the role of battery-based energy
storage in decarbonizing the electric grid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
capacity losses in organic flow cells is challenging, because candidate
electrolyte reactants encompass a large range of molecular classes and are
therefore susceptible to a wide variety of conversion and loss mechanisms that
may mutually interact and/or operate on overlapping timescales. This project
focuses on addressing this combinatorial problem via modeling and Bayesian
statistical learning, which is capable of discerning how multiple, dynamically
interacting inputs compose a given experimental output. The Bayesian statistical
framework offers a rigorous mathematical characterization of noise and
uncertainty, and therefore provides a pathway to weighing the probabilities of
various hypothesized capacity loss mechanisms in light of cycling data and
guiding future experimental designs that produce the most useful data. By
analyzing organic flow cell performance on this basis and together with a
physics-based electrochemical model of the cell, capacity loss will be described
in terms of chemical and electrochemical mechanisms related to parameters such
as the electrolyte acidity, the state of charge of the cell, and reactant
concentration. The synergistic use of experiment, modeling, and data-informed
statistical learning complements more traditional techniques and will inform
synthetic chemical and electrochemical strategies for capacity loss mitigation.
The research efforts will also lead to an improved understanding of RFB
performance tradeoffs under realistic operating
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.