* 2033822
* ECO-CBET: Collaborative Research: Towards a Circular Nitrogen Bioeconomy: Tandem Bio- and Chemocatalysis for Sustainable Nitrogen Recovery and Nitrous Oxide Mitigation
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2024
* William Tarpeh, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 10/31/2024
* USD 337,835.00

Cities and farms discharge nitrogen-rich compounds into receiving waters,
resulting in pollution of the environment. Current technologies to remove
nitrogen-rich compounds from water are costly and energy intensive, resulting in
great economic and environmental costs to society. The difficulty in addressing
this waste problem is why the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine calls managing the nitrogen cycle one of the “Grand Challenges” of
engineering. The goal of this project is to develop new scientific knowledge
about how to concentrate, separate, and transform waste nitrogen-rich compounds
into animal feed and beneficial products. This outcome will be achieved through
cross-disciplinary biology and chemistry research to remove nitrogen-rich
compounds from waste streams and to transform them into chemicals that can be
used for the production of useful products. The environmental impact and
potential for new businesses based on these new technologies will be evaluated.
Successful completion of this work will prevent nitrogen pollution, reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, and provide a new sustainable feedstock for chemicals.
Other benefits from this project will include workforce development and
educational outreach to underrepresented grade-school students. These efforts
will promote increased diversity in STEM fields and improve scientific literacy
of the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen-rich waste streams are
produced in large quantities from urban and agricultural settings and impose
severe environmental burdens to human and ecological health. Conventional
nitrogen management treats nitrogen-rich compounds as waste rather than as a
recoverable resource. This approach is costly, energy intensive, and results in
the release of large amounts of the potent greenhouse gas, nitrous oxide (N2O).
The goal of this research project is to develop novel technological approaches
to convert nitrogen-rich waste into high-value products beyond fertilizers. This
research project has the objectives to: (1) Engineer bacteria to bioconcentrate
dilute waste nitrogen, which then can be used as animal feed or for bio-based
chemical production; (2) Develop a microbial bioprocess for simultaneous
nitrogen removal and nitrous oxide recovery for use as a green oxidant; (3)
Design catalytic processes to capture and activate dilute nitrous oxide streams
for the selective oxidation of methane; and (4) Identify optimal products,
feedstocks, and technology combinations to satisfy diverse stakeholder needs and
cost and sustainability objectives. The novelty of the approach lies in the
energy-efficient recovery of nitrogen as a building block for bio-based
chemicals and animal feed. This approach integrates expertise across chemical,
biological, and environmental engineering disciplines. Successful completion of
this research will benefit society through sustainable waste nitrogen management
and the mitigation of nitrous oxide emissions. Additional benefits will result
from educational and industrial outreach. Such efforts include outreach to
underrepresented grade-school students in a climate action project. Integrative
learning experiences with industrial partners and graduate student exchanges
between research groups will enhance the development of a future workforce to
address grand challenges in sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.