* 2033354
* RAPID: Impact of SARS-CoV2 on function of the cellular tRNA methyltransferase 1 and redox homeostasis
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Dragony Fu, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 11/30/2021
* USD 179,077.00

Due to the global pandemic caused by SARS-CoV2, there is an urgent need to
understand how coronavirus infection affects host cellular processes. This
project will explore a recently discovered link between a SARS-CoV2 protein-
cleaving enzyme and a human protein that may be its target. Combined
biochemical, molecular, and cellular approaches will be used to study how
interaction of the viral and human proteins can alter normal cellular functions.
The outcomes are expected to uncover targets for therapeutic intervention to
address the COVID-19 pandemic. The project will provide training opportunities
for two graduate students who will carry out the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, a novel connection was discovered between the
main protease of SARS-CoV2, called Nsp5, and the human tRNA methyltransferase
enzyme known as TRMT1. TRMT1 methylates a specific position (m2.2G) in more than
half of all cellular tRNAs and in many mitochondrial tRNAs, and TRMT1 is known
to be essential for normal levels of protein synthesis and for redox homeostasis
in human cells. TRMT1 contains an amino acid sequence that may be a target for
cleavage by Nsp5, but the biological effects and downstream consequences of the
Nsp5-TRMT1 interaction are unknown. This project will focus on three aims:
determining the effects of Nsp5 binding on TMRT1's stability and ability to bind
tRNAs; identifying TRMT1-dependent pathways that are modulated through Nsp5
interaction with TRMT1; and testing how TRMT1-dependent pathways impact the
SARS-CoV2 life cycle. By understanding how SARS-CoV2 infection affects TRMT1
function, the project will yield insight into novel strategies that viruses
employ to alter host gene expression and metabolism. The results could aid in
development of new drug therapies or biomarkers for detecting coronavirus
infection.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, using
funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.