* 2033966
* NSF2026: EAGER: Carbon-sink infrastructure materials to create net-negative carbon emitting energy systems
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Bryan Jenkins, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2023
* USD 256,128.00

The production of infrastructure materials and their accumulation in the built
environment has a significant impact on our carbon footprint and demand for
natural resources and energy. In the United States, the production of building
materials accounts for nearly 13% of the nation’s energy demand and 38% of its
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. Recent studies suggest that biomass ash, from
energy production, is a promising building block for new construction materials
that could capture and store CO2 in the built-environment. With support from the
Environmental Engineering Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET) and the NSF 2026 Fund Program in the
Office of Integrated Activities, Professors Miller, Jenkins, and Kendall at
University of California-Davis propose to carry out an integrated research
program organized around three complementary objectives. Objective 1 will
evaluate the properties of biogenic ashes that affect their ability to capture
and store CO2. Objective 2 will investigate the carbonation of the biogenic
ashes and quantify their CO2 sequestration potential. Objective 3 will quantify
the use of carbonated biogenic ashes in infrastructure materials for long-term
CO2 capture and storage. The goal of this high-risk and high-reward exploratory
research project are to 1) explore the utilization of biogenic ashes produced
from the pyrolysis of crop residues as CO2 sorbents and 2) evaluate their
incorporation into infrastructure materials including biogenic fillers in
cement-based materials and thermoplastic composites. The successful completion
of this project will benefit society through the generation of new knowledge to
advance the development of next-generation carbon negative buildings. Further
benefits to society will be achieved through student education and training, and
public outreach including the mentoring of two female doctoral
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CO2 capture and storage in buildings is a
promising technology for the mitigation of global climate change. The
composition and alkaline nature of biogenic ashes suggest that they could
capture CO2 through carbonation, leading to the formation of carbonate minerals.
The goal of this high-risk and high-reward project is to explore how biomass
ashes from agricultural wastes can be engineered to 1) serve as CO2 sinks and 2)
enable their incorporation into infrastructure materials for long-term carbon
storage in the built-environment. To achieve this goal, the PIs propose to carry
out an integrated experimental and modeling research program structured around
three objectives. First, the PIs will explore the use of pyrolysis to synthesize
carbonated ashes using hulls, wheat straw and sugarcane bagasse as precursors.
The relevant physicochemical properties of these new materials will be
characterized using a suite of assays (e.g. acid hydrolysis) and tools [e.g.
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), x-ray diffraction (XRD) and differential
scanning calorimetry (DSC)] to assess their carbonation potential. Second, the
PIs will measure the CO2 sorption capacity of the carbonated ashes by exposing
them to a flue gas simulant inside a moisture and CO2 rich test chamber. The
results of the CO2 sorption measurements will be used as inputs to carry out
life cycle assessment (LCA) of the carbon sequestration potential of biogenic
ashes. Finally, the PIs will combine mechanical testing (e.g. tensile and
flexural strength measurements) with SEM, transmission electron microscopy
(TEM), and DSC to evaluate the utilization of the new carbonated ashes as
fillers in cement-based materials and thermoplastic composites. Thus, the
successful completion of this project has potential for transformative impact by
advancing the fundamental science and engineering of carbon negative
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supported project further expands the
concept from three of the top 33 NSF 2026 Idea Machine entries: (I) Public
Carbon Capture and Storage, (ii) Unlocking the Future of Infrastructure, and
(iii) Terraforming Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.