* 2033328
* RII Track-4: Understanding Phase-Change Nanodevices for Cognitive-inspired Computing Applications.
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Armando Rua, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2024
* USD 164,338.00

The future development of computers will likely depend on a qualitative change,
with new technologies based on materials and mechanisms very different from
those currently employed. One of the most promising alternatives centers on
development of ultra-low-power cognitive computing systems inspired by the
operating principles of the brain and employing new types of bio-inspired
devices with functionalities which correspond to those of neurons, synapses,
axons, and dendrites. This research project aims to enhance our understanding of
fundamental processes of the electrically-induced switching mechanism in
vanadium oxides and related materials. This knowledge will help to address the
needs of high-density data storage, adaptive neural circuits, and energy-
efficient neuromorphic computing. In addition, this project will allow the PI
and a graduate student to be trained at the Brookhaven National Laboratory in
the use of state-of-the-art instrumentation to apply techniques crucial to the
central aspect of the research. Collaboration will ensure longer-term impacts
and facilitate future access either through direct collaborations or through
support from future research projects for use of the facilities by the PI.
Participation by UPRM students in related sub-projects will be a unique
educational opportunity for them directly, which will prepare them to address
the challenges of electronic materials in the 21st century.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues experiments to study correlated
Magn√©li vanadium oxides in purpose-built nanostructures with the goal of
furthering our understanding of dynamics of the electrically-induced switching
of Phase Change Materials exhibiting Metal Insulator Transition and how it
depends on physical and chemical parameters such as composition, stress,
thickness, grain size and orientation, and local morphology. A range of
appropriate characterization techniques will be employed in order to study the
properties of interest here. Beyond standard ones, state-of-the-art techniques
will be applied, including in-operando photoelectron spectroscopy, high-
resolution scanning, and transmission electron microscopy. Elucidation of the
influence of parameters mentioned above on the switching mechanism and on
electroformed conductive filament formation are required to assess their
relative importance and to develop fabrication protocols enabling reproducible
electronic characteristics in prospective devices for neuromorphic
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.