* 2033672
* Integrating limnological, remote sensing, and modeling approaches to understand global lake ice dynamics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Catherine O'Reilly, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 45,353.00

More than 90% of lakes on Earth are covered with ice in the winter. When a lake
is covered with ice, this affects many ecosystem processes. The timing of when
ice forms and how long it lasts are both important, but so are the thickness and
clarity of the ice. Changing climate conditions have affected the duration of
ice cover as well as the quality of ice, as warm winter temperatures can cause
temporary thawing. There are three different ways to understand lake ice and its
impacts, each with strengths and weaknesses. Observations from the shore of the
lake are accurate but do not capture many aspects of lake ice timing, extent,
and quality. Remote sensing techniques provide new opportunities to expand the
scale and scope of research on ice-covered lakes. Lake models can estimate ice
parameters that are difficult to measure such as ice thickness. In order to
fully understand global lake ice dynamics and how they are changing, stronger
connections between limnologists, remote sensing scientists, and modelers are
needed. This project will support a workshop to study the dynamics of lake ice
formation and the consequences for ecosystem functioning of temperate lakes.
Participants in the workshop will join the annual Frozen Assets Festival in
Madison, Wisconsin and participate in public events. Researchers studying lake
ice from around the world will describe the ecological role and cultural value
of lake ice and demonstrate how remote sensing is used to understand lake ice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current lake ice database only contains 631
lakes with land-based observations, but there are millions of lakes that freeze
every year. The workshop will achieve four main goals: 1) Identify critical
questions about lake ice that require cross-disciplinary approaches, 2) Improve
cross-disciplinary understanding of how data are acquired and used, 3) Reach
consensus on core aspects of a cross-disciplinary lake ice database, and 4)
Develop a diverse community of researchers to foster collaborative projects. The
objectives will be achieved through a series of interactive sessions and
breakout groups during the workshop. A structure for a global lake ice database
will also be developed. There are specific activities before, during and after
the workshop to initiate and support community-building among scientists from
different fields. Ultimately, the workshop will produce guidance and resources
for a broad range of researchers working with ice-covered
lakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.