* 2033929
* Collaborative Research: Floodplain Management in the United States: Where, Why, and How Policies Have Shaped Flood Exposure Outcomes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Miyuki Hino, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 148,962.00

Nearly 41 million Americans are at risk of flooding, and new homes continue to
be built in flood-prone areas across the country. Federal, state, and local
governments can use a range of policies and programs to limit or reduce
construction in floodplains and promote development in safer areas. This award
supports research to explore why some communities have been able to use these
tools to grow without building in floodplains and why others have not. The
researchers develop an index to identify communities who have successfully
limited flood-prone development, and use case studies to explore the contexts,
actions, and policies that enable towns to successfully limit flood exposure. As
climate change leads to more intense storms and higher sea levels, effectively
managing development in floodplains is increasingly critical to the health,
prosperity, and well-being of communities across the United States. The research
will enhance efforts by researchers, policymakers, and the public to build
vibrant communities while limiting damage from climate extremes. The project
supports collaboration and learning across flood management contexts, as well as
the training of a diverse, inclusive next generation of climate adaptation
researchers and practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three
components. The first step is to measure floodplain development in
municipalities across the United States, filling a critical data gap. Using real
estate datasets, property buyout locations, and remotely sensed land use
information, the net change in housing units and the increase in impervious
surface from 2001 to 2016 are tabulated in relation to the regulatory 100-year
floodplain. Raw measurements are then converted into development indices by
scaling based on the municipalityâ€™s exposure to flood risk and total
development. By creating standardized measures of floodplain development, this
step enables strategic case selection and investigation of communities across a
range of floodplain development outcomes, which is not currently possible.
Second, patterns in floodplain development outcomes are analyzed using
geographic, social, and economic factors. Third, the project will explain why
communities differ in floodplain development outcomes using comparative case
studies. Specifically, this component examines how the adoption, purpose, and
implementation of legal and regulatory tools to avoid or retreat from
floodplains shape floodplain development outcomes. Municipalities are selected
in pairs: those that have limited floodplain development, and those that have
not. Interviews and document analysis are used to assess what legal and
regulatory tools were adopted, for what purpose, and how they were implemented,
considering both tool design and enforcement. By first creating a way to measure
development outcomes, this project provides a unique level of insight into both
patterns in floodplain development and how and why legal and regulatory policies
influence these outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.