* 2033363
* RII Track-4: in situ SSNMR Spectroscopy of Base Catalysts Used to Produce Statin Drugs
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Thomas Schwartz, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 12/31/2023
* USD 180,784.00

The production of pharmaceuticals and pharmaceutical building blocks often is
accomplished using traditional chemical synthesis methods. Unfortunately, these
methods can produce substantial waste products, and the starting materials are
often non-renewable. Recent developments in the availability of biomass and its
building blocks (e.g., sugars), however, provides a sustainable feedstock for
producing high-value chemicals, such as pharmaceutical precursors. Previous work
has developed catalytic methods for converting sugars into 3-hydroxy-gamma-
butyrolactone (HBL), which is an important building block for statin drugs such
as Crestor® and Lipitor®. This project is focused on strengthening collaborative
efforts between the University of Maine and the Ames Laboratory, which will
facilitate elucidation of the chemistry that occurs on these catalysts. In
particular, we will use solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(SSNMR) to identify the structures of chemical species adsorbed on the surface
of the catalyst and to track the reaction progress. Such a molecular-level
understanding of the operation of these catalysts is critical for the design of
new, improved materials that can further improve the efficiency of
pharmaceutical synthesis using renewable resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to develop a fundamental understanding of the chemistry that
occurs at the surface of a solid CaCO3 catalyst used to produce hydroxy-gamma-
butyrolactone (HBL) via what is believed to be a retro-Aldol reaction. In
collaboration with the nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) groups at
the Ames Laboratory, in situ 13C solid-state NMR (SSNMR) will be used to follow
the time-course of HBL production, which will allow for the identification of
important surface intermediates in the reaction, and elucidation of the reaction
mechanism as carried out by Ca-based catalysts. Subsequently, the high
sensitivity afforded by dynamic nuclear polarization 13C SSNMR will be used to
perform homonuclear correlation spectroscopy to identify the configurations of
molecules adsorbed on the CaCO3 surface. These fundamental mechanistic insights
will be key for the development of solid base catalysts for not only HBL
production but also other biomass-related reactions. Moreover, the collaboration
between the PI and the NMR groups at the Ames Laboratory will allow for the
development of additional SSNMR expertise at the home institution and will
provide further access to advanced SSNMR resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.