* 2033445
* RAPID: Assessing the Reactionary Response of High School Engineering Teachers to COVID-19
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Kenneth Reid, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 182,278.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted education on all fronts with no warning. The
response from universities to go online was relatively consistent among
universities, but K-12 education’s transition has not been as straightforward.
Existing issues of equity, access, and inclusion have required school districts,
schools, and teachers to adopt a variety of solutions, including no instruction,
online instruction, and shipping materials/supplies to students at home. The
existing pilot cohort of Engineering for Us All (E4USA) teachers provides a
unique opportunity to understand how teachers are transitioning, especially when
implementing a new and innovative engineering curriculum. This project allows
the multi-institution E4USA team (Virginia Tech, Arizona State University,
University of Maryland, Loyola University Chicago, Morgan State University,
Regent University, Towson University and Vanderbilt University) to collect data
on what has happened during the unforeseen and unique transition to ensure
better capture and understanding of the drivers behind decisions and changes
within high schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The E4USA Team will explore the
following research questions: (1) How did the pilot year E4USA teachers adapt
and deliver the curriculum during the COVID-19 disruption?; (2) What effect has
COVID-19 had on the initial cohort of teachers’ motivation, self-efficacy, sense
of expectancy/value, and imposter syndrome?; (3) Did E4USA student perceptions
of the program change after the disruption?; (4) What effect has COVID-19 had on
the potential effectiveness of the upcoming 2020 summer PD? A multifaceted
approach will be used to collect and analyze this data. Previously collected
focus group transcripts and discussion posts from the pilot teacher cohort will
be revisited along with post-COVID-19 focus groups and discussion posts to
explore changes due to the pandemic disruption. Focus groups will be conducted
with pilot teachers, incoming teachers, and students in the E4USA class to
explore how the COVID-19 disruption affected their perception of the class and
of engineering. Existing survey instruments for teachers are designed to measure
motivational, instructional and engagement self-efficacy. These will be modified
to ask teachers to rate these items side-by-side in the context of regular
classroom teaching and COVID-19 related adaptations. Existing feedback and
reflection questions designed as part of the initial survey will also be
modified to include adaptations related to COVID-19. Finally, we will examine
course artifacts before and after the COVID disruption. This study will allow
the E4USA team to develop a framework to advise and inform both internal E4USA
stakeholders and external education communities. Dissemination of these findings
has the potential to inform all who are developing teacher PD, those funding and
researching engineering in K-12 settings, local school administrations, and
other universities interested in working with K-12 schools. This unique
opportunity is urgent and may be the only mechanism to truly understand how to
plan for, rather than react to, future catastrophic
interruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.