* 2033910
* Adaptive dynamic coordination of damping controllers through deep reinforcement and transfer learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Hector Pulgar, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 09/30/2023
* USD 210,000.00

In the last decades, global environmental pollution, concerns with fossil fuel
reserves, and advances in technology have led to actions that are transforming
the power grid. Over the years, several states have adopted renewable portfolio
standards and goals to increase electricity production from renewable sources
such as solar and wind power. This has resulted in new grid behaviors in
response to disturbances in the system. This phenomenon has created concerns
about an increased risk of sustained oscillations that can cause poor electric
service quality and can even lead to blackouts. A search for new effective
control systems has created a new breed of controllers. Specifically, the design
of new controllers has been studied for wind turbines, energy storage systems,
and other emergent components. However, with this massive presence of non-
standard controllers and the existing controllers in conventional power plants,
there is an urgent need for coordination that would enhance the combined effect
of all the controllers to avoid conflicting interactions among them. Presently,
there is no coordination of this magnitude in either actual systems or
theoretical studies. The problem is challenging and it requires adaptability as
the grid is permanently changing during its operation. This project will add
intelligence to the grid, and through a real-time adaptable coordination, it
will diminish possibilities of blackouts by mitigating the unwanted oscillations
in the system. The proposed adaptive controller coordination has tremendous
potential to enable the current and forthcoming power grid with superior dynamic
performance and stability. This research will help increase awareness of the
importance of the power grid for our nation including the benefits and
challenges of renewable energy. Pre-college students and teachers will be
exposed to engineering principles and practical applications through
participation in outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
transform the conventional notion of controller coordination to make it suitable
for real-time control as well as adaptive to disturbances and operating
conditions. This project will seek controller coordinating signals that will
minimize the system oscillation energy. The physical concept of oscillation
energy not only allows avoiding the use of arbitrary objective functions, but
also serves as a mechanism to weight the importance of the different oscillation
modes without having to target in advance the most critical ones. As preliminary
work, the PIs have derived an analytical procedure for on/off controller
coordination using the time integral of the oscillation energy and its
sensitivity with respect to the controller gains. As this procedure is based on
the linearization of the state-space model, matrices, eigenvalues, and
sensitivities must be either calculated promptly after a disturbance or
collected previously off-line for the most representative operating points and
disturbances. To overcome this drawback, and to make the coordination feasible
and practical, a deep reinforcement learning (DRL) framework is proposed that
would make the coordination not only adaptive but also more effective. In this
regard, this DRL framework will allow exploring both discrete and continuous
coordinating signals. While a discrete signal can be seen as a controller's
on/off mechanism, a continuous signal can be understood as a quantity that can
scale up/down the controller gains within a specified range. Furthermore, as the
system can be subjected to extreme disturbances, this project proposes the use
of transfer learning so the DRL training can be transferred even if there are
topological changes or severe operational changes such as generator outages or
load rejections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.