* 2033320
* NSF2026: EAGER: Designing high performing novel landscapes to tackle climate change using gamification &amp; crowdsourcing
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Mark Lindquist, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,949.00

Environmental change will disproportionately affect cities, making adaptation
and mitigation efforts critical. Urban greenspaces are essential to these
efforts and provide additional benefits like recreation and neighborhood
beautification that play an important role in the well-being of residents. As
part of wider goals for creating resilient and livable cities, many local
governments are aiming to develop and enhance greenspace and tree cover.
Research suggests that urban greenspaces function best when they meet community-
specified needs and are connected to other natural areas inside and outside of
cities. Unfortunately, it can be both time and cost prohibitive to engage
residents in the design of greenspace and difficult to ensure connectivity. To
address these challenges this project develops Land.Info, an interactive
Decision Support Tool (DST) that combines realistic 3D visualizations and a
user-friendly interface to facilitate meaningful community engagement in the
design of urban greenspace at multiple scales. An online crowdsourcing approach
will be used to encourage broad participation and the creation of high-
performance designs. This collaborative approach will ensure a larger role for
communities in the creation and management of these landscapes by highlighting
the important connection between community needs and functioning greenspace.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award enriches the NSF2026 Idea Machine winning
entries Large Landscape Resilience by Design and Designing Ecosystems for the
Future NSF Idea Machine entries. The aim is to create a transformative approach
to community-engaged greenspace design for environmental resilience in cities by
developing, implementing, and evaluating the Land.Info DST. Land.Info will
present the user with a realistic 3D model coupled with a dashboard showing
scale-appropriate city- and regional-level environmental resilience targets. The
dashboard provides real-time feedback about site-scale performance in relation
to selected metrics, and contribution to larger landscape-scale connectivity and
resilience. The system will provide feedback to participants based on the
performance of the designs, and the DST will be deployed online in order to
crowdsource numerous design alternatives. Qualitative and quantitative methods
will be used to evaluate effectiveness of the DST, the collaborative approach,
and design outputs. The project will be conducted in Detroit, MI, and New
Orleans, LA, cities vulnerable to extreme events producing stormwater and
coastal flooding, and each grappling with broader challenges of urban renewal.
The research will potentially benefit residents and decision makers through the
creation of new tools and approaches to support community-engaged design of
urban greenspace for enhanced resilience, socio-ecological functioning, and
human well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.