* 2033607
* A1: The Urban Flooding Open Knowledge Network (UF-OKN): Delivering Flood Information to AnyOne, AnyTime, AnyWhere
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Sankarasubraman Arumugam, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 08/31/2023
* USD 5,299,998.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and potential societal benefit
of this Convergence Accelerator Phase II project is to minimize economic and
human losses from future urban flooding in the United States. Floods impact a
series of interconnected urban systems – the Urban Multiplex, that include the
power grid and transportation network, surface water and groundwater, sewerage
and drinking water systems, inland navigation and dams, all of which are
intertwined with the socioeconomic and public health sectors. This project uses
a convergent approach to integrate these multiple interconnected systems and
merges state-of-the-art practices in hydrological and hydraulic engineering;
systems analysis, optimization and control; machine learning, data and computer
science; epidemiology; socioeconomics; and transportation and electrical
engineering to develop an Urban Flood Open Knowledge Network (OKN), the final
deliverable of the project. It will be built with unprecedented engagement
between urban domain and flooding experts, practitioners, scientists, and
technology specialists. This partnership includes universities, nonprofits,
private companies, national labs, federal agencies, states, counties and
municipalities across the country. The Urban Flood-OKN will empower decision
makers and the general public by providing information on how much flooding may
occur from a future event and will also show its cascading impact on natural and
engineered infrastructures of an urban area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
convergence research and development team supporting this effort has integrated
researchers and methods from across disciplines including civil and
environmental engineering, hydrology, geography, computer science, meteorology,
public safety, emergency response, and economics. The partners engaged as
advisors, potential users, and developers include more than a dozen
municipalities and water management districts, federal agencies (NOAA, USDOT,
NIST, USGS, EPA, FEMA), a national lab (PNNL), non-profits (Consortium of Ocean
Leadership, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Consortium of Universities for
the Advancement of Hydrologic Science), for-profit organizations, consortia, and
individuals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The real impact of flooding on the Urban
Multiplex is currently very difficult to quantify because many of its systems
are independently designed and managed. Hence an open knowledge network that
captures the interconnectedness of these systems and how they impact each other
is critically needed. This project will semantically link the Urban Multiplex,
whose subsystems generate data that are currently not interoperable. This will
enable meaningful queries on flood-related information relevant to urban
sustainability. The Urban Flood-OKN will help increase urban resilience and
minimize damage from future urban floods due to changing climate and changing
land use patterns. It will allow identification of early-warning signals of
critical transitions/shifts of a complex interdependent infrastructure system
responding to external pressures, and how shifts will be affected by the
structure of the Urban Multiplex and failures propagating across its subsystems.
This project also has the potential to bring about a societal transformation in
the way practitioners, researchers, and the general public engage with, consume,
and act upon information about the potential response of the Urban Multiplex to
extreme external pressures. This project will allow internet queries that
produce actionable information on what to do during storms and flooding, how to
plan long-term, and how these decisions will contribute to urban sustainability
and resilience – all based on solid science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.