* 2033425
* RAPID: Uncovering the Effects of COVID-19 on Stress, Well-being and Economic Decision-Making
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Laura Razzolini, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2022
* USD 82,273.00

Measures taken to slow the spread of COVID-19, such as social distancing and
“stay-at-home” orders have generated the fear of income and employment losses in
addition to possibility of the individual, friends and family getting infected.
COVID-19 therefore increases burdens on mental well-being and stress levels.
Such increased stress levels affect individuals’ decision-making in risky
environments, choices over time-dated payments, willingness to donate to
charities, and honesty when provided the opportunity to cheat for personal gain.
The increased stress levels can impact preferences and choices and a range of
outcomes such as health, borrowing and savings, and human capital formation. It
therefore has long-term consequences for individual well-being. This research
project will use survey and field experiments to study the impact of COVID-19.
Specifically, it investigates three questions: (i) What are the effects of
COVID-19 on stress, mental and physical health, and preferences? (ii) Do
individuals believe in the effectiveness of strategies to slow the spread of
COVID-19 and do individuals have confidence in institutions responsible for
these strategies? and (iii) What are the welfare effects of the COVID-19
pandemic? In addition, how much money or how many years of life would
individuals give up in order to avoid exposure to a future pandemic similar to
COVID-19? The results of this study have important policy implications for
strategies to reduce the spread of, as well as reducing the effects of COVID-19
on the welfare of households. This research also will help establish the US as
the global leader in policies to reduce the effects of pandemics on
households.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a survey and field
experiment, built on an existing project, to study the impact of COVID-19
induced stress on economic preferences and decision-making. The survey has
several unique features that allows the PIs to quantify non-monetary costs of
COVID-19. The survey measures how exposure to COVID-19 affects self-reported
levels of stress, life satisfaction, and mental well-being. In addition, the
field experiment elicits individual specific measures of time and risk
preference, honesty, and pro-social/altruistic behavior, to examine whether and
how stress induced by COVID-19 affects economic preferences and decision-making.
The study will compare the effects of COVID-19, which may affect both stress and
income through changes in employment, to the effects of traffic and congestion,
which impact stress, but not income. Results from the study will inform the on-
going debate on stability of preferences and how preferences respond to
temporary shocks, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. The results will also provide
important inputs into policy formulation and implementation to reduce the spread
of, as well as mitigate the welfare effects of COVID-19. The research will
provide insights into which organizations are most trusted during a national
crisis, and therefore guide information strategies to prevent the spread of
pandemics. This research also will help establish the US as the global leader in
policies to reduce the effects of pandemics on
households.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.