* 2033262
* IIBR:Informatics:RAPID: Structure-based identification of SARS-derived peptides with potential to induce broad protective immunity
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Lydia Kavraki, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 05/31/2022
* USD 119,747.00

We are now living through a pandemic age caused by a novel strain of coronavirus
(SARS-CoV-2) with a fast-growing number of confirmed cases all over the world.
Several efforts are underway to produce new drug inhibitors, repurpose existing
drugs and devise combination treatments. At the same time, vaccine development
is targeting both neutralizing antibodies against envelope proteins of the
virus, and long-term cell-mediated immunity based on T cell lymphocytes. T cell
responses are particularly important for fighting viral infections, because they
can find and eliminate infected cells. This project will use advanced methods of
computational structural analysis to identify conserved small fragments
(peptides) of SARS-CoV-2 viral proteins that can be used as targets for a broad-
spectrum peptide-based vaccine, which could provide protective immunity against
several strains of SARS-CoV-2 and potentially other SARS-like coronaviruses. The
workflow will be shared by broad virology research community and any identified
peptides will be directly related to SARS-CoV variants and other pathogen study,
which will shorten vaccine and drug development cycle for any possible future
new coronaviruses. Educating and training future researchers are planned through
graduate and post-doc research mentoring, professional development, and career
guidance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a computational
pipeline to enable the identification of peptides that are conserved across
different SARS-CoV strains, and that can potentially be used to induce broad
protective cellular immunity against these viruses. The approach is based on the
combined use of gold-standard sequence-based methods, and new cutting-edge
methods for the structural modeling and analysis of peptides bound to different
Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) receptors. HLAs are responsible for displaying the
peptides to T-cell lymphocytes, and the proposed pipeline will enable the
identification of conserved hot-spots capable of triggering T-cell responses
against multiple SARS-CoV variants. In the context of this project, research
will target conserved peptides from the Nucleocapsid (N) protein of SARS-CoV-2.
If needed, optimization of predicted peptides will be conducted for different
prevalent HLA alleles. The proposed computational pipeline will be built using
general software-engineering principles, making it also applicable to study
different proteins from SARS-CoV variants, and even other pathogens. The work
done on this project can be found in http://www.kavrakilab.org/nsf-rapid-
sarscov2.html This RAPID award is made by the Infrastructure Innovation for
Biological Research (IIBR Informatics) Program in the Division of Biological
Infrastructure, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.