* 2033604
* A1: Systematic Content Analysis of Litigation Events (SCALES) Open Knowledge Network to Enable  Transparency and Access to Court Records
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Charlotte Alexander, Northwestern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 08/31/2023
* USD 5,520,669.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the Systematic Content
Analysis of Legal EventS Open Knowledge Network (SCALES OKN). The SCALES OKN
seeks to create the computational and data science tools needed to democratize
access to court records. Greater access to court records and analysis tools will
enable policy makers, scholars, journalists, entrepreneurs, and the public to
directly engage with and evaluate the workings of the U.S. courts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. court system collects detailed data about their
activities, but the challenge is that most of this data sits behind paywalls and
in scattered systems that are difficult to access. Highly limited access means
that court records are functionally inaccessible to the public. This limited
access to court records has prevented the development of tools to turn court
data into information and insights. The SCALES OKN will develop aggregation and
analysis tools that will bring together a community of public servants, academic
institutions, non-profits, private organizations, and individuals to better
understanding how litigation proceeds. Access to these new data and analysis
tools will enable legal scholars to better analyze litigation processes,
entrepreneurs to assess litigation costs and risk, journalists to investigate
equity in outcomes, advocacy organizations assess public policy needs, and the
public to better understand how the modern judiciary
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project joins 22 scholars in computer and
data science, economics, journalism, law, and sociology from eight universities
with a large and diverse range of partners from non-profit and for-profit
organizations. The SCALES OKN’s existing partnerships will enable users to ask
questions such as how lawsuits involving Fortune 500 companies or with
representation from large law firms progress, or if judicial rules are
consistently implemented. As the project develops, additional data and tools
will enable an even richer view into topics such as how new laws impact the
judiciary, corporations, and individuals, or how a changing economic climate
impacts people and organizations—whether that be because of a global economic
downturn or changes to the nature of employment as impacts from the COVID-19
epidemic unfold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team is building SCALES OKN as an
open and freely accessible knowledge network. Their efforts include developing
the tools to transform the data that define court records into actionable
information. This work will include the development of tools to extract and
transform data from court records, resolve and disambiguate entities, and enable
the automated identification of litigation events and construction of a
lawsuit’s lifecycle. Rather than having users depend on their own data skills,
the SCALES efforts plan to map user information requests onto the analyses
needed to address questions of relationships, correlations, trends, and
distributions of actions and decisions in the legal system. The team also plans
to build tools that facilitate the continued growth of open knowledge networks
through public contributions. The project will leverage machine learning to
enable users to develop further ontologies and merge additional datasets to
answer novel questions. Importantly, these advances will allow for the rapid
expansion of natural language processing techniques to legal contexts and
catalyze further computational analysis of the law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.