* 2033979
* Collaborative Research: A Multiscale Thermo-Hygro-Mechanical Investigation of Fibrous Porous Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Pania Newell, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 227,999.00

This collaborative research will explore how an isolated microscale confinement
of temperature and humidity impacts the mechanical performance of a fibrous
porous material such as face masks. Dramatic growth in the application of
fibrous porous materials in existing and emerging technologies in aerospace,
bioengineering, energy, electronics, etc. under complex environments demands an
in-depth understanding and quantifying the thermal and moisture effects on
mechanical performance of such systems. The project is focused on developing a
numerical framework that unveils the micro-mechanics of fibrous porous materials
and the impacts on their macroscopic performance. The outcome of this project
will be a first-of-a-kind thermo-hygro-mechanical constitutive model through
machine learning (ML) - informed homogenization that captures the mechanical
effects of fibrous porous materials in a realistic environment. This research
project will also provide exceptional opportunities for STEM participation of
women and underrepresented minorities to become the future leaders and
innovators of data-enabled engineering technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is to develop computational models that can provide accurate prediction
of a fibrous materialâ€™s performance in the confinement of a real-world
environment with varying thermal and humidity. The fibrous porous material
performance will be highly dependent on the inherent microstructural features
such as time-dependent vapor and moisture transports, fiber-vapor interactions,
fiber deformations, failure mechanisms, and microstructure evolution. The
objectives for this project are: 1) uncovering new knowledge in microscale
phenomena that have not previously been explored in detail involving complex
transient multi-physics interactions through rigorous numerical investigations,
2) developing a novel approach that combines the physics-based ML algorithms to
draw thermo-hygro-mechanical relationships, and 3) establishing a virtual
material testing platform that enables the future design of fibrous porous
materials with high mechanical efficiency and performance. These objectives will
answer the following two scientific questions: 1) what are the principal
mechanisms of localized deformation in a micro-confined domain with the co-
existence of thermal and moisture conditions? 2) how does micromechanics of
fiber exposed to environmental conditions manifest through macroscale? Answering
these questions will advance the fundamental understanding of interactions
between fiber and its surrounding environments at a micro-level and how the
interplay between humidity, temperature, and fiber structures defines the
performance of fibrous porous materials as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.