* 2033592
* B2: Learning Environments with Augmentation and Robotics for Next-gen Emergency Responders (LEARNER)
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Alexander Leonessa, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Cooperative Agreement
* Linda Molnar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 5,898,023.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact and potential societal benefits
of this Convergence Accelerator Phase II project will be to generate technology-
based learning solutions that can support and augment the performance and safety
of emergency response (ER) personnel. Academic researchers, core-technology
developers, stakeholders, and an advisory board constituted of leaders from
industry and government will come together to assess opportunities and
challenges related to the use of human augmentation technologies (HATs) that can
transform the process of foundational, use-inspired solution-finding for ER
work, and in a way that is transferable to other work contexts as well. This
will involve the development and evaluation of LEARNER (Learning Environments
with Augmentation and Robotics for Next-gen Emergency Responders), a mixed-
reality learning environment with physical, augmented, and virtual reality
components, for users to learn to work effectively with two HAT classes: powered
exoskeletons (EXO) and head-worn AR interfaces (AR). Our effort will contribute
to better conceptualize convergence work that can foster the understanding of
reciprocal human-technology interactions; contribute to systems that are
tailored, optimized, and continuously adapted for humans and their environments;
and education and lifelong learning to create the requisite workforce. Our
effort will also serve as a model for other research communities that can
benefit from working across traditional disciplinary boundaries in engineering,
computer science, learning sciences, and human resource development. We will
share our methods, learnings and findings with the ER community and the wider
world by leading a National Talent Ecosystem Council, a collaborative think-tank
organization, to support scientific research activities on workforce learning
with advanced technologies and organizing Learn-X symposiums on the topic of
technology-driven advances in learning-sciences and educational/human resource
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will develop and evaluate a functional
prototype of LEARNER â€“ an innovative accessible, modular, personalized, and
scalable learning platform to accelerate skilling and reskilling of ER workers,
particularly on nascent augmentation technologies that have significant
potential to change the very nature of work and improve efficiency, health, and
well-being. LEARNER will provide a unique training paradigm by incorporating
physiological, neurological, and behavioral markers of learning into real-time
scenario evolution. The proposed virtual and physical user interfaces and
interaction techniques will advance the human-computer interaction field by
providing a multisensory approach for ER simulation and synchronized virtual
interactions with physical environments and work artifacts. Furthermore, our
plan to field these HATs and develop an effective learning platform has
significant transformative potential as EXOs and AR will enable users to
formulate new work strategies at the individual and team levels enabled by their
newly extended physical and perceptual capabilities. Finally, our work will
advance learning by creating a scalable and replicable platform that will
increase the speed of integration and adoption of innovative and emerging HATs
that benefit the future workforce across diverse industrial sectors. Our
transdisciplinary approach converges and enhances the existing knowledge from
the disciplines of learning science, computer science, virtual and augmented
realities, human factors, cognitive psychology, and systems engineering to
create the LEARNER platform that integrates training course design, innovative
and emerging technology implementation, and new techniques of
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.