* 2033314
* SBIR Phase I:Automatic Touch Screen Disinfection (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Boris Kobrin, Innovasonic
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2021
* USD 255,730.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I is to equip any personal and public touch screen
displays with self-disinfection capabilities. Touch-screen technology is an
integral part of everyday life in applications such as personal smartphones,
industrial and medical equipment, and public touch screen stations. These
screens are convenient but become a hotspot for harmful germs and bacteria. The
use of touch screens could mitigate the social distancing policies of the
COVID-19 pandemic. This project will develop an ultrasonic disinfection method
to mitigate the spread of pathogens across such surfaces. A wide array of
applications could follow including: banks (ATMs), retail (groceries POS
stations, vending machines, restaurant order stations), transportation (self-
check kiosks, border control stations, planeâ€™s infotainment systems, automotive
dashboards), medical equipment, government buildings, museums and tourist
attractions, art and entertainment (interactive kiosks), and consumer
electronics (smartphones, smartwatches, tablets, laptops, touch screen equipped
appliances). Primary benefits of the methods would include speed and ability to
disinfect with high frequency, elimination of need for manual labor to disinfect
by this method, and expected safety to the user.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase I project will demonstrate the efficiency of ultrasonic disinfection
process using discrete piezoelectric transducers. Because these elements are not
transparent, they could be integrated with touch screen only by attachment at
the periphery of the display glass. This configuration will allow a basic
feasibility study for a proposed disinfection method. The project will use a
novel thin film piezoelectric technology where transducers are fabricated across
an entire display glass surface using thin film deposition and patterning
method. This configuration is beneficial since it would not require additional
device area or thickness beyond the current display glass product dimensions.
Moreover, this design is not limited to small display form-factors and could be
scaled to a larger display size. A thin film piezoelectric system is energy
efficient in operation. The disinfection process will be characterized at wide
ranges of ultrasonic frequencies and powers, and illustrated for coronavirus
(SARS-CoV-2) and bacterium (E. coli).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.