* 2033918
* NSF2026: EAGER:Cues and actions for efficient nonverbal human-robot communication
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sachit Butail, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,679.00

A large part of human group communication takes place nonverbally. People follow
gaze, avoid collisions, search and rescue in teams, all without speaking to each
other. In this respect, actions, rather than words, enable rapid two-way
communication of information without interfering with the task at hand or posing
additional mental burden required to understand speech and text. Integrating
human-machine intelligence would benefit from a similar natural and fluid
communication between humans and machines. This project develops novel methods
to advance human-robot intelligence through a series of experimental studies and
rigorous mathematical analysis. The experiments involve tasks designed to
exploit the strengths of robots and humans; robots are able to repetitively
explore a large environment and humans have better awareness of the situation
and domain expertise. The experimental tasks are inspired by the difficult
problem of monitoring the vast number of invasive aquatic species threatening
the Great Lakes region. The mathematical analysis is aimed at discovering
effective robot actions in response to changes in human cognitive load, and
efficient nonverbal interaction strategies between humans and robots. Research
results from this work will raise public awareness of invasive aquatic species
in the Great Lakes region and present human-robot teaming as a prominent
opportunity to solve large-scale problems. Engineering students involved in the
project will contribute to the new generation of scientific workforce who can
straddle boundaries across multiple disciplines such as robotics, computer
science, and ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
enable tighter integration of human-robot intelligence by teasing out components
of efficient nonverbal human-robot communication. These include: (i) level of
engagement of the robotic swarm as a function of human cognitive load, (ii)
recruitment strategies used by humans as they team up with the robotic swarm to
map a complex dynamic environment, (iii) perception of robot swarming patterns
by humans, and (iv) indirect indicators of human cognitive load that can enable
faster interpretation in the wild. Towards this, experimental conditions will
highlight the dependence of team performance on how robots respond to the
cognitive load experienced by the human participants. Experiments will be
conducted in virtual reality to enable realization of large robot swarms without
the accompanying design and sensor programming challenges. Scalability of swarm
robotics will be preserved by building all environmental sensing and interaction
strategies upon local interaction rules. Information-theoretic measures of
directional information flow will be used to quantify human perception of swarm
patterns and isolate movement correlates of cognitive load. This project has the
support of the Human-Centered-Computing Program in the IIS Division in the CISE
Directorate, and the NSF 2026 Fund Program in the Office of Integrated
Activities. The project enriches, extends, and explores the NSF 2026 Idea
Machine Winning Entry “Integrated Human-Machine
Intelligence”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.