* 2033210
* RII Track 4: Metrology and spectroscopy of individual nanomagnets dynamics using quantum sensor-based (NV- center) nano-magnetometry
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Kapildeb Ambal, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2024
* USD 209,287.00

Magnetic nanostructures, referred to as nanomagnets, are the foundation of
emerging information storage technologies such as magnetic random access memory
(MRAM) devices. Explosive growth in information science and technology sectors
demands new storage technologies that are smaller recording bits, densely
packed, fast, low-cost, and energy-efficient. Therefore, the magnetic
nanostructures used to build magnetic memory need to be small, fast, and uniform
across many devices. However, identically engineered nanomagnets' performances
deviate from each other due to geometric imperfections, non-uniform material
compositions, and manufacturing-related defects. A detailed diagnosis of
individual nanomagnets is necessary to unravel the effects of shape, sizes, and
manufacturing imperfections on nanomagnets' properties. However, the measurement
of nanomagnets' properties is complicated because they are small and buried
under many layers. The proposed project aims to measure the properties of
individual nanomagnets. The proposed measurement would expose what causes the
nanomagnets' performances to deviate from each other. The proposed research will
be performed with a collaborator at the University of Nebraska â€“ Lincoln (UNL).
The state-of-the-art research tools at the Nebraska Nanoscale Facility will be
used to design, fabricate, and measure nanomagnets' properties. The obtained new
knowledge will be implemented into the education plans, which empower the future
STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The confined geometry of magnetic
nanostructures causes spin dynamics to deviate from bulk thin films. In addition
to shifting the resonance frequency, multiple spin-wave modes are present. The
strong inhomogeneity in the internal magnetic field at the edge allows spin-wave
to localize within a few nanometers from the edge. Damages induced during
nanopatterning, such as impurities, edge, and interface roughness, can
significantly modify spin dynamics. The edges and defects' roles become critical
with decreasing size as the spin dynamics deviate among nanomagnets due to a
slight deviation in edge roughness and defect densities. The measurement of spin
dynamics is complicated because nanomagnets are often buried under nonmagnetic
layers, and both conventional metrology tools and routine magnetic measurements
are not adequately sensitive. Furthermore, it is difficult to retrieve an
individual nanomagnet's covert spin dynamics from the average response of many
similar nanomagnets. The proposed research investigates the spectroscopy of
spin-wave excitation modes characteristics of individual magnetic
nanostructures. The overall goals are to understand the fundamental device
physics that controls the dynamic properties of magnetic nanostructures and to
understand the source of defects, non-uniformity, and geometrical imperfection
among devices and their roles in device performances. The proposed novel method
is scanning Nitrogen-Vacancy (NV-) center-based magnetometry combined with real-
time locking and tracking of NV- center's magnetic resonance peak. The proposed
approach leverage the unique properties of NV- centers whose magnetic resonance
frequency shifts due to change in the magnetic field in the
vicinity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.