* 2033868
* NSF2026: EAGER: Involving the Public in the Discovery of Undiscovered Public Knowledge
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Shayan Doroudi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sohi Rastegar
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Scientific literature is ever growing, and this creates the opportunity to piece
together undiscovered public knowledge by making connections across publicly
available science information. An idea targeted by one of NSF’s Idea Machine
ideas is the “Globalization of Science Results with AI”, where artificial
intelligence (AI) can be used to sift through large volumes of science
literature and potentially synthesize new scientific results. This project seeks
to examine whether non-researchers can make connections across a large body of
scientific literature and synthesize new results and ideas that are relevant to
current research questions. This method is analogous to using AI to do the same
task and is timely given that current AI technology does not allow for the
completion of this type of task. By assessing the ability of non-researchers to
aid researchers in performing academic literature reviews, this project will
make advances in two additional NSF Idea Machine topics, “Creating Sustainable
Education Pathways” and “Reinventing Scientific
Talent”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is to be conducted in two phases. The
first is an exploratory phase that will seek to understand the differences in
ability between groups of non-researchers and researchers to complete literature
review tasks, determine the ability of non-researchers to find information among
different scientific topics, assess training methods, and assess the effects of
creating cohorts of individuals that show promise in a specific area of science.
The project will explore the viability of creating a paid workforce of trained
workers that can conduct quality scientific literature searches, potentially
across disciplines. The generation of new scientific knowledge is expected to be
generated at the intersections of scientific disciplines. In the second phase,
deployment, a field study will be used to determine how well the findings in the
first phase work when employed in real-world use case literature searches. This
project will provide a novel means for the public to engage with scientific
research, specifically targeting high school and undergraduate students who are
historically underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.