* 2033426
* RAPID: Identifying Biophysical Determinants of Binding to the SARS-CoV-2 Main Viral Protease
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* John Chodera, Sloan Kettering Institute For Cancer Research
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 199,999.00

John Chodera of the Sloan Kettering Institute for Cancer Research is supported
by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry to identify the biophysical determinants of
inhibition for the SARS-CoV-2 main viral protease (Mpro). Mpro is an essential
enzyme in the virus that causes COVID-19. The Chodera lab develops physical
models accelerated by inexpensive consumer-grade graphics processing units
(GPUs) to predict which small molecules might bind and inhibit disease-relevant
proteins. The Chodera lab is part of the Folding@home Consortium, a research
collaboration that uses the Folding@home distributed computing environment to
run these calculations. This computing resource is donated by a network of
volunteers around the world. Recently, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
Folding@home became the largest computing platform of any kind in the world,
with &gt;25M CPU cores and &gt;600K GPUs participating at any given time. The
Chodera lab will use Folding@home to integrate computation and experiment to
rapidly identify high-affinity inhibitors of Mpro and to elucidate key
interactions required for effective inhibition. They work with collaborators at
Informatics Matters (a team that works to enumerates synthetically feasible
compounds), Enamine (to synthesize compounds), the Diamond Light Source (to
crystallize chemical compounds), the London lab at the Weizmann (to assay
compounds), and PostEra (to make the results rapidly and publicly available in a
manner that can accelerate research on Mpro inhibition in other research
laboratories and pharmaceutical companies).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Over the last
two months, Folding@home has become the world’s largest computing resource
(&gt;2.5 exaflops, &gt;25M CPU cores, &gt;600K GPUs) in service of COVID-19
specific research. John Chodera, a founding investigator in the Folding@home
Consortium, and collaborators have established a rapid pipeline to go from the
selection of molecules within the 14B compound Enamine REAL Space virtual
synthetic library to key biophysical data (X-ray structures and affinities) to
SARS-CoV-2 main viral protease (Mpro) with ~2 week turnaround time. His
laboratory is now using relative alchemical free energy methods to assess
strategies for rapidly progressing an initial set of 68 small molecule X-ray
structures from an initial screen for weak inhibitors toward high-affinity
ligands. The team also identifies key biophysical determinants of high-affinity
ligand binding within the active site of Mpro, and benchmark the propsective
accuracy of small molecule force fields to inform the development of next-
generation force fields. The laboratory is selecting molecules from Enamine REAL
Space to be synthesized, soaked to produce X-ray structures by DiamondMX/XChem,
and assayed for Mpro inhibition by the London lab at the Weizmann Institute via
collaborations already in place. All computational data is being rapidly
disseminated online via the NSF-funded Molecular Sciences Software Institute
(MolSSI) COVID-19 Molecular Structures and Therapeutics Hub and the open science
COVID Moonshot program to maximize multiple downstream uses for fundamental
research and the opportunity for broader impacts in applied and translational
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.