* 2033131
* RII Track-4: Pressure Tuning of Magnetic Topological Insulators using Synchrotron X-ray Techniques
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Wenli Bi, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 12/31/2023
* USD 212,530.00

Quantum technology, such as quantum computing and spintronics, transitions
quantum mechanical properties into practical applications. The key to accelerate
this technology is to understand the fundamental physical properties governed by
quantum mechanics in novel materials. This EPSCoR project aims to develop a new
experimental approach to advance the fundamental understanding of quantum
magnetic materials. Specifically, modern synchrotron X-ray techniques combined
with external pressure, a controllable degree of freedom, will be used to reveal
the complex and exotic quantum phenomena in newly discovered materials
incorporating intrinsic magnetism with non-trivial electronic structure. The
microscopic insights gained in this project will guide the material design for
desired functional properties. This support will strengthen the collaborative
efforts between University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) and Advanced Photon
Source (APS) at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL). It allows the PI’s group to
gain full exposure to the state-of-the-art synchrotron facilities at APS and
develop new technique that will expand the research capability at UAB.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the proposed research are to unravel the
intriguing interplay of magnetic properties with the Dirac fermions and reveal
rich quantum phases by applying external pressure. The proposed research will
develop a novel experimental approach to study the interplay of magnetic order
and nontrivial topology and provide feedback to synthetic design of novel
quantum materials. Using pressure as a tuning knob, interplay of crystal
structure and magnetism will be established. The proposal adopts a combined
experimental approach using the state-of-the-art synchrotron spectroscopy, X-ray
diffraction, transport, and diamond anvil cell technology. Magnetic, transport,
and structural properties of two model magnetic topological insulators, EuSn2Pn2
and EuMnBi2 will be investigated systematically. This EPSCoR project will enable
PI’s research group to perform collaborative research at the Advanced Photon
Source (APS), Argonne National Laboratory (ANL). These activities will offer
invaluable learning experience on the frontier synchrotron techniques through
extensive interactions with the well-established experts at ANL, thus promoting
the career development of next-generation scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.