* 2033454
* RII Track-4: van der Waals polaritonics for mid-infrared light emitters
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Siyuan Dai, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2024
* USD 228,110.00

The mid-infrared (mid-IR) is part of optical spectrum that is invisible to the
naked eye but important for a wealth of technologies, including biochemical
sensing, gas monitoring, thermal illumination and energy control, security and
defense, and many others. Despite these vital applications, research and
development in the mid-IR have been stymied due to the sparsity of efficient
light sources in this wavelength range. This fellowship project aims to develop
bright mid-IR light sources by coupling nanometer scale material dots (quantum
dots) with propagating nanoscale optical waves (polaritons). By controlling the
properties of the polaritons in layer materials, the research team plan to
enhance the intensity of light emitted from quantum dots. The PI will
collaborate with researchers at the University of Texas at Austin (UT Austin) to
synthesis quantum dots-polariton structures and to perform the mid-IR optical
characterizations. This fellowship project is expected to develop useful mid-IR
light sources that will benefit a broad range of applications listed above. The
project will also broaden the research capabilities of the PI and Auburn
University in IR optoelectronics and quantum-engineered material synthesis, as
well as establish long-term collaborations between Auburn University and other
institutions including UT Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the
project is to develop bright and controllable light emitters for the technically
important mid-IR spectra range where light wavelength spans from 3 to 20 m. For
this purpose, the PI proposes to incorporate current quantum dots mid-IR
emitters with polaritonic van der Waals (vdW) materials. Polaritons in vdW
materials are highly confined and relatively low-lossy, therefore possess high
photonic density of states to enhance the mid-IR light emission by increasing
the radiative recombination rate of electrons in quantum dots. The PI and his
collaborators will grow mid-IR semiconductor quantum dots using the state-of-
the-art molecular beam epitaxy at UT Austin. The research team will then
fabricate vdW polaritonic materials on top of the quantum dots and fine tune the
top surface structure to optimize light emission into the free space. Graphene
and configurable vdW heterostructures will be involved to implement dynamic
tunability for the light emitters. The quantum dot-polariton emitters will
finally be characterized by mid-IR photoluminescence spectroscopy to test the
light emission performance. The successful demonstration of this project will
deliver bright and dynamically tunable mid-IR light sources and complement
current knowledge in light-matter interactions with a better understanding of
quantum dot – polariton interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.