* 2033846
* RAPID: Dual COVID-19 and Influenza Virus Detection via Target Antibody-Functionalized Graphene Field-Effect Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Andrew Ellington, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 05/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Both COVID-19 and Influenza are infectious respiratory diseases, and their
symptoms are hard to distinguish at the early stage. Influenza, commonly known
as the flu, spreads through the world in yearly outbreaks, mainly in the fall-
winter season, and causes up to 650,000 death per year with 3-5 million severe
cases. COVID-19, emerged recently, has already been positively detected in
almost 4 million individuals worldwide. Due to the absence of effective, low-
cost, point-of-care detection methods, the number of affected individuals is
estimated to be, perhaps, 10- fold higher. While scientists, doctors, and whole
nations are hard at work to resolve the pandemic, there exists a pressing and
urgent need for diagnostics that can differentiate between COVID-19 and
influenza. The situation is such that a second wave of the coronavirus spread
will likely appear in the fall/winter of 2020, which also coincides with the
seasonal outbreak of influenza. Therefore, it is of rapid importance to develop
a dual specific and selective biosensor for direct confirmation of the presence
of influenza and/or COVID-19 virus within the patient’s body fluids, such as
saliva. Authors of the work propose to utilize ultrasensitive graphene
nanomaterial transistors, that are functionalized with the antibodies as the
virus-specific biosensors. The researchers aim to build a sensor explicitly
designed towards the detection of virus bodies directly. Successful completion
of this project will lead to an early-stage diagnosis tool that differentiates
between influenza and COVID-19, yet embodied into a single device, which is
crucial for containing the forthcoming outbreak in order to promote public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators intend to approach the problem of
virus detection by building a specific dual bioelectronic sensor that employs
electrolyte-gated graphene-based field-effect transistors. Among other potential
detection methods and transducers, electrolyte-gated graphene field-effect
transistors are known for their extremely high sensitivity to analytes. Besides,
graphene is biocompatible, stable in ambient, and inert in the aqueous
environments. The graphene channel will be functionalized with specific
antibodies through a 1-pyrenebutanoic acid, succinimidyl ester (PASE) linker
molecule. PASE will facilitate the particular conjugation with both COVID-19
specific, and influenza-specific antibodies. Building upon the direct PASE-
antibody conjugation, the researchers plan to explore another, more robust and
modular path, which employs conjugation of graphene with ssDNA and use the
antibody:compDNA hybrids to improve the antibody attachment onto graphene. The
particular conjugation of graphene-to-SARS-CoV-2 and graphene-to-H1N1 specific
antibodies will be studied within the scope of the work. In order to test the
COVID-19 and Influenza biosensors, the spike protein (S1) and H1 hemagglutinin
protein (H1 HA) will be used as analytes, respectively. Based on the protein
biosensing, knowledge on the biosensor’s detection limit, their sensitivity,
dynamic range, accuracy, and response time will be obtained. Following the dual
conjugation of two graphene channels with specific antibodies, one additional
channel will be chemically passivated in order to provide a reference signal and
allow for the removal of non-specific signals. The inactivated SARS-CoV-2 and
H1N1 viruses will then be used to explore the real-world application properties
of the built biosensor, exploring specificity and selectivity of such a sensor,
cross-reactivity, and throughput. The specific passivation will enable reliable
signal recording at the next stage of virus detection, using real body fluid
samples to assess the biosensor. Combining a specific and dependable
biomolecular integration of both SARS-CoV-2 and H1N1 viruses with graphene’s
electrical readout will enable an accurate, specific, and rapid test for the two
deadly respiratory diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.