* 2033654
* RECODE: Harnessing Stem Cell Heterogeneity to Navigate Lineage Specification and Maturity in Real Time
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Brendon Baker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,281,301.00

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC), which have the capacity to become any
cell type, have the potential to transform drug discovery, regenerative
therapies, and personalized medicine for a broad range of human disease.
Unfortunately, current methods yield mixed cell types with variable
reproducibility and poor subsequent maturation, leaving many cells stalled in
embryonic-like states. The goal of this project is to develop a novel framework
based on live imaging and real-time manipulation that will determine the basic
biology of stem cell differentiation into cardiac lineages. The knowledge gained
will be used to develop practical tools to enhance control of cardiac-directed
stem cell differentiation and maturation. These tools, including materials
(cells), analytic tools (software) and an online database for standardizing
differentiation protocols and outcomes, will be made widely available. The
approach taken has the potential to impact the ability to control stem cell
differentiation across a broad range of cell and tissue types. The project’s
educational component involves multiple efforts designed to introduce students
to the cross-disciplinary fields of developmental biology, genetics,
systems/computational biology, and mechanobiology. Activities include
involvement with existing programs (e.g. Girls in Science and Engineering,
Detroit Area Pre-College Engineering Program), development of a new hands-on
laboratory module centered on stem cell differentiation and a new course in stem
cell biology, and providing rotation opportunities for medical students,
residents and fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project’s goals are to develop
a comprehensive understanding of cardiac lineage specification from the earliest
stage in iPSC differentiation, to create robust methods to control
differentiation from mesodermal precursors through several cardiac lineage
bifurcations, and to direct maturation signals in specific cardiac lineages. The
project builds on several innovative approaches developed in the investigators’
labs, including the ability to constrain where cells can adhere to a substrate
with micro precision, to image BMP, Nodal, and Wnt signaling at the single cell
level over multiple days of differentiation and to fabricate a micron-scale 2D
(M2D) muscle bundle platform that generates &gt;4000 muscle bundles per device
and can be used as an efficient testbed for dissection of multiple variables
that drive maturation. To accomplish the project’s goals, tools will be
developed to enable real time adjustment of differentiation methods to control
lineage specification and minimize unwanted heterogeneity during differentiation
in diverse iPSC lines. The Research Plan is organized under two Aims. AIM 1 is
to direct cardiomyocyte (CM) differentiation through single cell tracking and
real-time manipulation. Mechanistic insight into cardiac differentiation will be
obtained by tracking signaling at the single cell level, manipulating exogenous
cues in response to these real time observations, and linking the cell
environment to specific transcription factor activity using CRISPR
activation/inhibition. Heterogeneous differentiation will be dissected as cells
move down the lineage tree: from iPSC to mesoderm, from mesoderm to endoderm and
first and second heart fields (FHF, SHF), and from FHF to the morphologic left
ventricle and SHF to the atria and right ventricle/outflow tract. AIM 2 is to
improve maturation of iPSC-CMs from FHF and SHF cardiac lineages by identifying
the key nodes that drive CMs toward a mature and stable state. The M2D muscle
bundle platform will be used to dissect combinatorial influences of exogenous
and endogenous soluble cues with real-time monitoring. The relationships will be
further interrogated with additional modulation of the mechanical and
extracellular matrix. This aim will identify microenvironmental cues and
underlying transcriptional networks that regulate CM maturation. In summary,
this project’s emphasis on deciphering the underlying mechanisms of stem cell
fate decisions and tissue-specific maturation is consistent with NSF’s “Rules of
Life” Big Idea. The approaches established will yield critical insights into
stem cell differentiation, define the key determinants of cardiac lineage
specification and maturation, and enable real time monitoring and control of
iPSC differentiation. Moreover, this project will address major hurdles that
currently limit the use of stem cell technologies for a variety of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.