* 2033332
* Characterizing Expert Behavior During Interactive Parametric Building Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Catherine Berdanier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 316,623.00

Parametric design strategies allow experts in the Architecture-Engineering-
Construction industry to rapidly consider many potential options in early
building design. Optimization techniques applied to parametric models can
systematically find the best options in terms of quantitative design goals such
as energy use or structural efficiency. This project will investigate how
optimization techniques can best assist designers in managing qualitative and
quantitative goals simultaneously. In a broader contex, the project will study
how emerging human-computer collaborative tools influence design choices, how
cognitive processes relate to the outcomes they produce, and especially how they
are contextualized in architectural engineering. The project will characterize
the behavior of expert designers as they employ optimization-based parametric
design methods to formulate and explore design options in early-stage design.
The project includes educational and outreach activities such as industry
workshops to retrain established, traditionally analog-trained engineers in new
digital design techniques and software. These activities will help to prepare a
workforce to be computationally agile in their careers, with the ability to use
digital tools to design buildings that are more energy-efficient, safe, durable
and sustainable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ an empirical
multiple methods research design to investigate experienced practitioners’
design strategies using eye tracking and observational data. The main research
question under study is: “What patterns of design behaviors do architectural
engineers employ while constructing and exploring a parametric model using
optimization-based tools?” Expert building designers will be recruited from
architecture and engineering design firms and will participate in a design task
employing data-informed parametric modeling. Their behaviors will be captured
using time-resolved recorded data of the authentic design task from the design
software and eyetracking hardware. The multiple streams of data will be analyzed
using machine learning capabilities such as Hidden Markov Modelling and other
statistical methods to characterize behaviors. The project will provide a
foundation for evidence-based approaches to computational design tool
development and will contribute to design theory in digital interfaces,
optimization, parametric modeling, analysis of multiple real-time data streams.
A related objective is to improve education of established design professionals
in the use of emerging visual programming interfaces, parametric design, and
optimization concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.