* 2033364
* RII Track-4: Investigating the Effects of Faulting on Chemical Exchange Between Seawater and Earth’s Mantle at Slow Mid-Ocean Ridges
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Timothy Schroeder, Bennington College
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 153,509.00

The mid-ocean ridge system is a 65,000 km-long mountain range that wraps around
the Earth at the center of each ocean basin. New tectonic plate is continuously
generated along the ridges at rates of one to 20 cm per year. Global seawater
composition, and thus Earth’s climate, is maintained over geologic timescales by
a balance between chemical-exchange reactions that occur when seawater
infiltrates into hot rock at mid-ocean ridges, and salts flowing into the ocean
from continental rivers systems. Mantle rock has a radically different chemical
and mineral composition than crustal rock, and the nature of its chemical
interactions with seawater, along with the larger implications for seawater
composition, are poorly understood. The goal of this proposal is to build
understanding of the processes by which seafloor mantle-rock exposures are
fractured to permit seawater infiltration, and thus facilitate water-rock
chemical exchange on roughly half of the global mid-ocean ridge system. Results
from this study will be integrated in the undergraduate Earth Science courses
and independent research projects for undergraduate students at Bennington
College, a small liberal arts institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
this project are to understand how pre-existing ductile deformation fabrics and
the tectonic environment of mantle peridotite exposures control the process by
which rock permeability is generated during brittle fracturing. Rock samples
collected from three mantle peridotite exposures along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge
(MAR) that formed by very different types of fault zones will be examined using
several distinct microanalysis and imaging techniques: 1) micro-computed
tomography and scanning electron microscope imaging will be used to characterize
the micro-scale geometry of fracture networks, 2) thermogravimetric analysis and
helium gas pycnometry will be used to quantify the degree of hydrothermal
alteration and 3) confocal Raman spectroscopy will be used to place additional
constraints on the nature of hydrothermal exchange with micro-analysis of
alteration minerals and trapped fluids. Rock samples will be obtained from
collections at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and from the Bremen Core
Repository in Bremen, Germany. The outcomes of this research will have broad
applications to understanding the deep biosphere, and potential origins of life
on Earth as well as potential hosts for life on other
planets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.