* 2033790
* Machine-Learning Assisted Flapping Agitator Design Methodology Towards Enhanced Thermal-Hydraulic Performance
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Chung-Lung Chen, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 12/31/2023
* USD 335,042.00

Thermal transport in air-cooled heat exchangers is critical for effective
cooling of power plants, data centers, and electronic devices. However, the
performance of an air-cooled heat exchanger is often restricted by insufficient
mixing of hot and cold air, which is needed to reduce the required fan power.
Over the past few decades, much effort has been devoted to investigating
enhanced heat transfer by introducing additional air turbulence. Among all the
methods, flow-induced vibration of a flexible thin-film agitator has drawn much
attention since it requires no external power, and the large flapping amplitude
of the agitator strengthens the intensity of the turbulence. This project will
conduct comprehensive experimental investigations to fully establish the
flapping dynamics of agitators and resulting heat-transfer characteristics. It
will also develop a machine-learning assisted design methodology to enhance
performance. The project will integrate machine learning into fluid dynamics
research and education, instill the excitement of engineering in high-school
students through summer camps, and attract prospective students from under-
represented groups towards STEM fields in college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to develop a machine-learning assisted methodology
for fast-optimization of the flexible agitator design in various channel flow
conditions towards the maximum synthetic thermal-hydraulic performance. The
research approach includes i) Acquire the training data through systematic
experimental characterization of self-agitator dynamics on the heat transfer
enhancement; ii) Characterize the vortex dynamics due to the added self-agitator
in the channel flow with a state-of-the-art stereo time-resolved particle image
velocimetry system; iii) Establish a machine‚Äêlearning assisted design
methodology by using experimental results as training and guiding data to bridge
between the given flow and structure conditions and the resultant self-agitator
vibration mode, vibration amplitude, vibration frequency, vortex shedding
frequency and evolution on the final thermal-hydraulic performances. This work
will serve as a comprehensive step towards achieving a fundamental understanding
of vorticial flow dynamics under the effect of fluid-structure interaction. Such
a knowledge base will pave the way for designing novel air-side heat exchangers
that can achieve high-efficiency heat transfer without unduly increasing pumping
power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.