* 2033286
* RII Track-4: Physiology of Sulfate-Reducing Bacteria under Energy-Limiting conditions
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Aude Amelie Picard, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 175,987.00

Bacteria have the ability to survive long periods of time under energy-limiting
conditions, common in natural environments. To understand the fundamental
aspects of energy limitation, bacteria can be studied in cultures for months to
years without re-supplying the medium with energy sources. This project aims to
study long-term cultures of sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB), which drive the
sulfur and carbon biogeochemical cycles in anoxic environments. The proposed
research will investigate the integrity of the cell and outer membranes of SRB
and quantify metabolic processes to gain physiological insights into the long-
term survival of SRB. This project will advance fundamental knowledge about
long-term survival of microorganisms in anoxic environments. The project is also
of importance for the economically vital processes that are influenced by SRB,
such as the corrosion of iron infrastructure, wastewater treatment, and
bioremediation of metal contaminated environments. This fellowship will improve
1) STEM education through the delivery of lectures on high-resolution imaging to
graduate courses, 2) the research capacity of the PI, and 3) the research
infrastructure at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this project are to characterize the extended life cycle of sulfate-
reducing bacteria and to decipher the role of sulfide mineral crusts in
preserving the viability of SRB in their extended life cycle. Our preliminary
experiments have indicated that mineral-encrusted bacteria can be preserved
alive for several years and regrow in fresh medium when non-encrusted cells of
similar age do not regrow. The proposed research will characterize the metabolic
and physiological changes in mineral-free and encrusted sulfate-reducing
bacteria in the long-term stationary phase. It will also identify the early
steps of mineral crust formation at the surface of cells and the steps of
mineral crust removal when cells regrow in fresh medium. Transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) will be used to image the integrity of the cells and their
membranes and cell wall at high resolution, while electron diffraction will be
used to gain information about the mineral phases forming around cells. Super
resolution fluorescence microscopy (iPALM) will be used to localize and quantify
metabolic processes such as new protein synthesis, proton gradient formation and
adenosine triphosphate synthesis during the extended life cycle of mineral-free
and encrusted SRB. This project will lead to a better understanding of long-term
survival of sulfate-reducing bacteria and of the role of sulfide minerals in
preserving long-term viability of SRB, which contribute to the formation of
those minerals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.