* 2033995
* NSF2026: EAGER: An Ecologically Inspired Human-Machine Intelligence Approach to Recognizing Similitude in Multi-Scale Watershed Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Donna Rizzo, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,971.00

With support from the Division of Earth Sciences (GEO/EAR) and the NSF 2026 Fund
Program in the Office of Integrated Activities, Professors Hamshaw, Lee,
Pespeni, Rizzo and Underwood at the University of Vermont &amp; State
Agricultural College are awarded this EAGER grant. This project addresses the
NSF 2026 Idea Machine topic of Universal Similitude Across Scales, focusing on
the broad area of Earth Sciences. Freshwater resources face growing pressures
from extreme events and land use changes, which result in varying trends in
water quantity and quality at multiple scales (from small creeks to large rivers
and from storm events to decadal cycles). To build a greater understanding of
the impacts to water quality, this interdisciplinary research project will
investigate trends in short-term and long-term water quality and streamflow data
and possible similarities and associations to watershed attributes (e.g. land
use, topography). The project relies on water quality data archived at research
stations across the continental U.S. available through databases of streamflow
and water quality. To analyze these large quantities of water quality data, a
combination of artificial intelligence and traditional scientific methods will
be used. The societal importance of this project includes applying advances in
machine learning and artificial intelligence to help researchers and
environmental managers analyze and leverage limited monitoring resources
collected at different sites and to develop best practices for monitoring
environmental change. The project will fund a workshop that brings together
graduate students from engineering and hydrological sciences with those from
biology and microbiology to share data, analytical methods, and pursue
interdisciplinary approaches that translate across disciplinary
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying similarities in watershed
characteristics and water quality conditions across the continental U.S. can
help identify the causes of environmental change and enables the translation of
research from individual studies to larger regions. Because the sheer size and
diversity of these long-term monitoring data present challenges for traditional
scientific and statistical methods, we will employ artificial intelligence
methods along with domain experts in hydrology and ecology in an integrated
human-machine learning framework. In so doing, we aim to identify the common
environmental variables and parameters that are linked to similarity across
scales and investigate trends in short-term and long-term water quality and
streamflow data. Organizational frameworks from ecological and biological
disciplines will be applied to create a new approach to organizing and
summarizing similarities in watershed signals, where watersheds are grouped into
guilds based on their similar functional traits. By identifying patterns of
similitude in these large data sets and extracting watershed attributes with
linkages to these patterns, findings of research on ecosystem processes
conducted in individual watershed studies can be more readily translated to
larger regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.