* 2033973
* RAPID: Rapid Creation of a Data Product for the World’s Specimens of Horseshoe Bats and Relatives, a Known Reservoir for Coronaviruses
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Nelson Rios, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,999.00

The award to Florida State University will support research contributing to the
development of georeferenced, vetted, and versioned data products of the world’s
specimens of horseshoe bats and their relatives for use by researchers studying
the origins and spread of SARS-like coronaviruses, including the causative agent
of COVID-19. Horseshoe bats and other closely related species are reported to be
reservoirs of several SARS-like coronaviruses. Species of these bats are
primarily distributed in regions where these viruses have been introduced to
populations of humans. Currently, data associated with specimens of these bats
are housed in natural history collections that are widely distributed both
nationally and globally. Additionally, information tying these specimens to
localities are mostly vague, or in many instances missing. This decreases the
utility of the specimens for understanding the source, emergence, and
distribution of SARS-COV-2 and similar viruses. This project will provide
quality georeferenced data products through the consolidation of ancillary
information linked to each bat specimen, using the extended specimen model. The
resulting product will serve as a model of how data in biodiversity collections
might be used to address emerging diseases of zoonotic origin. Results from the
project will be disseminated widely in opensource journals, at scientific
meetings, and via websites associated with the participating organizations and
institutions. Support of this project provides a quality resource optimized to
inform research relevant to improving our understanding of the biology and
spread of SARS-CoV-2. The overall objectives are to deliver versioned data
products, in formats used by the wider research and biodiversity collections
communities, through an open-access repository; project protocols and code via
GitHub and described in a peer-reviewed paper, and; sustained engagement with
biodiversity collections throughout the project for reintegration of improved
data into their local specimen data management systems improving long-term
curation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award will produce and deliver a
georeferenced, vetted and consolidated data product for horseshoe bats and
related species to facilitate understanding of the sources, distribution, and
spread of SARS-CoV-2 and related viruses, a timely response to the ongoing
global pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2 and an important contribution to the global
effort to consolidate and provide quality data that are relevant to
understanding emergent and other properties the current pandemic. This RAPID
award is made by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) using funds
from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.