* 2033424
* RII Track-4: Low-temperature Laser Sintering and Melting of Semiconductors Through Selective Excitation of Soft Phonons
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Yan Wang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2024
* USD 274,544.00

Sintering and melting has become an integral processing step in consolidating
semiconductor powders into compact engineering components. Laser sintering and
melting stands out among processing options due to its high throughput,
controllability, and natural ability to 3D print components. However,
conventional laser processes typically heat materials to such high temperatures
that the target region fully or partially melts, which can damage the sintered
region and its surroundings due to overheating. This project aims to melt and
sinter semiconductors at a reduced temperature by exploiting ultrafast laser-
material interactions at the electronic and atomic levels. Complementary
experimental-computational studies leveraging the advanced laser systems at the
University of Nebraska, Lincoln (UNL) will be conducted to understand the
dynamics of atoms in semiconductors under laser irradiation. Successful
completion of this project will improve 3D printing technologies for various
modern applications that rely on nanocrystalline semiconductors, such as solar
cells and thermoelectric materials. This project will improve laser
manufacturing education at the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR) through the
development of innovative K-12 programs and undergraduate/graduate-level
curricula. The ultrafast laser manufacturing techniques acquired through this
project will also enhance Nevada and UNRâ€™s competitiveness in additive
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to achieve
laser sintering and melting of semiconductors at significantly reduced
temperatures compared to those in conventional laser processes, which will
greatly reduce the adverse thermal effects (e.g., unwanted grain growth that
degrades material properties) caused by prolonged high material temperature. To
achieve this goal, three specific objectives will be pursued with complementary
computational-experimental techniques: 1) identify the patterns of atomic
motions that can effectively and efficiently trigger the melting of
semiconductors using atomistic modeling; 2) elucidate the melting dynamics using
quantum-mechanical calculations; and 3) demonstrate the proposed process using a
dual-laser system that combines the strengths of the advanced ultrafast laser
systems and the tunable-wavelength continuous laser systems at UNL. The
successful completion of this project will lead to a low-temperature laser
sintering and melting process with improved ability to control the
microstructures and properties of 3D printed semiconductors, enabling 3D
printing of high-quality thermoelectric modules, solar cells, electronic
devices, etc. The acquired expertise in ultrafast laser processing, developed
K-12 education programs on advanced manufacturing, and strengthened
collaboration with an established laser manufacturing researcher from UNL will
greatly strengthen the competitiveness of Nevada, UNR, and the principal
investigator in the field of additive manufacturing and related applications
like energy and electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.