* 2033355
* RII Track 4: Probabilistic Dynamic Control Stability Analysis in Power Grids with High Penetration of Renewable Resources
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Di Wu, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 01/31/2024
* USD 191,781.00

The legacy power grid is undergoing a radical transformation. Notably, the
impact of distributed renewable energy resources is challenging the safe and
reliable operation of the power grid and calling for innovative techniques to
enhance the reliability and stability in power grids with high penetration of
renewable resources. With the support of this NSF EPSCoR RII Tack-4 fellowship,
the PI and a Ph.D. student will receive training on new techniques, including
novel approaches for modeling the impact of uncertain renewable generation on
grid operation and a hardware-in-loop system simulation platform at the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). The PI and the student will closely
collaborate with NREL researchers by focusing on how to better assess grid
dynamic stability under uncertain renewable generation. This fellowship will
provide an excellent opportunity for a Ph.D. student to gain valuable experience
and develop new skillsets. The PI will bring the new techniques back to the home
institution, i.e., North Dakota State University (NDSU), and introduce them to
other investigators in related fields for the future benefit of NDSU and North
Dakota. This fellowship will foster a strong partnership between NDSU and NREL,
and help the state of North Dakota better meet its renewable energy
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing integration of renewable energy
resources via power electronic inverters have significantly changed grid
dynamics. The dynamic interactions between inverter-based renewable energy
resources (IB-RERs) and the power grid have caused the dynamic control stability
issue. However, it is challenging to analyze dynamic control stability in power
grids with high penetration of IB-RERs, especially considering the impact of
variable and uncertain renewable generation. The overarching goal of this
fellowship is to support the PI’s training and collaborative research at NREL,
focusing on the development and validation of a novel approach for
probabilistically assessing dynamic control stability in the power grid with
high penetration of IB-RERs. Specific training and research objectives include:
1) modeling the impact of uncertain renewable generation on the dynamic control
stability, 2) developing a novel method for probabilistic analysis of dynamic
control stability under uncertain renewable generation, and 3) receiving
training on advanced hardware-in-loop simulation platforms and performing proof-
of-concept validation. This project will expand the PI’s research capacity and
transform his career path towards a promising direction in enhancing the dynamic
stability of the power grid with large-scale integration of IB-RERs. The results
of the research will significantly advance the state-of-the-art of grid
stability analysis to better understand the impact of variable and uncertain
renewable generation on dynamic control stability, and ultimately support the
large-scale renewable integration in power grids, thus providing higher-quality,
more reliable, and cleaner electricity to millions of customers across the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.