* 2033721
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Continuous Micro Casting Deposition process for rotary targets manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,03/31/2022
* Jason Bergquist, JUNORA LTD
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 03/31/2022
* USD 255,400.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1
project will develop an innovative and efficient advanced manufacturing method
to substantially reduce costs of thin coating processes. This innovation will
lead to a significant reduction of production costs of goods such as energy-
efficient and smart windows, solar panels, thin-film solid-state batteries,
electronic displays and many others, therefore encouraging further adoption of
modern and energy-efficient technologies in the society. The successful
commercialization of this technology will therefore benefit the environment
through increased building efficiency and solar generation and improving
availability and functionality of advanced electronics with lower cost
components in displays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes
development of a novel process for additive manufacturing of rotary sputter
targets for very high thermal conductivity precious metals, such as silver.
Benefits include 50% lower initial infrastructure investment costs compared to
the traditional rotary target manufacturing processes (such as casting) and 30%
lower sputtering process costs with respect to other rotary targets of
comparable purity. The proposed research and development activities will focus
on overcoming the main technical risks and challenges, including managing the
considerable heat dissipation in highly thermally conductive metals while
producing rotary targets. The research will also address technical difficulties
related to increasing power capacity and creating a full-scale prototype capable
of producing targets of sufficient size for the industry. This will be the first
reliable method for producing silver rotary targets with the uniformly small
grain size and minimal gas content of a cast target at a competitive
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.