* 2033308
* Organobismuth Copolymers as Tunable High Refractive Index Materials
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Jakub Hyvl, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 12/31/2023
* USD 214,047.00

The project establishes a robust collaboration between the PI Hyvl’s lab at
University of Hawaii at Manoa (UHM) and the Genzer’s lab at North Carolina State
University (NCSU). This research collaboration will investigate copolymerization
of organic and organometallic monomers, generating knowledge about fundamental
polymer science, exploring varied synthetic alternatives, and ascer-taining the
properties of hitherto unknown copolymeric materials. The preliminary results
demonstrate that the bismuth metallopolymers have an unusually high refractive
index. Refractive index is a dimensionless number describing the ability of
light to travel through the material. High refractive indices in polymers are
desirable for applications in optics. The high refractive index and transparency
of our materials ought to translate into anti-reflective coatings for visible
light and near IR optics. This project will train one graduate student who will
directly participate and get hands-on experience with polymer research both at
UHM and NCSU. The fellowship will generate research opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate students in the area of polymer chemistry, augmenting the
education of the next generation of scientists and engineers. By collaborative
partnering with local institutions, will provide opportunities for
underrepresented Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander students to do research in
our group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RII Track-4 EPSCoR Research Fellows
project will further PI Hyvl’s career and build research capacity at University
of Hawaii (UHM) by strengthening a collaboration with the Genzer lab at North
Carolina State University (NCSU). The research collaboration will investigate
copolymerization of organic and organometallic monomers, generating knowledge
about fundamental polymer science, exploring varied synthetic alternatives, and
ascertaining the properties of hitherto unknown copolymeric materials. The
project leverages PI Hyvl’s synthetic expertise and the unique and premier
polymer characterization expertise of the Genzer group at NCSU. The project has
three main objectives. (i)The synthesis of bismuth-containing monomers,
diaryl(4-vinylphenyl)bismuthane (aryl = phenyl or tolyl), to be carried out at
the home's institution laboratory. (ii)Polymerization of prepared bismuth-
containing monomers with styrene will afford the corresponding copolymers. It is
expected to examine a variety of different polymerization methods and techniques
including radical and ionic polymerizations to preferably prepare random or at
least pseudorandom copolymers. The synthesized copolymers will be characterized
by common techniques (GPC and MALDI) present at the Host Institution. (iii)The
prepared copolymers are to be deposited on glass or silicon wafer surfaces
through spin-coating and transmittance and refractive indexes will be evaluated,
including also evaluation of the monomer distribution in the copolymer. The
research outcomes will be published in peer-reviewed journals and will enhance
extramural materials science funding opportunities. UHM will benefit by creation
of a new research capacity and the creation of a new curriculum on polymer
chemistry, the first of its kind in Hawai`i.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.