* 2033008
* RAPID: Mapping Integral Human Behavior Changes and Resiliency in Response to COVID-19
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Julia Ivanova, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 9,977.00

During the COVID-19 pandemic, encouraged human behaviors such as social
distancing and wearing of masks have become key methods to control the spread of
the disease. While individuals may be presented with suggested behavioral
changes and prompts daily, how individuals perceive these recommendations within
their local, national, and global context can influence how they assess disease
risk and whether they respond to recommendations in their daily lives. By
pairing variability in individual and community disease perception with news
data, this research aims to model efficacy and success of different human
behaviors to halt the spread of disease. This project uses social network
analysis to understand what networks help or hinder behavioral changes during a
pandemic, with the aim of identifying adaptations that impact stress resistance
and resiliency. The project provides training for graduate and undergraduate
students in methods of rigorous, scientific data collection and analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in three main phases to
address two issues: (1) how human behavioral changes are affecting the spread of
COVID-19, and (2) what integral behavioral changes appear to have the greatest
influence on resiliency to a pandemic disaster. In the first phase, researchers
in a major metropolitan area will conduct an observation-based analysis using
picture and field note evidence at open essential businesses. This phase will
provide a basis for local and national trends. In the second phase, researchers
will recruit from a range of more remote locations for the purposes of
understanding larger social networks. Participants will fill out a risk-
perception survey, schedule an interview with researchers, and, if interested,
will participate in forwarding their own photographic evidence and field notes
following research guidelines. In the third phase, a systematic news media
analysis will be conducted from November 2019 through the continuation of the
project. Such a review will focus on a pool of accessible news sources that will
provide a way of tracking human behavioral changes and recommendations from the
beginning of the pandemic, onwards. Using frameworks from disaster,
anthropology, identity, and social network research, this study will provide
information that may be actively utilized in epidemiological efforts to address
the spread of COVID-19. Additionally, this research project aims to develop a
functioning dynamic model of identified effective human behaviors to be useful
in planning pandemic responses currently and in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.