* 2033321
* RAPID: Combating the Spread of COVID-19: Testing Cost-Effective Strategies for Promoting Behavior Change
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Dean Karlan, Innovations for Poverty Action
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2022
* USD 199,974.00

Epidemics and pandemics emerge from human behavior and can similarly be
mitigated by changing human behavior. Human behavioral changes are themselves
shaped by social learning processes---how people come to know, remember, and
believe---the consequences of violating recommended safety protocols. This
research project will use experimental methods to investigate how different
information sharing strategies affect people’s learning about protocols to
reduce the spread of COVID-19 and adherence to these protocols. The project will
test the relative effectiveness of curiosity inducement strategy (by presenting
information in the form of a quiz rather than a direct statement) and peer
information sharing strategies (asking message recipients to pass reliable
COVID-related safety to several contacts) for social learning about the pandemic
in different social context, thus allowing the results of the research to be
applicable to broader environments. Understanding which social communication
strategy is more effective in promoting social learning about pandemics within
different social contexts will allow policy makers to develop and implement more
efficient communication strategies to reduce the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic
in particular, and improve social learning generally. The research results will
help improve the health and economic well-being of American citizens as well as
help establish the United States as the global leader in combating global
pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Epidemics and pandemics
emerge and are spread by human behavior; similarly, they are mitigated by human
behavioral changes that come from social learning. How do people learn—come to
remember and believe—the potential consequences of violating recommended safety
protocols? What factors influence whether, when, and how people behave
differently when given new health-related knowledge? This project will advance
research on how alternative information-sharing strategies impact people’s
learning of and adherence to public health protocols through three interrelated
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) to be conducted in different communities.
These RCTs test the effectiveness of two information-sharing techniques designed
for delivery via text messages: curiosity inducement (achieved through
presenting information in the form of a quiz rather than a direct statement) and
peer information sharing (asking message recipients to pass reliable COVID-
related safety information on to several contacts). The techniques share the
goal of bringing COVID-19 related knowledge and behavior into line with safety
protocols set by health authorities. Conducting the RCTs across different
communities allows the researchers to understand how social context affect the
effectiveness of a particular mode of communication. The results of this
research has direct policy relevance to reducing the COVID-19 pandemic. In
addition to helping to improve the health and economic well-being of Americans,
this research project will also help establish the U.S. as the global leader in
combating global pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.