* 2033891
* NSF2026: EAGER: Groundwater Microbial Communities as Sentinels of Environmental Change
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Matthew Schrenk, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the NSF Directorate for Geosciences and the 2026 Fund Program
in the Office of Integrated Activities, Professor Matthew Schrenk at Michigan
State University conducts research that employs environmental DNA sequencing
approaches to compare groundwater microbial communities along well-defined
groundwater flow pathways. The work is designed to better understand how
subsurface microbial populations move and adapt, and how they may impact
environmental health. This research is important because, as the environment
changes, water availability and quality has become a pressing issue for many
populations across the globe. An enormous proportion of global freshwater
resources resides in the fractures and pore spaces of groundwater aquifers and
can be impacted by natural and anthropogenic perturbations. Within the
subsurface groundwater habitat, microbial communities catalyze key
biogeochemical transformations and respond to environmental changes, both at and
below the land surface. However, little is known about how microbial communities
vary along subterranean flow pathways from water on land to that which
percolates down to the subsurface and from the land surface to its discharge
into rivers, lakes, and oceans. The research involves a systematic, multi-
disciplinary assessment of the subsurface microbial biosphere, knowledge
critical for making accurate predictions of microbial response to land use
change, to the introduction of contaminants, to the impact of water over-
extraction, and to variations in climate. The work also provides a template for
ongoing, large-scale, water quality surveys, domestically and abroad. Broader
impacts of the project include engagement, mentoring, and training of a cohort
of students who will be recruited through programs at Michigan State University
that are focused on increasing the involvement of underrepresented groups in
STEM research. In addition, the biogeochemical datasets generated through this
study will be used to develop exploratory, 3-dimensional projections for
outreach events at a campus-based museum. They will also be made accessible to
local communities where the research is being conducted through Michigan
Extension Services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subsurface aquifers harbor a
substantial portion of the global biosphere and carry out critical functions
that sustain both human civilizations and a habitable planetary environment.
Despite their important role, most microbiology studies of the subsurface are
sparse and those that have been done have relied upon only a few samples and
none have considered their hydrological context. As a result, we lack a clear
understanding of the relationship between environmental changes (including human
interventions) and the response of microorganisms in groundwater. This research
focuses on advancing our knowledge of the subsurface microbiome and its
complexion and impacts by characterizing the composition and activities of
microbial communities along subterranean flow pathways that have been decoupled
from the land surface over time scales ranging from years to millennia. The goal
of the work is to better understand how these microbial communities respond to
changes at and below the land surface and corresponding implications for human
and environmental health. The proposed work will directly address microbial
community composition and activities within the context of well-defined
subsurface fluid circulation pathways within 3 aquifers in the Lower Peninsula
of Michigan. Specific goals are to examine the impact of in situ environmental
factors (e.g. oxidants, nutrients, salinity) as well as legacy factors at the
land surface (e.g. urbanization, agriculture) in shaping microbial community
structure. It will use this information to track how microbial signals propagate
in the subsurface. Amplicon sequencing will be used to generate a taxonomic
‘fingerprint’ of microbial communities within individual water wells. These data
will be combined with hydrological and geochemical data to study the coupling
between biological, physical and chemical factors in subsurface groundwater
reservoirs and along flow paths. Metagenomic approaches will be used to create a
detailed inventory of microbial genome composition and functional potential
within the aquifers, whereas metaproteomics will provide a quantitative metric
of key functions within the subsurface habitat that can be integrated into
biogeochemical models. These data will be used to develop ecological modeling
approaches to examine the connectivity within fluid circulation pathways and to
study environmental forcing factors for key processes. This regional-scale
study, involving both geology and microbiology, will be used as a platform for
outreach efforts aimed at highlighting the characteristics of groundwater
resources and their susceptibility to environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project responds to the NSF2026 Idea Machine
2026 winning entry of “Global Microbiome in a Changing
World”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.