* 2033865
* SBIR Phase I:  Desktop Plug-and-Play Vaporized Hydrogen Peroxide Sterilizers for Personal Protective Equipment (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Michael Kimble, SKYHAVEN SYSTEMS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2022
* USD 255,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to enable sterilization of personal protective
equipment (PPE). Global response measures to the COVID-19 pandemic have
highlighted severe shortages of N95 masks and PPE, which could be alleviated by
sterilizing the equipment. This has been demonstrated effectively in large
trailers and room-size facilities, but these large units are cost more than $1 M
each, require substantive facility modifications, and have strict operational
requirements. An alternative approach is to provide desktop sterilizers
resembling the ubiquitous steam sterilizers typically used in hospitals and
clinical settings. This project will develop a desktop plug-and-play vaporized
hydrogen peroxide sterilizer unit to decontaminate PPE within 30 minutes at low
cost. These could be deployed throughout a medical facility without requiring
substantive room remodeling or restricted access rooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop and
demonstrate a desktop plug-and-play vaporized hydrogen peroxide sterilizer.
Vaporized hydrogen peroxide (VHP) is a proven sterilant that exhibits broad-
spectrum efficacy against viruses, bacteria, yeasts and bacterial spores.
Conventional VHP sterilizers are large units that use concentrated H2O2
cartridges to produce the requisite 750 ppm VHP concentration. Because these
units use concentrated H2O2 canisters, the resulting systems have significant
process controls and operations to maintain safe operation, design consequences
that make it difficult to scale the technology to smaller economical desktop
units. Toward producing safer desktop sterilization units, a new chemical
reactor will be developed in this program that can produce hydrogen peroxide
directly in the vapor state without using hazardous compounds or dangerous
reaction conditions. Optimization of the catalysts, reaction area, and operating
conditions will be conducted to produce vaporized hydrogen peroxide at
concentrations upwards of 750 ppm. Additional components will be developed to
safely operate the sterilizer including H2O2 concentration and relative humidity
sensors, and a catalytic H2O2 decomposition reactor to breakdown residual H2O2
to water and oxygen. These components will be integrated into a desktop
sterilizer unit, along with new control algorithms for safe
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.