* 2033405
* Improving Weather Forecasting through non-Gaussian Data Assimilation with Machine Learning
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Steven Fletcher, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 582,475.00

The research project is to advance techniques for using a mathematical
discipline to optimally combine theory with observations to improve the accuracy
of weather forecasts. The team will use different forms of machine learning
mechanism to detect changes in the behavior of moisture fields in the atmosphere
such that the new techniques are able to change parts of the weather prediction
scheme to better capture these fields in different locations and at different
times. To achieve the research goal, a large amount of observations and model
results is required to train computers to detect moisture changes. The research
will investigate how much data are needed to reliably detect changes through the
machine learning techniques. As part of this research project, the research team
will develop a website for the research community to view atmospheric moisture
changes in the past 24 hours. This research will also test how well a new
component of the weather prediction scheme works when the machine learning
techniques have detected moisture changes from its normal behavior. The project
will also involve training a new scientist to learn the latest research method.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will investigate the ability of machine
learning techniques to detect changes away from Gaussian behavior for the
moisture fields and to be capable to switch the cost function in variational
data assimilation between Gaussian and non-Gaussian. The scheme is important to
ensure that the model-observation errors are being model consistently. The error
changes are commonly assumed to be toward lognormal; recent work has indicated
that the behavior of moisture fields has another probability density
function—the reverse lognormal. This distribution has a right skewness and
enables analysis to increase the moisture state if the background is too dry.
Using the proper type of error distribution schemes will aid not only cloud
prediction but also cloud retention in forecast models after the data
assimilation scheme has finished. This team will also investigate a new ensemble
smoother, as well as non-Gaussian versions of the Maximum Likelihood Ensemble
Filter as a more consistent ensemble filter for hybrid data assimilation
schemes, especially for the lognormal and reverse lognormal behavior. In
addition, the skewness of the moisture field at different locations and heights
will be displayed at the team’s website for the general public and forecasters
to view how the moisture distribution is changing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.