* 2033909
* SBIR Phase I: COVID-19: Robots for Automating Indoor Disinfection Tasks with Existing Non-Autonomous Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Bradley Oosterveld, Thinking Robots Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2021
* USD 253,836.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to fully automate frequent and regular
disinfection tasks in hospitals, care centers, commercial units, universities,
schools, and other indoor spaces. This task has become critically important in
light of the rapid spread of SARS-CoV-2. By being fully automated, the proposed
robotic system reduces human risk and required protective gear (as humans do not
need to enter a contaminated zone to move in and position their devices) as well
as human workload (due to autonomous operation of the robot system). Current
Ultra-Violet C (UVC) disinfection robots utilize integrated bulbs and have
limited operation intervals due to the need to frequently recharge, the proposed
solution is able to operate a wide variety of disinfection devices like UVC
lamps, High-Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) filters, hydrogen peroxide
aerosols, and others, and thus, offers maximum versatility to the customer while
also allowing for the utilization of the customerâ€™s existing devices. In
addition, the assistive system can be instructed in natural language by non-
experts and can thus be operated without prior
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop two autonomous robots that, together, can carry out
room disinfection tasks with existing equipment. One challenge with automating
disinfection, especially UVC disinfection, is the power consumption of UVC
lights and the need for frequent recharging of battery-operated units on
autonomous robots. Another is that current robotic solutions have UVC devices
integrated, which prevents the use of existing or custom devices. The solution
to both challenges is to build a flat carrier robot where existing or custom
devices can be mounted and a second robot, tethered to the carrier robot, that
can power the device by docking at a purpose-made docking station connected to a
wall outlet. While the device is on, both robots will also be able to recharge
their batteries and thus operate continuously. Advanced navigation strategies
are necessary to ensure that both robots can drive through indoor environments
to their target locations without tangling the tether. Both robots will be
equipped with laser and camera sensors and utilize joint sensor information
communicated via their tether for improving localization and navigation. The
result will be a robust autonomous multi-robot system for navigation and
disinfection tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.