* 2033302
* RECODE: Real-time analysis and environmental feedback for directed differentiation of liver organoids
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Sarah Heilshorn, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,425,885.00

Human stem cells can be grown into organ mimics, termed “organoids”. If they can
faithfully reproduce the key structures and activities of organs, they would be
extremely valuable. They could revolutionize the way we discover and test new
drugs, study human disease, and possibly even replace damaged body parts. The
technology to produce consistent and reliable organoids does not exist. This
project will combine a novel type of live imaging microscopy with adaptive
biomaterials technology to enable active monitoring and manipulation of liver
organoids. As part of the project, the investigators will recruit and train
diverse students at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. They
will also promote science activities to under-served elementary students, and
engage in high school educator development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three-
dimensional (3D) culture of human stem cells as “organoids” has tremendous
clinical potential. Applications include drug discovery, safety and efficacy
testing, regenerative medicine, and as models of normal and diseased tissue
development. An unmet requirement for the success of these applications is
proper organoid differentiation and maturation. Through this RECODE project, a
noninvasive imaging method to actively monitor human induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) will be developed. This information will be used to manipulate
adaptive biomaterials. These biomaterials will modulate matrix-mediated
biomechanical and biochemical cues and reproducibly direct organoid
differentiation. Finally, the improved reproducibility and functionality of the
RECODE-differentiated organoids will be validated through assays that represent
the three major potential applications for hepatic organoids: regenerative
medicine, drug screening, and disease modeling. The novel technologies developed
will have broad applicability to a variety of other cell, organoid, and tissue
types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.