* 2033907
* EAGER: DECOMPOSING COVID-19 VIRUS USING THE DUAL ACTION OF MICROWAVES AND PLASMA
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Yuchun Du, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,963.00

The medical-supply shortage during the COVID-19 pandemic has created an
unprecedented need for disinfecting medical personal protective equipment (PPE).
Microwaves and plasma can effectively inactivate microbial pathogens and may be
used for disinfecting contaminated medical equipment. This research project
presents an exploratory approach to address some of the challenges created by
the current pandemic. The researchers will investigate the effectiveness of the
dual action of microwaves and plasma in disinfecting PPE contaminated with
enveloped viruses, such as the COVID-19, at low temperatures. If successful,
this process will have the ability to decontaminate heat-sensitive materials
(e.g., masks, gloves, and gowns) by subjecting them to microwave-assisted low-
temperature plasma with controlled intensity and density to avoid compromising
their structural integrity. The proposed disinfection approach is potentially
transformative and may also inspire fundamental changes in how communities use
and recycle certain objects, as well as address challenges beyond the current
COVID-19 pandemic. For instance, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) estimates that each year healthcare-associated infections kill
more people worldwide than other incidents such as AIDS, breast cancer, or car
accidents. The outcomes of the proposed research will significantly contribute
to alleviating this problem by presenting effective techniques for disinfecting
medical equipment. Thus, it will have tremendous environmental and economic
impacts to geographical locations with limited consistent access to fresh
medical supplies, e.g., rural communities in the U.S. and other developing
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary research will analyze key
parameters affecting microwave and plasma disinfection mechanisms of
contaminated PPE at low and nondestructive temperatures. Numerical solutions for
equations describing electromagnetic-wave and plasma interactions in an
overmoded microwave cavity will be developed. These solutions will be used to
design an experimental system to apply variable intensities of microwaves and
low-temperature plasma to contaminated specimens. An optimized system will be
built with high precision to analyze the parameters affecting the
decontamination process. The effectiveness of the developed system in
inactivating enveloped viruses, such as COVID-19, will be tested using influenza
A viruses. The effective destruction of influenza A virus would guarantee the
system's capability to destroy COVID-19. The microwave and plasma intensities
and exposure time will be varied while the specimen's temperature, humidity in
the device chamber, and the viability of the virus are being monitored. The aim
is to determine the effective combination of microwave and plasma doses,
exposure time, humidity, and temperature that can destroy the virus. The
proposed approach has several advantages over conventional disinfection
approaches using chemicals, including speed, convenience for repeated use,
continuous availability, environmental friendliness, and safety. The research
can potentially be extended to explore disinfecting objects contaminated with
other pathogens such as fungal cells and bacteria, in addition to enveloped and
non-enveloped viruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.