* 2033349
* EAGER: Manufacturing of Large-area Sensor Fabric for Rapid Monitoring of Coronavirus
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2021
* David Gracias, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award seeks to
develop a scalable and cost-effective fabrication paradigm for rationally
designed nanostructured substrates, which in concert with optical measurements
and machine learning, offer highly sensitive and selective detection and
identification of the coronavirus related to the Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic. The research approach paves the way for large area rigid
and flexible sensors that can be used to optically identify virus strains with
minimal sample preparation in point-of-care settings thereby greatly improving
preparedness for future waves of coronavirus outbreak and other pandemics.
Crucially, the detection methodology eliminates the need for virus-specific
biomolecular capture or detection elements and holds promise for detection of
mutated viruses without any alteration to the platform. By combining expertise
in the disparate fields of scalable nanomanufacturing, optical spectroscopy,
biosensing, analytical chemistry and machine learning, this endeavor not only
delivers a fundamentally different approach to population-wide testing for
viruses but also creates a new tool to explore diverse biological systems. The
project seeks to enhance the education curriculum for undergraduates while the
research findings related to the fabrication of the large-area sensor fabric and
its use in detection of infectious agents are incorporated into graduate
teaching activities and disseminated into the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the development of a new
platform for ultrasensitive and rapid detection of the severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) by exploiting Surface Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy (SERS) signatures recorded on highly reproducible plasmonically
active substrates in a label-free manner. Large area nanogap (hot-spot) patterns
are nanoimprinted on flexible fabric. The gap dimensions (5-10 nm) are regulated
and reduced to sub-lithographic sizes by transfer onto pre-stretched substrates
followed by strain release. SERS spectra are collected from low pathogenic
viruses as well as from clinical samples with suspected SARS-CoV-2 and other
human respiratory infections. Given the complexity of the samples and the
presence of other spectral interferents, pattern recognition methods and
supervised classification approaches are harnessed to relate the spectral
information to the identification of pathogens. By capturing latent biological
differences that are encoded in the vibrational fingerprints, this method
creates a new landscape for pathogen analysis eschewing the need for complex
sample preparation using specific capture and detection molecules. Through this
multidisciplinary collaborative effort that integrates nanomanufacturing,
biophotonics, and machine learning, this project lays the foundation for a
broadly applicable sensing platform with applications extending beyond virus
detection. In addition, the enhanced sensitivity of this novel sensing tool is
expected to revolutionize the understanding of other nanoscale molecular
processes such as energy transduction and protein conformational dynamics and
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.