* 2034840
* I-Corps:  A steerable microcatheter that utilizes a miniaturized actuator to achieve a maximum range of motion
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Andrew Grande, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
outcomes for the 45,000 yearly ischemic stroke patients undergoing mechanical
thrombectomy in the US. Mechanical thrombectomy, the act of reestablishing
cerebral blood flow by relieving an obstructed blood vessel, is the primary
treatment for qualifying patients. In reaching the obstruction, tortuous anatomy
could lead to procedure failure and poor outcomes. Steerable microcatheters have
been developed to increase the chances of a successful outcome. Currently
available steerable catheters pull wires for their steering mechanism, these
wires travel the entire length of the catheter. For long, tortuous anatomies,
the friction between the wire and the catheter sheath increases drastically
reducing the tip's range of motion. As the catheter diameter is scaled down to
access narrower blood vessels (below 2 mm in diameter), friction, which is
proportional to relative area, increases dramatically, making the catheter
inoperable. Moreover, conventional fabrication at this scale becomes challenging
or prohibitively expensive due to precision requirements. The proposed
technology is a microcatheter to bypass this limitation and retain its
steerability independent of the catheters course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a steerable microcatheter that
utilizes a miniaturized actuator to achieve a maximum range of motion (360
degrees in 3D space). It uses both a actuation mechanism as well as a novel
fabrication approach. The actuation mechanism avoids friction altogether,
allowing for its range of motion to be independent of path tortuosity. In
addition, the fabrication method is based on laminate assembly of laser micro-
machined layers, which results in high-throughput manufacturing of devices with
sub-millimeter precision. The result is a technology platform for developing
accurate, steerable, miniature catheters at an unprecedented scale. This 360
degree directional catheter also may be piloted by a remote-controlled robotic
system. With 5G transmission capabilities becoming readily available, in the
future, stroke thrombectomies may be carried out in mobile units, while the
proposed catheter is piloted by a physician remotely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.