* 2034796
* Catalyzing Electrochemical Data Sciences: Education and Research Opportunities Workshop
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Daniel Schwartz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,967.00

A workshop, titled "Catalyzing Electrochemical Data Sciences: Education and
Research Opportunities," will be held at the Spring 2021 Electrochemical Society
(ECS) Meeting in Chicago, with contingencies for a potential virtual meeting.
The workshop will focus on data sciences for the electrochemical community. A
key objective will be to identify research priorities and strategies for
promoting open electrochemical data repositories and software. Such systems will
accelerate research progress in electrochemical science and engineering. To
assure a diversity of participation at the workshop, participants will be
nominated by the steering committee and by relevant ECS Division Executive
Committees. The two-day agenda includes a series of presentations on the
creation and analysis of labeled datasets in electrochemical science and
engineering. The agenda also contains seminars on open source software of
significance to the electrochemical community. Discussions will be guided by
steering committee participants, and a report on priorities and research gaps
will be drafted by steering committee members. An associated educational
activity, entitled Hackweek, will be aimed at the electrochemical software
developer community through online teaching and project
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis, aggregation and use of different
electrochemical datasets from multiple labs are limited by a lack of
standardized file structures, a lack of data quality standards, and a lack of
long-lived, scalable, and searchable open data repositories. Extensive dataset
archives are critical to machine learning, statistical analysis methods, and
validation and parameter estimation in physics-based modeling. The lack of such
data slows progress in electrochemical fields. The objective of this workshop is
to identify promising research directions in data science focused on providing
accessible repositories of electrochemical data for the research community. This
workshop will ascertain research gaps in the processes of storing and
integrating big data in electrochemical research. Members of the steering
committee will lead critical activities of the workshop including selecting
participants and drafting the report. The workshop leaders have significant
experience in educational and management aspects of the workshop as well as in
research topics pertaining to data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.