* 2034192
* SitS: Decoding microbial interactions in soil systems using subsurface sensors for volatile organic compounds
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Malak Tfaily, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2023
* USD 547,157.00

Organisms produce and use many types of chemical compounds in metabolism,
communication, and defense. Soil microorganisms are vigorous producers and
consumers of one such type, volatile organic compounds, but our understanding of
how the presence of these chemicals in the soil influences nutrient flux, soil
health, and plant growth is limited. Soil microbes emit volatile organic
compounds at exceedingly low concentrations in hundreds of different varieties,
making their comprehensive measurement in soil difficult. Challenges associated
with measuring volatile organic compounds quickly and non-invasively have
limited our capacity to use the full suite of volatile organic compounds in soil
to infer interactions between microbes and plants, and to assess soil health.
New approaches and technology for high resolution measurement and monitoring of
volatile organic compounds in the soil are needed to better understand how
plant-microbe interactions influence carbon and nitrogen dynamics in soil, soil
health, and crop production. To address this need, this project aims to: 1)
develop a new sensing system to measure volatile organic compounds in soil; and
2) advance understanding of how to ‘decode’ volatile organic compounds signals
of microbial activity. Broader impacts of this research include providing
management tools for sustainable agriculture and ecosystem services. The
outreach strategy is focused on 1) engaging high school and undergraduate
students in research; and 2) designing research and education projects on
sensors and data analytics for dissemination through the University of Arizona
Biosphere 2 App and on-site activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the
University of Arizona (UA) in collaboration with industry researchers at
Aerodyne Research, Inc. (ARI) and QuantAQ, Inc. plan to develop a subsurface
real-time, in-situ sensing platform to measure volatile organic compound (VOC)
signals in the soil. To develop the platform, the project will generate training
sets and validate an emerging low-cost VOC sensor against a high-resolution
analyzer. Validation activities will use controlled soil columns with increasing
degrees of complexity in the soil 'volatilome' (inert matrix, soil, soil and
plants), and controlled addition of specific VOCs. To decode VOC signals in
soil, the project will: 1) characterize dynamic response of soil VOC composition
to wetting in bulk soil and in the rhizosphere; and 2) add VOCs to induce and
measure responses in the soil and rhizosphere volatilome. Deliverables of the
project include 1) high-resolution VOC soil sampling to generate new
understanding of subsurface VOC signals; 2) training sets, and 2) low cost VOC
sensor development and validation. The results will contribute to a long-term
vision of achieving low-cost, subsurface VOC sensor
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was made through the "Signals in the
Soil (SitS)" solicitation, a collaborative partnership between the National
Science Foundation and the United States Department of Agriculture National
Institute of Food and Agriculture (USDA NIFA)."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.