* 2034448
* The Structures of Solution Principles and Their Role in the Betterment of Designs
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Andy Dong, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 12/31/2024
* USD 561,011.00

This project is based on the observation that the structure of an idea, whether
that idea takes the form of a scientific discovery or an engineering innovation,
influences its long-term impact. The objective of this project is to investigate
the structure of the solution principles for the design of a product and their
effect on the product’s potential for improvement. To achieve this objective,
the project will perform a long-term and in-depth study of one of world’s most
important products: the sewing machine. Discoveries about product improvement
over time based upon the properties of solution principles for sewing machines
are likely to be generalizable, because the longitudinal data collected in the
project will cover major design and technological improvements that took place
across more than 150 years of social, economic, and political changes.
Understanding the reasons that solution principles affect a product’s potential
for improvement will enable design engineers to accelerate opportunities for
improvement more effectively, implement changes with more confidence, and
iterate faster. This is a matter of economic importance, because the US
government and the private sector invest billions of dollars annually into new
products that employ advanced technologies. This project connects the
engineering details of a design to product improvement to enable informed
resource allocation in engineering innovation. Broader impacts of the research
include a collaboration with the National Museum of American History to share
the research results through online and physical exhibits of sewing machines,
which will enhance public scientific and technological understanding. This
collaboration will also enhance research infrastructure by making publicly
available the set of physical and functional models that will be produced during
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to investigate
the endogenous improvement potential of a product due to the structure of
solution principles in its design. The project conceptualizes the problem of
understanding the long-term improvement of products as a problem of design
complexity. The project will collect patent data and collaborate with the
National Museum of American History to document the solution principles of
multiple generations of sewing machines. Using this dataset, the project will
compute the degree of design transformation using new graph-based metrics, each
of which takes a different perspective on the concept of transformation. The
project contributes important conceptual and methodological advances. First, the
project improves strategic design advice in directing design search by
explaining whether constraints on improvement imposed by the solution principles
are independent or hierarchical. The simultaneous analysis of physical and
functional architectures to understand their influence on product improvement
will produce a clear causal logic between the design and its improvement
potential. The logic will underpin the establishment of new design strategies to
increase a product’s potential for future improvement. Understanding how the
structures of solution principles and the solution principles themselves
positively affect or impede the potential for betterment will enable design
engineers to select and architect solution principles to facilitate improvements
to a product in subsequent generations. The collaboration with the National
Museum of American History will broaden dissemination to enhance scientific and
technological understanding by contributing to physical and online exhibitions
in the museum’s collection of American textile machines. The set of physical and
functional models produced during the performance of this research will cover
the history of the development of the sewing machine in the United States. The
data will be publicly available and become a valuable source for scholars
studying innovation, thereby enhancing infrastructure for research. Even though
this study focuses on an engineered product, the research insights will apply to
all kinds of systems for which the potential for change is governed by the
system’s underlying structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.