* 2034232
* SitS: Collaborative Research: Soils are signaling shifts in aggregate life-cycles: What does this mean for water, carbon and climate feedbacks in the Anthropocene?
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2024
* Pamela Sullivan, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 12/31/2024
* USD 268,335.00

Healthy soils support the production of food, store rainfall, transmit and
filter groundwater, and provide habitat for plants, animals, and microbes. Much
of the volume of these soils is comprised of aggregates that represent the
binding of particles (e.g., clay) and organic matter (generated by plants and
microbes) into larger units. How these larger aggregate units are arranged
controls the shapes of pores between aggregates, and thus the characteristics of
the pore network. As a result, aggregate arrangement governs how water flows
through soil. Interestingly, aggregates have a life-cycle: they form, persist
for largely unknown time periods, and then degrade. Several recent studies
suggest that the speed at which aggregates move through this life-cycle is
controlled by changes in rainfall, temperature, and land-use patterns. This
research aims to make explicit linkages between environmental drivers and
aggregate life-cycles across various scales: from very small individual
aggregates, to their arrangements and effects on water flow through a soil
profile, and, finally, how they influence water flow at hillslope, regional, and
continental scales. At these broader scales, this study will uncover the role
that these aggregate life-cycles and arrangements have on influencing soil
moisture, vegetation and climate. Findings from this work will reveal how soils
respond to changing climate and how those responses can in turn influence
climate, facilitate model development for forecasting the impacts of climate
change on water resources, food production and ecosystems, and promote the
development of strategies to adapt to future environmental realities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to mechanistically link soil aggregate
life-cycles and arrangements to water flow, carbon cycling, and biogeochemical
fluxes from soil particles to continental scales. Aggregate soil organic carbon
(SOC) is a key structural component that gives rise to the soil pore and
hydraulic properties observed at broader soil horizon and pedon scales. Thus, by
examining both biotic and abiotic mechanisms governing rates of formation and
collapse of soil aggregates, investigators can quantify and project the
structural response of the soil fabric to changing climate and land useâ€”features
largely overlooked in current modeling frameworks. To accomplish this goal, our
multi-disciplinary team will leverage soil samples and data from existing
environmental observatories (e.g., United States Department of Agriculture, NSF-
funded long-term research sites) and National Ecological Observatory Network
sites, as well as ancillary data (e.g., Natural Resources Conservation Service
Soil Climate Analysis Network and remotely sensed products), that represent
gradients of climate, land use, and soil texture to: 1) investigate biotic and
abiotic drivers of soil aggregate formation and collapse, arrangement, and pore
geometry through manipulative experiments that quantify the influence of binding
agent abundance, mineral surface area, and overburden pressure, which varies
with soil depth, on these trajectories; 2) relate gross rates of aggregate
formation and collapse to rates of microbial activity and SOC mineralization; 3)
quantify how and to what degree aggregate arrangements influence porosity and,
thus, water and C fluxes with depth; 4) develop new tools that leverage
remotely-sensed soil moisture and vegetation properties at the soil surface to
predict depth distributions of soil aggregate and related properties; 5)
integrate a mechanistic understanding of empirically quantified soil processes
from the individual aggregate to the pedon scale into hillslope- to watershed-
scale models to project soil biogeochemical responses to changes in soil pore
development; and, 6) model the continental-scale effects of changing aggregate
life-cycles and arrangements on the biogeochemistry of soil systems and
resulting feedbacks to climate. Advances from this research will improve
understanding of soil capacity to perform ecosystem services now and in the
future, elucidating physical, chemical, and biogeochemical processes affecting
fluxes, transformation, and storage of water and C in
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was made through the Signals in the
Soil (SitS)" solicitation, a collaborative partnership between the National
Science Foundation and the United States Department of Agriculture National
Institute of Food and Agriculture (USDA NIFA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.