* 2034278
* MSIP: The Keck Planet Finder
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Constance Rockosi, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2023
* USD 6,507,079.00

The discovery of extrasolar planets, recognized with the 2019 Nobel Prize in
Physics, was one of humanity’s longest-awaited scientific achievements. The
contemplation of other worlds has always been an important part of understanding
our place in the universe and is now among the fastest growing domains in
astronomy. This award funds construction of the Keck Planet Finder (KPF), a new
instrument for the W.M. Keck Observatory that will significantly advance the
search for and characterization of extrasolar planets. KPF will be a high-
resolution spectrometer that will use optical light gathered by the Keck I
telescope to measure the tiny Doppler shifts of a star’s spectrum as orbiting
planets tug on the star gravitationally. The instrument has a novel design
featuring a glass-ceramic material that makes it insensitive to temperature
changes. KPF is an investment in the U.S. development of technology on the path
to detecting the signal of an Earth-like planet orbiting a nearby Sun-like star.
The KPF team will carry out multi-year science projects, including searches for
planets orbiting nearby stars that might be studied in detail by future space-
borne and ground-based telescopes, explorations of the diverse population of
‘super-Earth’ and ‘sub-Neptune’ planets, and measurements of the masses of
Earth-size planets discovered by NASA’s Kepler mission. KPF will also be a
general-purpose Doppler facility for the U.S. astronomy community. The KPF team
will organize a Planet Finder Academy for high school students to provide an
immersive experience in exoplanet science. The project will also support a
public education program at the California Institute of Technology with events
including monthly stargazing and a public lecture series.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Keck Planet Finder (KPF) team will build and deploy a
high-resolution spectrometer for the 10-m Keck I telescope at the W.M. Keck
Observatory. KPF will discover and characterize extrasolar planets with precise
spectroscopy and Doppler measurements. The KPF spectrometer has a unique design
that includes an all-Zerodur optical assembly for extreme thermomechanical
stability. Four multi-year science projects will be carried out with KPF that
address community priorities. First, KPF will discover and characterize planets
orbiting nearby, Sun-like stars. These planets will be Earths/super-Earths
suitable for imaging and spectroscopy by NASA's HabEx and LUVOIR mission
concepts and ice giants for characterization by NASA's WFIRST mission. Second,
KPF will discover Earth-analog planets in the Habitable Zones of nearby cool
stars (M dwarfs) that can be characterized by future giant segmented mirror
telescopes. Third, KPF will characterize the diversity of super-Earths and sub-
Neptune planets. Fourth, KPF will determine if the ubiquitous Earth-size planets
in the Habitable Zones of Sun-like stars are rocky like Earth or are enshrouded
in thick gas envelopes making them incompatible with life. In addition, KPF is a
general-purpose Doppler facility that will enable a broad range of science for
the U.S. astronomy community. Forty nights of Keck Observatory time will be
awarded to the general astronomical community irrespective of
affiliation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.