* 2034656
* MsRI-EW: Conference to Identify Research Infrastructure Concepts for a National Full-Scale 200 mph Wind and Wind-Water Testing Facility; Virtual; August 2020
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Arindam Chowdhury, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,624.00

To foster national resilience, the United States needs advanced experimental
capabilities that can support research in understanding and reducing human,
infrastructure, and property losses from extreme wind and wind-water events,
particularly hurricanes. Recent windstorms have demonstrated rapid
intensification where wind gusts have exceeded 200 miles per hour (mph), and
there are indications that the number of very high intensity windstorms will
increase in the coming years. To mitigate the impact of extreme wind and wind-
water events on the built environment, a university-based research and testing
facility is needed that can simulate wind fields reaching 200 mph. This award
will support an engineering workshop to identify research infrastructure
concepts for a national, full-scale, 200 mph wind and wind-water testing
facility capable of supporting research and testing beyond the wind speeds and
scales that are achievable with current testing facilities in the United States.
Additionally, because storm surge (wind-driven water) is the principal life
safety threat in hurricanes, the workshop will identify ways to integrate storm
surge and wave actions into the facility design. The long-term goal of the
workshop is to advance wind engineering research with new testing capabilities
that can enhance the hurricane resilience of the built environment. This
workshop supports the National Science Foundation's role in the National
Windstorm Impact Reduction Program. The workshop report will be disseminated to
the natural hazards and engineering research communities via the Natural Hazards
Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-
ci.org).

The two-day workshop will be held virtually in August 2020 due to the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic. The workshop will identify conceptual gaps in existing mid-
scale research infrastructure (MsRI) and assess the feasibility and design
options for a national, full-scale, 200 mph wind and wind-water testing
facility. The workshop, hosted by Florida International University, will include
50 participants from research and engineering applications communities from
universities, businesses, professional associations, and government. The
workshop will include design and construction conceptualization of a unique MsRI
to (a) advance knowledge on the characterization of the transient nature of
wind-surge-wave combined hazards, and (b) enable robust simulations of the
behavior of civil infrastructure under the multi-stressor environment of
hurricane landfalls. The workshop will include a project management expert and a
conference facilitator to work with plenary leaders and breakout session chairs.
The outcome of the workshop will be a report that will identify the research
needs and a conceptual design for the facility.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.