* 2034150
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Mitigating the Impact of Forced Remote Learning of ECS Due to COVID-19
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Andrew Rasmussen, Chicago Public Schools
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 06/30/2023
* USD 24,793.00

The Learning Partnership, in collaboration with the Chicago Public Schools
(CPS), and Education Development Center (EDC), will conduct research and develop
teacher support programs that will mitigate the impact that the global COVID
pandemic is having on high school computer science students in CPS. There are
significant concerns that the variability in implementation of remote learning
policies in response to COVID-19 school closures could exacerbate educational
inequities in access and quality of experience for students taking Exploring
Computer Science (ECS). These concerns are particularly acute in CPS where
computer science is a graduation requirement and ECS is the primary course that
students take to fulfill the requirement. Inequalities in access and
implementation of computer science in CPS can have consequences for students’
high school graduation. In order to develop effective teaching materials for the
2020-2021 academic year, the project team will study the overall impact of
remote learning by comparing outcomes for the 2019-20 implementation of ECS in
CPS relative to the previous three years of ECS implementation as well as
whether inequities have emerged within CPS by examining differences in school
plans for remote learning, student access to technology, participation in remote
learning experiences by race and ethnicity and whether those differences
correlate with differences in learning outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project extends the work of the Chicago Alliance for Equity in Computer Science
(CAFECS), a long-standing partnership between university computer science
faculty, educational researchers, and CPS teachers and administrators, to ensure
that all CPS high school students engage in high quality, engaging computer
science education. CAFECS will develop strategies develop strategies on how to
emulate effective high-touch teacher facilitation strategies online from their
experience with face-to-face classrooms. The project will be guided by three
research questions: (1) How can we design online professional development to
support ECS teachers’ transition to teach the course fully or partially online
during the 2020-21 school year? (2) How can the CAFÉCS coaching model be adapted
to support teachers in moving ECS to a remote learning format and to provide
remote coaching when school access is restricted? (3) What are the
characteristics of remote learning policies that foster student engagement and
best support student online collaboration? The teacher professional development
model will be guided by the Desimone and Garet framework to provide a structure
for drawing conclusions about the contribution of the professional development
in mitigating the impact COVID-19 school building closures have on student
outcomes. The results of this research will have a direct impact on hundreds of
CPS teachers and, ultimately, thousands of CPS high school students. The results
will significantly contribute to the knowledge base of how to effectively teach
computer science for underserved students in computer science and how schools
can mitigate the impacts of COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.