* 2034856
* Collaborative Research: Decoding the Corrosion of Borate Glasses: From Fundamental Science to Quantitative Structure-Property Relationships
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2025
* Aditya Kumar, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 03/31/2025
* USD 238,937.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Chemical durability of glass is a topic of interest
today; fundamental understanding is of paramount importance to the glass
industry and to the pursuit of overcoming various challenges relevant to the
well-being of humanity and the environment, including nuclear waste management
and development of novel biomaterials. This project aims at understanding the
fundamental science governing corrosion of multicomponent borate glasses,
achieved through the unification of experimental studies and artificial
intelligence. Successful completion of this project is expected to lay the
foundation of new fundamental knowledge to understand and describe composition-
structure-property relationships in glass corrosion, and advance new machine
learning-based models to promptly and reliably predict the corrosion behavior of
borate glasses. The U.S. glass/materials industry is facing a severe shortage of
experienced glass engineers/scientists. The project reduces this shortage by
training undergraduate and graduate students in glass science and engineering,
thus providing a talent pool for the U.S. glass/materials industry, academia,
and national laboratories. The education and outreach activities are designed to
invoke interest in students and teachers at the middle and high school levels,
in addition to the training of undergraduate and graduate science and
engineering students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Our current
understanding of glass corrosion is based primarily on empirical data, as there
is still no complete consensus on the primary mechanism of glass dissolution
that applies across a wide composition space. Therefore, there is an exigent
need to develop robust, fundamental understanding of the linkage(s) between
chemical composition, atomic/molecular structure, and chemical durability of
glasses in order to address crucial and scientifically challenging problems
(e.g., designing glasses with desired chemical durability). Accordingly, the
project aims at combining the strengths of experimental studies and artificial
intelligence to reveal the underlying mechanisms that dictate the dissolution
behavior of borate glasses in aqueous environments; and developing a cloud-based
quantitative structure-property relationship (QSPR) model – powered by theory-
guided machine learning engine – to predict the time-dependent corrosion
behavior of oxide glasses. Enabling the materials-by-design approach – which is
in alignment with the U.S. Materials Genome Initiative – this project is a
pioneering effort, representing a leap forward in designing oxide glasses with
controlled chemical durability. Apart from revealing fundamental drivers of
glass corrosion and advancing a QSPR model to reliably predict glass corrosion,
a significant outcome of the project is the development of a talent pipeline of
undergraduate and graduate students well-trained in glass/materials science and
machine learning. Further, the project's education plan incorporates a
foundational, spiral approach that builds interest at the elementary, middle,
and high school level students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.