* 2034019
* High-dimensional Frequency Gates in Integrated Photonics for Scalable Quantum Interconnects
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Andrew Weiner, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2024
* USD 409,489.00

Within the overall landscape of quantum science and technology, the development
of quantum networks is critical for applications such as distributed quantum
computing, connected quantum sensors, and blind quantum computing. While there
has been progress in facilitating entanglement and communication between end
nodes using satellite-based free space links, for dense and short reach networks
these modes of communication are unrealistic given the need for line-of-sight
access. In contrast, optical fiber offers tremendous bandwidth and low loss over
lengths up to about 100 km, making it the logical choice for local area and
metropolitan area quantum networks. However, much of the previous work in
quantum networking has utilized photonic degrees of freedom, like polarization,
which cannot be easily preserved in standard single-mode fiber. On the other
hand, frequency encoding provides natural stability in optical fiber,
straightforward measurement with high-efficiency filters and detectors, and
compatibility with wavelength-division multiplexing. We propose to harness
quantum interference in the spectral domain to implement high-dimensional mode
transformations that support increased information per photon for direct quantum
communication protocols. To realize the functionality required for these
schemes, we will leverage recent advances in silicon photonics and organic
electro-optic materials to develop a quantum frequency processor in an
integrated photonic platform. A key outcome of the proposed work will be a
demonstration of entanglement swapping with spectrally distinguishable photons –
a milestone important for moving to a networking paradigm based on spectrally
multiplexed and/or frequency-encoded quantum information. In addition, a team of
undergraduates will be integrated into this research through long term projects
under an experiential learning initiative supported by the College of
Engineering. The team will progress from developing lab automation skills and
repeating foundational quantum optics experiments to photonic device design and
system-level testing toward the end of the project.
&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;This project will tackle three critical
challenges in the field of quantum interconnects – (i) high-dimensional encoding
for information transport more robust to loss, (ii) high-speed, low-loss, and
broadband optical switches for nanosecond scale scheduling and routing, and
(iii) photon-photon interconnects for entangling heterogeneous nodes/sources. To
do so, we will develop a silicon photonics-based quantum frequency processor
(QFP) that can implement high-dimensional mode transformations and logic gates.
We will overcome the lack of a second order nonlinearity in silicon/silicon
nitride by building on progress in organic electro-optic materials, which have
been harnessed to realize low-power and high bandwidth modulators. Process
advances at silicon photonics foundries will be leveraged to realize pulse
shapers with narrow spectral channels, thereby making it possible to then drive
a QFP with many RF harmonics over a limited analog bandwidth. This, in turn,
will facilitate implementation of high-dimensional quantum frequency gates (d
&gt; 6). On a parallel track, we will carry out proof-of-concept experiments to
validate the generalization of the QFP protocol to higher dimensions. Both
tracks will converge toward the realization of a two-state Bell state analyzer
for frequency qubits, which will be used in a heralded entanglement generation
protocol where photons participating in the joint measurement are spectrally
distinguishable. This protocol is generalizable to higher dimensions and may
facilitate entanglement swapping of qudits. At the network level, this has the
potential to relax constraints on spectral indistinguishability and will be
useful in situations where qubits from quantum memories are intentionally
shifted (via quantum frequency conversion) to different spectral bins in the
telecom band for spectrally multiplexed fiber transmission or when trying to
generate entanglement between different types of matter-based qubits or between
qubits in different local environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.