* 2034784
* I-Corps: Rapid field detection of crop pathogens using portable reflective interferometry
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Lewis Rothberg, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a portable detector for pathogen testing of fruit crops in the
field. The market for agricultural testing is over $20 billion per year, with
greater potential for smaller firms for whom the current methods are
impractical. Getting immediate results in the field is important since disease
can spread through orchards in days and ruin entire crops. The proposed
architecture may be applicable to point-of-care diagnostic sensors for food
safety applications and for animal and human disease detection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of an
optical platform that is designed to produce large changes in reflectivity when
small amounts of material adhere to its surface. The system uses a robust and
convenient substrate, silicon, and a simple light-emitting diode, to implement
the platform. Attached antibodies selectively bind specific pathogens of
interest to the substrate in a way enabling the antibodies to recognize the
appropriate target antigen even when immobilized on the surface. Sensitive
detection is achieved through a process that discourages unwanted molecules from
sticking to the surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.