* 2034498
* RAPID: Microelectrode Array Sensors for SARS-CoV-2 and Other RNA Viruses
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Gangli Wang, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 06/30/2021
* USD 197,558.00

There is an urgent need for accurate measurement tools to test for the presence
of the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 in samples, so that this information may be
used for diagnosing the novel coronavirus infectious disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Obtaining test results on the timeline of minutes is essential to limiting
spread of the virus and helping individuals and communities make appropriate
decisions. Alarmingly high rates of missed virus presence (false negatives) have
been found using some of the current fast testing routes. Those routes typically
rely on sample amplification that is time-consuming and resource-intensive, and
due to their complicated multi-step sample treatments, those routes are more
likely to generate false negatives. The immediate goal of this project, led by
Dr. Gangli Wang and colleagues at Georgia State University, is to design and
develop electrochemical sensors whose "switched-on" response to SARS-CoV-2
presence results from target interactions with specific chemical species in the
nucleic acids of the virus. The response is rapidly intensified to allow for
trace-level detection of virus, potentially within minutes. The design principle
provides several benefits, such as drastically simplified sample pretreatment,
fast turn-around time, and simplified one-step detection with greatly decreased
false negative outcomes. These essential qualities pave the way for future
point-of-use applications that go beyond SARS-CoV-2. The project provides a rare
opportunity for fundamental measurement science to address an ongoing societal
and global crisis through cutting-edge research. In addition, the project
provides a rich and diverse educational experience for students and postdoctoral
fellows at Georgia State University, an institution with large numbers of
minority students and students from low-income backgrounds. Scientific concepts
and results are disseminated through classroom teaching, local events,
attendance at scientific meetings, and publications. Additional educational and
outreach activities provide opportunities to many in the Atlanta Metro Area and
beyond through an on-going NSF undergraduate research program and the Atlanta
Science Festival, as well as several other recently established mentor programs
at Georgia State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enabling intellectual
merit is the in-situ signal amplification mechanism in signal-on electrochemical
sensors via redox cycling. The novel design drastically improves the lower limit
of detection (LoD) to be competitive with and possibly surpass that of existing
methods and eliminates the need for error-prone, multi-step sample treatments,
such as enrichment, labeling, or amplification. The concept, employed in single-
entity electrochemistry, is fundamentally different from the sample
amplification strategy adopted in most nucleic acid analysis tools being used.
In principle, the LoD is anticipated to approach utmost levels, i.e., single
copies of ribonucleic acid (RNA) where the response time is correlated through
statistical analysis. The sensor specificity to the SARS-CoV-2 specific RNA
sequence(s) is based on their recognition by electrode-immobilized probes. With
key components pre-assembled as integral parts of the sensor, near-zero
background may be established, which is the prerequisite to improve the LoD and
resolve binding of single nucleic acids. Binding with the target sequence turns
on the designed electron-transfer pathway: the redox molecule on the recognition
probe is then abled to repeatedly mediate electron transfers between the sensor
electrode and the co-reactants in solution. The signal-on mechanism further
mitigates nonspecific adsorption concerns. Individual sensors are assembled into
arrays to simultaneously detect multiple target RNAs. The multiplex signal
readout design represents another intellectual merit for enhanced sensor
performance. The mechanistic insights from cyclic voltammetry and low LoD
achieved with pulse voltammetry are envisioned as critical for the formulation
of optimal and generalizable measurement methods and protocols. Synthetic
samples, common biomatrices, viral RNA extractions, and virus-infected cell
lysates are selected to establish calibration profiles and detection strategies.
Comparison of the results with those from laboratory analysis techniques, such
as reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction, provides further validation
of the sensor efficacy. In addition to offering qualitative Yes/No answers for
fast testing, the sensor approach may provide quantitative information in
absolute concentrations over a wide dynamic range, an outcome of great value to
the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as to other on-going and future needs in the
biological sensing community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.