* 2034400
* Large Angular Scale Polarization Survey of the Cosmic Microwave Background - Phase Two
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Ricardo Bustos, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,305,707.00

This award supports new observations with the Cosmology Large Angular Scale
Surveyor (CLASS). The main science goals of CLASS are (1) to measure when the
first stars lit up the universe and (2) to detect and characterize primordial
gravitational waves created at the start of the universe. The first goal is
important for understanding how galaxies formed and also improves our ability to
measure the mass of fundamental particles called neutrinos, the study of which
is a frontier in physics. The second goal will tell us what happened at the
earliest moments of the universe and connects gravity with quantum mechanics, a
long-term quest in physics. To accomplish these goals, telescopes with new
technologies have been developed over the past decade and deployed high in the
Chilean Andes, in the Atacama Desert. This is a premier site for observations of
the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB), which is the afterglow of the hot early
universe. CLASS probes the largest-angular-scale (more than 10 degrees across
the sky) variations in the CMB polarization to reach its science goals. Broader
societal impacts include rigorous training of students and postdocs in the US
and Chile. CLASS reaches the public through public events at universities and
local schools, Quarknet high-school teacher training, and development of high-
school-level cosmology modules. Publications and data will be publicly
distributed. Transformational data on the early universe will be of enormous
interest to physicists, astronomers, students, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CLASS is unique among current CMB surveys in
targeting CMB polarization corresponding to angular multipoles down to ell of
order 2. At these scales, scattering of CMB photons by the ionized intergalactic
medium (post reionization) alters the CMB polarization angular spectra (both E
and B-modes). This distinctive low-ell signature in the angular power spectrum
is targeted by CLASS to measure the optical depth to reionization at the cosmic-
variance limit and the tensor-to-scalar ratio at the 0.01 level. CLASS uses four
telescopes to measure the CMB polarization over 70% of the sky. The telescope
array observes at four microwave frequencies (40, 90, 150, and 220 GHz) to
differentiate between the CMB signal and the microwave emission from our Galaxy.
The key technology enabling the low-ell measurement through low-frequency noise
reduction is rapid polarization amplitude modulation with a Variable-delay
Polarization Modulator. Additional technology developments include novel
microwave optics, cryogenic transition-edge sensors, and a custom high-
performance data pipeline. The initial 5-year CLASS survey (funded under a
previous MSIP), was begun in 2016. This grant allows the team to capitalize on
developments in instrumentation, survey strategy, and data analysis pipeline
from the first five years, and acts as a bridge to future, enhanced
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.