* 2034948
* CAREER: Giant Tunability through Piezoelectric Resonant Acoustic Metamaterials for Radio Frequency Adaptive Integrated Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Cristian Cassella, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Our well-being and livelihood, our education, our social interactions, and our
knowledge of the fundamental sciences depend, more and more, on a host of
advanced technologies, such as cloud-storage, edge-computing, machine learning,
artificial intelligence (AI) and fifth-generation (5G) wireless communication.
However, to allow these technologies to succeed, new hardware components such as
more stable frequency synthesizers (FSs) based on novel materials and techniques
will be critical and need to be developed. Similarly, the Internet-of-Things
(IoT) has created a growing number of wireless nodes within an already congested
spectrum. Therefore, new lower-power tunable front-end architectures that are
capable of filtering interference signals and adapting to changing
electromagnetic scenarios are needed to grant higher communication throughputs
and longer battery lifetimes. To meet these challenges, this CAREER proposes to
develop a new class of passive, tunable, and high-performance integrated
resonant devices, namely the Piezoelectric Resonant Acoustic Metamaterials
(pRAMs). Thanks to their unique, artificially produced and reconfigurable modal
features, the development of pRAMs will enable new stable FSs, adaptive front
ends for IoT radios and many other on-chip transducers for sensing and
communication. The project team will collaborate with the Northeastern
Universityâ€™s Center for STEM Education to organize on-campus activities, as well
as outreach visits to connect with underrepresented groups in local schools and
communities. The project achievements will enrich both the undergraduate and the
graduate courses that the Principal Investigator teaches on circuit theory and
on advanced acoustic-based technologies for communication and sensing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pRAMs will rely on the distinctive propagation
features of acoustic metamaterials, built out of CMOS-compatible Aluminum
Nitride (AlN) or Aluminum Scandium Nitride (AlScN) thin-films and embodying a
periodic arrangement of magnetostrictive rods. Thanks to their unique,
artificially produced and reconfigurable modal characteristics, pRAMs will
surpass the material limitations that have prevented the achievement of low-loss
acoustic resonant technologies, even with moderate frequency tuning ranges. This
will allow the creation of new on-chip acoustic-based passives and will provide
the means to achieve significantly more stable FSs for future networking
components. Furthermore, pRAMs will allow the development of a new class of
tunable channel-select-filters enabling future generations of IoT wireless nodes
resilient to interference and consuming lower power. It is envisioned that by
exploiting their new magnetosensitive behavior responsible for their large
tuning range, pRAMs will likely pave the way towards a new class of chip-scale
magnetometers, achieving the low limits of detection compatible to the
challenging needs of critical biomagnetic and environmental applications, yet
not requiring to be biased or cooled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.