* 2034122
* Nanoparticle Interactions and Nanoscale Transport in Polyelectrolyte Brushes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Russell Composto, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 07/31/2024
* USD 520,000.00

Nanoparticles come in a variety of sizes, shapes, chemistries, and
functionalities, including folded proteins, viruses, and quantum dots. This
project will research the motion of individual nanoparticles in complex
environments. Most previous studies of nanoparticle motion have been limited to
studies of ensembles of particles or particles in homogeneous environments, and
these studies provide a valuable foundation upon which to build. Recent advances
in imaging methods and data processing methods enable the study of nanoparticles
in heterogeneous environments one particle at a time. A new imaging method
provides improved spatial and temporal resolution that detects biomolecules at
interface, and the investigators will apply this advanced imaging method to the
study of nanoparticle motion at interfaces, particularly interfaces with various
functionalities. These studies and fundamental understanding will inform
advanced strategies for separating natural or synthetic nanoparticles based on
size, shape, or charge. The investigators will mentor undergraduate researchers,
engage with public outreach events across Philadelphia, and partner with a
program to bring the science laboratory to underserved high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles come in a variety of sizes, shapes,
chemistries, and functionalities, ranging from folded proteins, viruses, and
quantum dots. Because nanoparticles at interfaces underpin a broad and expanding
range of applications including nanoscale filtering and detection, this project
will research the motion of individual nanoparticles in complex local
environments. Most previous studies of nanoparticle motion have been limited to
studies of ensembles of particles or particles in homogeneous environments, and
these studies provide a valuable foundation upon which to build. Recent advances
in imaging methods and data processing methods enable the study of nanoparticles
in heterogeneous environments one particle at a time. Interferometric scattering
microscopy provides exceptional spatial and temporal resolution and was
originally developed to image biomolecules at interfaces. This project will use
this advanced method to study nanoparticle motion at interfaces, particularly
interfaces with various functionalities, and under applied electric fields.
These studies and fundamental understanding will inform advanced strategies for
separating natural or synthetic nanoparticles based on size, shape, or charge by
designing interfaces that selectively trap nanoparticles. This new understanding
will also provide strategies for producing higher quality nanoparticle products
with more uniform characteristics. Differentiating mechanisms of nanoparticle
dynamics can also lead to advanced sensing applications. PIs Winey and Composto
will mentor undergraduate researchers, engage with public outreach events across
Philadelphia, and partner with a program to bring the science laboratory to
underserved high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.