* 2034026
* Workshop: The Structure of Technology
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Ricardo Hausmann, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2022
* USD 18,271.00

This workshop will work toward an integrative framework for the interplay
between science and technology on the one hand and social and economic systems
on the other. As scientific discoveries are made and become embodied in new
technologies, they have pervasive impacts on the architecture of technologies,
as well as the organizations and economies around them. These impacts have been
explored with a wide range of tools across fields. Engineering, economics,
management science, science of science, and other fields have developed diverse
frameworks to understand the ways in which abstract knowledge connects with
implementations in real-world systems. However, the multi-disciplinary nature of
these investigations, and the complexity of the interactions between science,
technology, and the economy, have stymied efforts to build an integrative
framework, and parallel efforts in different fields rarely cross disciplinary
boundaries. Having such a framework would help understand and plan for the
impacts of science and technology at all levels, whether promoting innovation in
a small team of designers, or developing policies for a region to branch out
into new industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will convene scholars
to take stock and develop a research agenda to better understand the structural
characteristics of technology that matter for predicting societal outcomes.
Soliciting input from a wide range of disciplines, as well as working towards a
synthesis of their frameworks, is critical for progress as technology change
necessarily involves wide-ranging interactions between scientific discovery,
engineering innovation, business operations, and economics. For example, a
variety of evidence shows how the characteristics of scientific knowledge and
technology shape firms and local economies. Firms often structure their
departments and teams in ways that mirror interactions between physical
components. At the regional level, economic competitiveness depends on whether
scientific and technical knowhow needed for a given technology is present in the
population, highlighting the importance of strategies to gain knowhow through
training or by attracting skilled individuals. The changing characteristics of
technology also matter for efforts to adapt the workforce. As technologies
increasingly leverage robotics or artificial intelligence to automate manual and
routine tasks, they have placed new emphasis on workerâ€™s cognitive and empathic
abilities, portending new training needs for the workplace. The workshop will
gather a set of researchers with diverse expertise under the umbrella of science
of science to develop quantitative ways to model the structure of technologies,
involving embedded relationships among design components, ideas, skills,
economic inputs, and individuals. One outcome of the workshop will be a research
agenda to advance a scientific understanding of science and technology change,
and help a wide range of efforts to predict, guide, and manage its
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.