* 2034255
* Manufacturing Talent Development Innovation Laboratory: A Workshop for Manufacturing USA Institute Workforce Development Stakeholders
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Fazleena Badurdeen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2023
* USD 49,999.00

The Manufacturing USA Institutes were created to be innovators in technology
research and development, thus, supporting integration of novel and advanced
technologies into U.S. industries. Additionally, each Manufacturing USA
Institute was tasked with an education and workforce development mission. This
mission involves alignment of industry, academia, and government to strengthen
the U.S. workforce's advanced technical skills in support of U.S. global
leadership in advanced manufacturing. This project will organize a conference
that brings together eight of the Education and Workforce Development Directors
along with regional strategic partners. The aim of this convening will be to
establish innovative career and technical education pathways for educating the
skilled technical workforce needed as industry implements new technologies. The
conference outcomes will inform the career and technical education communities,
Manufacturing USA Institutes, and the U.S. Advanced Manufacturing industries of
best practices and models for educating the skilled technical workforce. This is
a joint project between the Departments of Education and Defense and the
National Science Foundation. The overall goal is to assist the Manufacturing USA
Institutes to become drivers of regional economic development as they implement
best practices and models to educate domestic talent to ensure U.S.
manufacturing competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will bring
together region-based teams from eight of the Manufacturing USA Institutes to:
1) identify/help formulate the value proposition for targeted organizations to
partner with the institutes for region-specific manufacturing workforce
development; 2) identify the skills demanded by the regional manufacturing
economies, expected growth in the demand and occupations that can meet the skill
requirements; 3) determine the regional operational patterns of the
manufacturing workforce demand distribution between large vs. small/midsized
enterprises ; 4) determine strategies to involve the entire talent development
pipeline; 5) identify additional organizations and agencies to recruit for
formal and informal relationships; 6) explore innovative approaches to increase
the effectiveness of technician education and training; and 7) establish best
practices to utilize regional workforce development resources. Conference
outcomes will include action plans from each participating Manufacturing USA
Institute aimed at achieving the above objectives. These plans will be
disseminated to the entire Manufacturing USA Institute community as well as the
career and technical education communities that include both secondary and post-
secondary institutions. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.