* 2034318
* US Community Access to the Large Millimeter Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Min Yun, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2024
* USD 5,000,000.00

Astronomical observations of celestial sources at millimeter wavelengths address
a broad range of important scientific questions. The United States has an active
community of astronomers with strong interests in pursuing this research,
creating a need for access to world-class telescopes for millimeter-wave
astronomy. This project will provide the US community with open access to 15% of
the scientific observing time on a 50m-diameter, millimeter-wave telescope: the
Large Millimeter Telescope Alfonso Serrano (LMT). The LMT was constructed in a
collaboration between the University of Massachusetts Amherst and the country of
Mexico, who shared the capital cost of building the telescope and currently
share in the scientific use of the facility. US astronomer access to comparable
facilities, located elsewhere in the world, has been extremely limited, so
access to the LMT provides a significant new opportunity for work in diverse
areas such as studies of galactic evolution, time variable objects, and the
formation of stars in the Milky Way and other nearby galaxies. LMT is a project
carried out in a binational collaboration with the country of Mexico, and the
opportunities presented by open access to the telescope are expected to boost
scientific contact and collaborations between the United States and its southern
neighbor. In addition, the educational institutions involved in the program,
University of Massachusetts Amherst, University of Maryland College Park, and
the Instituto Nacional de Astrofisica, Optica, y Electronica in Mexico, have
strong traditions of engaging students and training the next generation of
scientists through hands-on work and direct participation in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this program is to
provide 15% of the scientific observing time on the LMT to the US Community.
Projects will be selected for observing time based on the results of an open,
peer-reviewed, proposal competition. Observations for open access projects will
be carried out by trained LMT observers and data products will be provided to
open access users of the facility. The LMT has state-of-the-art instruments
operating in the atmospheric windows between wavelengths of 4 mm and 0.85 mm and
has the largest single-dish effective area in the world in the ALMA Bands 4-6.
The new TolTEC instrument, a multi-wavelength continuum camera and polarimeter
with 7,000 pixels, will complete surveys of the sky thousands of times faster
than ALMA. Spectral line mapping surveys will also be obtained with surface
brightness sensitivity and speeds exceeding ALMA capabilities, and unbiased
spectroscopic surveys of molecular gas in the high redshift universe will be
conducted. The LMT presents opportunities to carry out both “stand alone”
science as well as playing an important complementary role to ALMA by providing
data sets that will enhance the scientific return from ALMA for the US
Community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.