* 2034154
* EAGER: Mesoscopic modeling of complex chemical-physical processes at interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Emily Ryan, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2024
* USD 209,918.00

In many engineering systems, the physics and chemistry occurring at interfaces
in a component are critical to the systemâ€™s performance, such as the
electrochemical reactions in batteries, cavitation in fuel injectors, pumps and
blood vessels, or reactions in chemical reactors. Understanding the physical
phenomena and interactions between phases at the interfacial level is critical
to designing more efficient systems and new technologies, such as high energy
density batteries and drug delivery methods. With computational methods, we can
visualize the physical nature of interfaces, making it well positioned to study
interfacial processes and to isolate critical phenomena to better understand the
chemical-physical driving forces within a system. Additionally, modeling can
complement experimental work on elucidating the fundamental chemical-physical
processes at the core of many complex engineering systems. For instance, in
battery electrodes, optimal performance requires balancing the surface area
available for reactions, the pore space available for transport of reactive
species, and the connectivity of the solid electrode for charge transport.
Neglecting any of these critical phenomena reduces battery performance. This
study focuses on developing the computational methods needed to resolve
chemical-physical processes at interfaces in the air electrode of high energy
density lithium batteries. The project focuses on models that explicitly resolve
the interfaces and surrounding regions within the complex porous geometry of the
air electrode in a lithium-air battery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
meso-scale model development will focus on modeling the air electrode of a
lithium metal battery using smoothed particle hydrodynamics, a Lagrangian
particle-based modeling method. The air electrode is a porous carbon-based
material and the interfacial region where the air, electrolyte and electrode
meet, is the site of the electrochemical reactions. During discharge, Li+ ions
travel through the electrolyte to the air electrode where they react with
oxygen. In an aprotic electrolyte design, the electrochemical reactions result
in non-soluble lithium peroxide (Li2O2). The buildup of Li2O2 passivates the
surface of the cathode and can lead to clogging of the pores. This limits the
capacity of the battery over multiple charge/discharge cycles as the incomplete
dissolution of Li2O2 decreases the capacity. The meso-scale model will focus on
modeling the meso-scale behavior of the electrode to resolve the interfacial
chemical-physical processes such as transport of species and charge to the
reaction sites and the electrochemical reactions that produce Li2O2. The model
will be used to investigate the meso-scale physics by explicitly resolving the
interface and will study how the interplay between the electrode microstructure,
electrolyte and reaction site concentration and locations affect electrode
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.