* 2034481
* Delineating Nitroxyl Formation Pathways from Chloramines and Free Chlorine and Cascades of Reactive Nitrogen Species to N-Nitrosamines and N-Nitramines
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Julian Fairey, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 329,548.00

Disinfection is a critical unit operation used in water treatment to protect the
public from waterborne diseases. Chloroamines are utilized to disinfect about
one-half of the drinking water produced in the United States. The use of
chloramines in water disinfection provides several advantages. Because they are
less reactive and more stable than chlorine, chloroamines have much less
tendency to form disinfection by-products by reacting with dissolved organic
matter (DOM). In addition, chloramines provide longer-lasting disinfection and
better protection against microorganism regrowth and contamination as treated
water is delivered through the distribution pipe networks. However, recent
research has linked the presence of the cancer-causing compound
N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA)in drinking water to reactive nitrogen species
(RNS) that are formed in chloramine systems used in water disinfection. The goal
of this research is to investigate the role of RNS in the formation of NDMA in
chloroamine water disinfection systems. The successful completion of this
project will benefit society through the development of new knowledge and
insight to control and mitigate the formation of NDMA in chloramine water
disinfection systems. Further benefits to society will be achieved through
student education and training including the mentoring of a doctoral student and
an undergraduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reactive nitrogen
species (RNS) have long been postulated to form in chloramine systems used in
water disinfection. However, the identification of these RNS and delineation of
their roles in the formation of toxic disinfection by-products (DBPs) such as
N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) has remained elusive. Thus, there is a critical
need to identify RNS formed from chloramines and free chlorine and delineate the
subsequent RNS cascades that initiate NDMA formation in drinking water. The goal
of this project is to address these knowledge gaps. To achieve this goal, the PI
propose to test the hypothesis that that nitroxyl is the “missing link” in
understanding NDMA formation via (1) dichloramine hydrolysis and (2) the
reactions of monochloramine or hypochlorous acid with hydroxylamine. The project
will integrate batch kinetic experiments and modeling to (1) evaluate the
formation and role of peroxynitrite as a parent nitrosating agent, (2) delineate
nitroxyl formation pathways from chloramines and free chlorine, and (3)
determine the proportion of N-nitrosamines (e.g. NDMA) and N-nitramines formed
through the nitroxyl pathway under typical chloramination conditions used during
water disinfection. The kinetic experiments will measure and quantify the
concentrations of the relevant reactive species including reactants (free
chlorine, chloramine species, precursors, and dissolved oxygen), RNS
intermediates, stable products (nitrous oxide, nitrogen gas, nitrite, and
nitrate), and N-nitrosamines and N-nitramines. Thus, the successful completion
of this project has the potential for transformative impact through the
development of new fundamental knowledge that could enable the control and
mitigation of the formation of toxic DBPs such as NDMA in chloramine water
disinfection systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.