* 2034234
* EAGER: High-throughput early detection and analysis of COVID-19 plaque formation using time-lapse coherent imaging and deep learning
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Aydogan Ozcan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,947.00

Plaque assays are widely used for measuring the infectious concentration of
viral samples and form a very important tool for vaccine development, especially
for the evaluation of the performance of new vaccines at the exploratory and
preclinical stages. This standard method is laborious and takes days to get the
results, and is subject to human errors since it depends on manual plaque
counting. Molecular techniques such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR or reverse
transcription PCR) and western blots can be used to quantify the viral genome.
However, none of these methods provide information about the infectivity of the
virus and cannot measure plaque forming units. This proposal aims to create a
computational sensor platform for accelerated testing of SARSCoV-2 viability and
infectivity using deep learning-based plaque assays and achieve accurate and
automated plaque forming unit (PFU) measurements within hours as opposed to days
with standard plaque assays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed computational
imaging system will periodically capture coherent microscopic images of the
cytopathogenic effects of viruses on cell cultures and analyze these time lapsed
holographic images using deep neural networks (DNNs) for rapid detection of
viral destruction of the cell monolayer. In addition to early and automated
detection of plaque forming units, this unique platform will further make use of
deep learning for high-throughput holographic image reconstruction of the assay
volume to perform tile-scan imaging of the entire well plate within 5 min,
corresponding to an imaging throughput of ~50 cm2/min. Powered by deep learning,
this automated and cost-effective viral plaque monitoring platform can be
transformative for a wide range of applications in microbiology and virology by
significantly reducing the detection time without labeling or the need for an
expert, or manual inspection. The project will also establish a complementary
educational outreach program that will involve (1) public interviews and popular
science articles in news media and internet; (2) undergraduate research
opportunities in the PIâ€™s laboratory involving minority students; and (3)
graduate student training through organization of workshops, seminars and
conferences. Furthermore, research projects, seminars and open house visits will
serve undergrads and high school students (especially from minority groups) to
interact with a cutting edge research environment, helping to increase their
scientific curiosity and shaping their career goals in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.