* 2034778
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Arctic Wetlands Ecosystems - Resilience through Restoration &amp; Stewardship
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Henry Lee, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2023
* USD 286,322.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support for research projects that
focus on Resilience in a Rapidly Changing Arctic. Integrated teams of scientists
and stakeholders will address key areas of arctic resilience understanding and
action. This collaboration of academic and non-academic knowledge systems
constitutes a transdisciplinary approach that will advance not only
understanding of the fundamentals of arctic resilience but also spur action,
inform decision-making, and translate into solutions for resilience. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AWERRS (Arctic Wetlands Ecosystems - Resilience
through Restoration and Stewardship) project seeks to address the challenge of
building resilience in a rapidly changing Arctic by focusing on human activities
that impact Arctic wetlands ecosystems. The project will support and help
communities to strengthen their capacity to engage in wetlands restoration and
stewardship. At a local scale, wetlands buffer heavy precipitation and snowmelt
and filter and store water. They provide crucial habitat for biodiversity,
providing nesting and breeding areas for migratory bird species and spawning
areas for fish species. As such, they support traditional livelihoods activities
including reindeer husbandry, hunting and fishing, other cultural and
recreational activities, and tourism. Less widely known is that intact wetlands
store a stunning amount of global carbon. While they make up only about 3% of
the Earth's land area, wetlands store an estimated 20% of the worlds terrestrial
carbon â€“ the largest regional store of carbon on the planet. Identifying and
testing approaches for strengthening the engagement of local communities and
other actors in the restoration and stewardship of Arctic wetlands ecosystems
helps increase community resilience though shared engagement - and through the
ecosystem service benefits derived from improving wetlands ecosystems'
resilience&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.