* 2034137
* Machine Learning for Communication-Cognizant Smart Inverter Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Ming Jin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2023
* USD 390,000.00

Smart inverters interfacing solar panels, energy storage units, and electric
vehicles to the main electric grid are an effective grid control mechanism to
cope with the voltage fluctuations induced by solar generation in residential
grids. However, selecting the power injections for hundreds of inverters in real
time is a formidable task. To hit the sweet spot between cyber demanding
optimization solutions and subpar local control, the proposed research develops
novel algorithmic schemes for coordinating inverters based on control rules or
policies trained through machine learning (ML). This program advances
understanding of communication-limited decentralized control of residential
electric grids and discovers novel uses of smart meter data, with immediate
applicability to distribution systems and relevance to electric power utility
practice. The expected benefits to industry are cutting-edge physics-aware ML
solutions, advanced asset management, and value added for inverters, sensors,
and grid communications. Enhancing grid controllability benefits society by
enabling reliable integration of smart grid technologies, such as distributed
solar generation, electric vehicles, and demand-response programs. Handling
voltage excursions by inverters extends the lifetime of voltage regulators and
capacitors, and postpones costly grid upgrades. The proposed research activities
are integrated with educational and outreach objectives. The program reaches
pre-college female students through hands-on learning activities on renewable
energy sources and continues the PIs' outreach to undergraduate students through
visits to residential communities and seminars. The findings will be integrated
into the curricula of (under)-graduate courses on distribution grids and ML for
energy systems, thus educating the upcoming power-engineering workforce on
timely ML tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aspires to integrate machine
learning (ML) models into optimal power flow (OPF) formulations to develop data-
adaptive and communication-limited smart inverter control schemes in power
distribution grids. This is achieved by accomplishing the ensuing tasks: i)
devise algorithmic solutions to ensure ML modules comply with inverter
specifications and feeder constraints; ii) capture the physical coupling across
ML modules through approximate and exact AC power flow equations under both
model-based and model-free setups; iii) put forth stochastic and chance-
constrained ML-based OPF schemes to deal with the uncertainty of solar
generation and loads; iv) design learning architectures that are centrally
trained and implemented in a distributed manner on a tight communication budget
to exploit big historical data but small real-time data feeds; and v) ensure
dynamic stability and safety when ML modules are driven by states to close the
loop. The outcome will be a comprehensive suite of ML-based inverter
optimization solutions validated using real-world data on benchmark feeders. The
proposed research pioneers the design of data-driven nonlinear inverter control
policies at the nexus of power systems, ML, robust control, and stochastic
optimization. The original and potentially transformative idea of learning
inverter control rules through a stochastic constrained OPF is the permeating
theme of this project. When OPF and local control schemes fail to adjust to
time-varying grid conditions, the proposed ML-OPF solutions exploit creatively
designed neural network topologies, as well as advances in kernel-based and
reinforcement learning to operate effectively under the train-big/operate-small
data paradigm. Building communication-aware inverter control policies will
advance our knowledge on constrained learning over a physical or engineered
system under a tight communication budget. Research tasks explore different ML
tools; account for model-based and model-free setups; handle approximate and
exact grid models; and consider varying communication capacities between the
utility and inverters. Uniquely combining expertise on distribution grids,
statistical learning, robust control, and reinforcement learning, this project
goes beyond communication-limited inverter control to bandwidth-limited resource
allocation problems and cyber-physical systems
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.