* 2034351
* SitS NSF- Field deployable sensing of the plant-soil interface: innovative bio-mimetic robots to understand dynamic soil processes and accelerate root and rhizosphere productivity
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Taryn Bauerle, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,199,959.00

Advances in agricultural practices have increased crop productivity in recent
years but at the cost of soil quality. Soil and plant roots represent critical
components in terrestrial carbon sequestration. The physics, chemistry and
biology in this zone play central roles in global organic carbon, nitrogen and
water cycles, and in a large part drive plant productivity. The opacity of soil
coupled with the dynamic nature of the soil-root system have severely limited
direct observations that would allow precise interventions as part of soil and
plant management. New developments in subterranean exploration technology
provide opportunities to probe the intricate relationship between roots and
their surrounding soil environment. The investigators will integrate novel
biologically inspired robotics; specifically soil endoscopes with fiber optics
for soil and near root sensing and root growth and dynamics image capture, and
novel soil sensing technology, for measurements of water and soil organic carbon
dynamics. Developing this suite of novel tools will enable new means to
interrogate the soil and specifically to address questions about roots, the
“hidden half” of plants. This interdisciplinary effort has the potential to
advance current belowground sensor systems across temporal and spatial scales to
enable breeding efforts that directly affect food productivity and security. The
project builds upon established programs that stimulate interest and engagement
in science and engineering for girls, fosters public engagement in science and
promotes training for early-career scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of
a suitable technology to measure the interplay of roots, water, and carbon
directly at the root-soil interface has severely limited the ability to
elucidate the temporal and spatial variation in bulk versus rhizosphere soil
processes including root-soil hydraulic contact, rhizosphere metabolite
profiling and soil organic carbon forms for inclusion in plant breeding and crop
management programs. This work has the potential to significantly unravel
several scientific questions including: 1) understanding of how plant roots
influence the biophysical environment of the rhizosphere, and 2) quantifying how
root exudates alter water in the rhizosphere and key processes in soil organic
matter formation. The investigators will use two new methods to navigate and
sense roots and soils with minimal disturbance. These advances will allow
spatio-temporal measurements of the near-root and bulk soil environment, an
important yet overlooked component of agricultural systems where the amount of
carbon stored belowground often surpasses aboveground storage. Moreover,
integration of above – and belowground environmental data in maize field trials
will allow for a detailed understanding of the interrelationship of plant
phenotypes to soil properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was made through
the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" solicitation, a collaborative partnership
between the National Science Foundation and the United States Department of
Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture (USDA
NIFA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.