* 2034794
* RAPID--Physical principles of self-assembly of SARS-CoV-2: Theory with input from experiment
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Umar Mohideen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is made on a RAPID proposal
in response to the Coronavirus Disease 2019 Dear Colleague Letter. SARS-CoV-2
belongs to the family of coronaviruses and is responsible for the current
pandemic. Untangling the steps and stages of how the components of the virus
assemble themselves to make it is challenging. In contrast to icosahedral
viruses which are shaped like a geodesic dome with 20 triangular sides,
coronaviruses are heterogeneous both in size and morphology complicating their
statistical reconstruction. While a fair amount of theory has been done for the
assembly of icosahedral viruses, such an analysis has not been attempted for
coronaviruses with their attendant complexities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since
viruses have no independent energy source, assembly and budding strategies rely
mainly on a combination of equilibrium statistical physics and the exploitation
of active cellular processes hijacked for the formation of the virus. This
project is focused on the investigating the assembly of SARS-CoV-2 both
theoretically and through computer simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the lack of data necessary for the
theory, this project also contains an experimental component. The project is
focused on advancing understanding of the role of SARS-CoV2 structural proteins
in its self-assembly using experiments. In particular, the PIs will use
microscopy to study viral assembly within human cells and in vitro models, and
to characterize particles collected from cells. The goal of experiments is to
provide the basic necessary parameters for the theoretical investigation. By
carrying out theory and experiment in concert, the PIs will obtain a deeper and
more mechanistic understanding of the formation and assembly of SARS-CoV-2,
which can contribute to the rapid design of effective drug therapies and thus
will have a crucial role in combating the threat of the present and future
global pandemic outbreaks of such
coronaviruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported through this award made on
RAPID proposal will enable the development of coarse-grained simulations to
study the role of several proteins involved in the formation of SARS-CoV-2
responsible for the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), which is spreading
rapidly across the world, with tremendous adverse impact on health and the
economy. Due to the urgency of the issue, numerous complementary strategies
should be employed to tackle the problem and to improve the knowledge and
information base. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SARS-CoV-2 forms at the membrane of the
Endoplasmic Reticulum Golgi Intermediate Compartment (ERGIC). The assembly of
SARS-CoV-2 is unique compared to many other viruses as both the assembly and
budding occur simultaneously at the ERGIC membrane. Despite some investigation,
very little is known of the assembly pathway or mechanism. This project is aimed
to advance understanding of how SARS-CoV-2 assembles and provides a platform for
other fundamental investigations to develop drugs and other strategies for
treatment. A better understanding of physical principles involved in the
formation of SARS-CoV-2 will advance the means of defeating the virus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will employ the methods of soft
condensed matter and statistical mechanics of virus assembly, using both
equilibrium and nonequilibrium approaches. Since virus assembly is akin to a
thermodynamic phase transition, nucleation and growth theory will be used for
the kinetics. Using the law of mass action and classical nucleation theory the
PIs explore how the protein concentration, solution condition, that is, pH and
salt concentration, influence the degree of assembly and budding. The analytical
theory will be augmented by Monte Carlo simulations in grand canonical
ensembles. This award also has an experimental component guided by the needs of
the theory and simulation effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The particular
intellectual merit of this proposal is the development of a dynamical theory of
the coupled shape fluctuations of the membrane and the diffusion of proteins
bound to it, and the testing of these results by the analysis of the experiments
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.