* 2034584
* EAGER: Investigating the Hinge Mechanics of the Spike Protein to Understand the Coronavirus Infection Mechanism
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2020,11/30/2021
* Sinan Keten, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nakhiah Goulbourne
* 11/30/2021
* USD 188,034.00

This COVID-19 EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will
investigate how SARS-CoV-2, virus causing the disease, attaches to cells, and
how it may detach when subject to mechanical force. The virus attaches to cells
through its spike protein, and it is believed that this protein has flexible
regions called hinges that allow it to change its shape to regulate its
attachment. This project will establish a method involving molecular simulations
and data science methods to reliably identify these hinges. These analyses will
aim to explain how mechanical forces and chemical factors influence hinge
motions that influence the binding of the virus to cells. Understanding how the
spike protein changes its shape during viral attachment, and how it may detach,
e.g. during coughing and sneezing is critical for accurately describing how the
virus enters cells, and how we can prevent infection. These findings will
advance scientific understanding about this novel coronavirus and provide
fundamental insights needed to find a cure for the disease.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will aim to implement a novel
computational strategy to understand how hinge motions of the spike protein
govern viral attachment. This method will combine molecular simulations with
network reconstruction and community detection methods that are new to the study
of proteins. It will aim to accurately identify soft and stiff regions of the
protein, pinpoint hinge motions, and examine how mechanical forces impact
receptor binding domain accessibility and binding strength. This will provide
critically needed physical insights into how SARS-CoV-2 binds and infects cells,
how it may dislodge when subject to force, and which compliant regions
antibodies could target to prevent attachment. Statistically rigorous techniques
for inferring network properties will help to correctly identify the regions
that regulate viral attachment. As part of outreach efforts, physics-based
animations and videos on the spike protein dynamics and viral attachment will be
created and disseminated. Statistical methods, codes and software developed to
infer networks and hinge motions from simulations will be shared with the
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.