* 2034004
* I-Corps: Dynamic Wireless Charging
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Khurram Afridi, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project includes
increased productivity and cost reductions in warehouses and factories through
wireless charging of autonomous material handling vehicles (AMHVs). The
commercialization of the proposed technologies could reduce the need for
expensive and bulky on-board batteries, extend range, and accelerate electric
vehicle penetration with the potential for substantial reductions in U.S. energy
consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. The wireless charging technology could
also enable new life-saving and quality-of-life enhancing energy-hungry
biomedical implants, such as artificial hearts, for millions of people. This new
wireless charging technology, if properly engineered and marketed, may meet
unaddressed needs by providing a way for in-motion charging while eliminating
downtime. The project will also meet broader educational goals, including the
training of a graduate student through the I-Corps innovation and
entrepreneurship course and Cornell's Commercialization Fellows
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is a dynamic capacitive
wireless charging system suitable for in-motion charging of autonomous material
handing vehicles (AMHVs), other mobile robots, and electric vehicles (EVs).
Power is transferred safely and without contact through the air via high-
frequency electric fields from the charging pad on the floor to the charging pad
on the vehicle when the vehicle is in proximity. Research in this area has led
to the development of new approaches to the design of multi-stage matching
networks, active variable reactance rectifiers, and variable compensation
inverters suitable for dynamic capacitive wireless charging systems, as well as
other radio frequency applications. Compared to inductive wireless charging
(which transfers energy through magnetic fields), capacitive wireless charging
is smaller, lighter, less expensive, and easier to embed in the floor.
Preliminary analysis suggests the possibility of substantial cost reductions
through reduced downtime with the use of dynamic capacitive wireless charging
instead of wired charging in warehouses. This system will also enable research
in large-scale deployment of wireless charging infrastructure for AMHVs, other
mobile robots, and EVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.