* 2034014
* SBIR Phase I:  Using patient specific DNA methylation to predict COVID-19 clinical prognosis
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Kristin Brogaard, INHERENT BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2021
* USD 255,959.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of an onsite, clinical test
to screen incoming patients potentially infected with COVID-19 and prioritize
hospital resources and personnel based on a predicted infection severity and
treatment response. The benefits of a test that can predict COVID-19 infection
severity are enormous. In addition to the millions of infections and hundreds of
thousands of dealths, it costs hospitals an average of roughly $2,500 per day
per patient for inpatient care. This project will develop a test for COVID-19
screening to accurately identify patients at risk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is establishing the
use of DNA methylation patterns for personalized screening and treatment for
COVID-19. The variation in symptoms and outcomes for COVID-19 progression make
it challenging for healthcare workers to triage accurately. The development of a
DNA methylation-based test to predict the severity of COVID-19 infection will
help manage the pandemic. This project will: 1) generate a comprehensive dataset
of white blood cell DNA methylation patterns, health history, and clinical data
for patients infected with COVID-19; 2) generate a predictive model for COVID-19
infection severity and treatment response. The anticipated technical results of
this project are a testing method and a computer algorithm for predicting
infection severity and treatment response based on a patientâ€™s unique DNA
methylation pattern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.