* 2034938
* Collaborative Research: Large-Signal Stability Analysis and Enhancement of Converter-Dominated DC Microgrid
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Wencong Su, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2024
* USD 353,479.00

Title: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Large-Signal Stability
Analysis and Enhancement of Converter-Dominated DC
Microgrid&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While DC
microgrids have many well-understood advantages (e.g., simpler, more efficient
and compact power conversion system as well as less copper consumption in the
cables), the unique DC electric characteristics, such as direct P-V coupling
(i.e., even a small load/generation change can lead to voltage flickers and
equipment malfunctions) and low system inertia (i.e., very little overload
capacity), pose great challenges to grid stability. Small-signal stability can
only ensure the stability of the system at the equilibrium point, but the true
boundary of the stability domain cannot be determined; hence there are major
limitations in securing stability when the system has large disturbances.
Existing large-signal analysis tools in the literature have either limited
applicable ranges or non-rigorous theoretical foundations. Therefore, there is
an urgent need to develop a fundamental knowledge base of large-signal stability
analysis in converter-dominated DC microgrids and a comprehensive design
guideline for DC grid stability. The research findings of this project directly
contribute to the overall goal in our country to maintain high reliability and
resilience electricity with more and more microgrids and distributed energy
sources. The proposed education and outreach research plan will (i) incorporate
theoretical frameworks, curated data sets, and testbed from this project into
the existing curriculum at both the University of Michigan-Dearborn and the
University of Texas at Austin; (ii) promote K-12 students’ interest in STEM;
(iii) disseminate all project materials, processes, designs and results in the
public domain via public-access websites, top-ranking conference and journal
publications and in diverse media; and (iv) provide rich research opportunities
to under-represented undergraduates by creating societally meaningful projects
on microgrids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to (a) take a
rigorous step toward deriving the sufficient criteria for large-signal global
stability in DC microgrids with multiple distributed energy sources and constant
power loads, which is still an unsolved puzzle because traditional small-signal
stability analysis does not apply to converter-dominated power systems when a
large disturbance occurs, such as a fault, a pulse power load, or load
switching; and (b) investigate a systematic methodology to improve the global
asymptotic stability of a converter-dominated DC microgrid in a theoretically
sound yet easy-to-implement manner, ultimately bridging the technology gap
between three traditionally disjointed areas: control theory, power systems, and
power electronics. The proposed project aims to fulfill this goal by leveraging
the range and depth of the PIs’ expertise (e.g., power systems, power
electronics, optimization, control theory, and machine learning). The proposed
research will have intellectual merits in the following areas: (1) a fundamental
knowledge base to understand the large-signal stability criteria of inertia-less
DC microgrids with 100% penetration of constant power loads and converter-based
distributed energy sources; (2) a stability-aware converter to collectively
improve the global asymptotic stability of converter-dominated DC microgrids in
a theoretically sound yet easy-to-implement manner; (3) rigorous mathematical
methods and safe learning algorithms for estimating the region of attraction of
a general dynamic system (i.e., a DC microgrid) with multiple equilibria; and
(4) a power-hardware-in-the-loop testbed allowing for dynamic interactions of
the proof-of-concept prototypes of innovative stability-aware
converters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.