* 2034306
* The Event Horizon Telescope: Resolving Black Holes in Time and Space
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Vincent Fish, Northeast Radio Observatory Corp
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 02/28/2026
* USD 8,779,996.00

Black holes are the most mysterious objects in the cosmos. They are formed when
matter collapses in on itself under the force of gravity, producing a
singularity of infinite density. This singularity cannot be directly observed
because it is surrounded by an event horizon, the point where the black hole’s
gravitational field is so strong that even light cannot escape, but matter
outside the event horizon can in principle be observed. On April 10, 2019, the
Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) succeeded in producing the first image of a black
hole at the center of the galaxy M87, 55 million light years from Earth. The
observed ring of light bent in the immense gravity was stunning confirmation
that supermassive black holes exist in the centers of galaxies. The EHT results
enabled scientists to verify key predictions of Einstein’s theory of gravity at
the black hole boundary and to study how supermassive black holes dominate the
energetics and dynamics at the centers of galaxies. This project aims to build
upon this success by improving the EHT so that astronomers can make black hole
images that are much more detailed and take the first steps towards making black
hole movies. Observations under this award will address key questions about
general relativity and astronomy, including whether black holes spin and how
they launch powerful jets that travel at nearly the speed of light to distances
larger than the host galaxy itself. This project includes resources for training
the next generation of radio astronomers involving postdoctoral scholars and
graduate and undergraduate students at US universities, including minority-
serving institutions, and will undertake cultural outreach to the Hawaiian
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports continued operations of an
enhanced Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) over the next three years to test general
relativity and study the astrophysics of supermassive black holes, including the
Galactic Center source (Sagittarius A*) and the black hole in the center of the
nearby galaxy M87. Investments in instrumentation to transform submillimeter
VLBI into a standard observing mode across the heterogeneous array will enable
monitoring campaigns triggered during optimal observing conditions, allowing a
study of the dynamics of the material at the base of the jet in M87. The
extension of observing to the 345 GHz frequency band will increase the angular
resolution of the EHT, sharpen its view of Sagittarius A* due to reduced
interstellar scattering, enhance its ability to study the structure of the
magnetic field in these and other sources, and test the prediction that photon
rings are independent of observing frequency. The EHT will continue to be made
available to the broader astronomical community through an annual call for
proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.