* 2034430
* SitS: Coupling High Frequency Soil Solute Signals and Scalable Simulations to Quantify Biogeochemical Mechanisms Governing Water Quality
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Robert Payn, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 12/31/2025
* USD 948,426.00

This award was made through the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" solicitation, a
collaborative partnership between the National Science Foundation and the United
States Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture
(USDA NIFA). Agricultural areas face a pervasive problem of poor water quality
that is tied to inefficient use of fertilizer-provided nutrients by crops. Soils
play a key role in regulating whether nutrients from fertilizers actually add
value to the plant growth or if the nutrients are not absorbed and end up
contaminating groundwaters and streams. The ability to understand how to promote
the retention of nutrients in soils, reduce the potential for water resource
contamination, and increase delivery of nutrients to crop production are
collectively hampered by the inability to make direct observations of the
activities of dissolved chemicals in soil water. This work will use new sensors
embedded in soils to observe a suite of added nutrients, including the key
nutrient and major water contaminant nitrate, over a range of experimental and
field conditions. These buried sensors will transmit data electronically, and a
soil model will be used to interpret the signals. The results of this work will
identify conditions that balance water quality and sustainable plant production
in model rain-irrigated systems of the Northern Great Plains. This project will
also motivate activities supporting science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM) education and participation in underserved communities of the region. If
successful, this project will strengthen the nation’s food security while
preserving water resources by providing technology that makes the use of
agricultural fertilizers more efficient and decreases the negative environmental
impacts of these fertilizers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The movement of water through
soils mediates both weathering reactions and biogeochemical cycles to drive
solute loads delivered to groundwater and rivers. However, current sensor
technologies and solute transport modeling approaches limit the efficacy of
efforts to address critical questions about soil processes governing the
consequences of land use for water quality. In soils, the highly soluble and
mobile nitrate ion provides an indicator of nitrogen (N) availability and
transformation, serving as a frequently studied yet under-observed signal
molecule in disturbed and fertilized systems. Nitrate concentrations in soils
are currently quantified using destructive soil sampling, a technique used for
over a century. In-situ and real-time measurements of nitrate concentrations in
soil waters are lacking. Two limitations hamper understanding of the nitrate
signal: 1) lack of high-frequency observations of soil solution composition, and
2) lack of observations that differentiate dynamics in nitrate concentrations
driven by variation in the pore structure of the soil fabric. This work will
develop, test, and produce a coupled multi-scale sensor approach and solute
transport modeling framework capable of scaling reaction dynamics from pore to
profile scales. The team will undertake measurements of nitrate in parallel with
measurements of general water quality (conductivity, pH, temperature), to
address how variation in soil water biogeochemistry associated with variation in
pore structure dictates nitrate fate and transport in agricultural soils.
Results will include the establishment of new technologies for exploring
mechanisms interrelating physical soil structure, hydrologic dynamics, and
solute reaction regimes from pores to profiles. These fundamental insights about
soil systems will benefit efforts to balance water quality protection with
sustainable food production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.