* 2034651
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Variable Household Use of Space
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Ashley Hampton, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2023
* USD 29,400.00

Researchers have long been interested in understanding how culture changes over
time. Understanding one particular type of cultural shift, the creation and
perpetuation of social inequality, is particularly pertinent to modern-day
social realities. This project builds on previous ethnographic and
archaeological research into how complex fisher-hunter-gatherer groups shift
from an egalitarian to a non-egalitarian society. Understanding the expression
and experience of such social change by members of households is the primary
focus of this research. How might a society go from a cultural ethos of sharing
access to resources to one promoting restricted access? How is access to
resources and power defined and who is included (or not included)? This research
investigates these questions by analyzing changes in household-based
interactions to unravel the roles gender, kinship, and agency play in defining
access to power and resources within an emerging social hierarchy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation project examines previously
collected material from a site which contains a sequence of 15 anthropogenic
floors. The researchers will conduct new macrobotanical analyses and examine
lithic artifacts from four occupations using a wide array of cutting-edge
analytical techniques (geo-chemical sourcing, residue studies, and ancient DNA
analysis) to understand what types of activities constituted social identities
during different times within the housepit. Spatial and statistical analysis of
these data will be used to understand, reconstruct, and interpret changes in
past household interactions over time. This research will thus create new
frameworks for understanding the interplay between social identity and the
emergence of institutionalized inequality at the household level. The research
will actively include First Nation perspectives and cultural knowledge to
interpret and contribute to ongoing public memory projects in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.