* 2034228
* RAPID: Reconstructing the contemporary history and progenitor of SARS-CoV-2 strains causing COVID-19
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Sudhir Kumar, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the root cause
of the COVID-19 disease that has caused many deaths in the US and millions of
infections worldwide. It is expected to infect many more and is feared to
inflict a higher death toll, requiring immediate research efforts to understand
its genome biology and evolution. Experimental laboratories have quickly
assembled tens of thousands of CoV-2 genomes to characterize its variation and
to track the spread of COVID-19. Now a meaningful analysis of this enormous
dataset is needed to understand patterns of coronavirus change over the last few
months. These evolutionary patterns are the key to making predictions and
developing products to fight COVID-19. The discovery of evolutionary patterns
requires new methods explicitly designed to exploit salient features of
coronavirus genomes and the history of the outbreaks. This project will provide
professional development opportunities for two early career scientists, and a
public webinar for broader education and training on how to use the new software
to study viral evolution will be hosted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel analytical
approaches for inferring the contemporary evolutionary history of SARS-CoV-2
strains will be developed. In preliminary investigations, the new procedures and
protocols show higher power in resolving early evolutionary events in the SARS-
CoV-2 history. New methods will be tested by using empirical and computer-
simulated datasets. An extensive collection of coronavirus strains will be
analyzed to reconstruct the earliest evolutionary events in its origin and
divergence. The new software implementing the new methods will be integrated
into the Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software that is used
extensively in virology. This will place sophisticated techniques at the
fingertips of scientists via a graphical user interface and command-line
versions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.