* 2034048
* Environmental Effects on Viable Virus Transport in Ventilation Airflow at High Risk Facilities
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2024
* Yassin Hassan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 11/30/2024
* USD 329,268.00

Meat processing plants have become hotbeds for the transmission of COVID-19 in
the United States. Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems in meat
processing facilities provide a means of transporting SARS-CoV-2, the virus that
causes COVID-19. In addition, these ventilation systems facilitate the
deposition of virus particles onto surfaces where they can survive and remain
infectious for days. Despite a recent flurry of investigations, the spread of
COVID-19 via aerosol dispersion and inhalation in processing plants remains
poorly understood. The goals of this research are to advance our fundamental
understanding of the spread of viruses-laden aerosols in processing plants and
use this knowledge to mitigate the transmission and spread of SARS-CoV-2. To
achieve this goal, researchers will use bovine corona virus, a surrogate for
SARS-CoV-2, to: i) investigate virus aerosolization, transport, and deposition
inside a model test chamber designed to simulate conditions in the meat
processing plant; and ii) perform computational modeling of virus particle
transport to predict behavior in the ventilation system. Successful completion
of this project will benefit society through the development of new knowledge to
understand and mitigate the transmission and spread of SARS-CoV-2 virus
particles in meat processing plants, thus protecting a vital part of the
Nation’s food supply. Further benefits to society will be achieved through
student education, training, and public outreach including the recruitment and
mentoring of students from underrepresented groups, and training for teachers,
industrial and medical collaborators, and other
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meat processing plants have been especially
hard hit by the current COVID-19 pandemic. Although we know that conditions in
these plants including low temperature, high humidity, and high airflow rate can
facilitate the spread of SARS-CoV-2 virus particles, the relative importance of
these environmental factors on virus transmission and infectivity in meat
processing plants remain poorly understood. The overarching goal of this project
is to advance our fundamental understanding of virus aerosolization, transport,
dispersion, and infectivity in meat processing plants. To achieve this goal,
researchers will carry out an integrated experimental and computational modeling
research program using bovine corona virus (BCoV) as a surrogate for SARS-CoV-2.
Experiments will be conducted in a temperature- and humidity-controlled BSL-2
chamber equipped to track the size and distribution of virus aerosols using
particle tracking velocimetry. During the experiments, the surfaces inside the
test chamber will be sampled at regular time intervals to quantify the number
and viability of BCoV particles using cell culture techniques and quantitative
PCR. Researchers will utilize ANSYS Fluent software to model the airflow pattern
in the test chamber to determine the effect of ventilation on the entrainment
and spread of BCoV aerosols. Finally, researchers will conduct field tests at
two large beef processing pants to validate and apply the project findings.
Successful completion of this project has potential for transformative impact
through the development of new knowledge and tools to predict and mitigate the
transport, dispersion, and infectivity of viruses in meat processing
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.