* 2034178
* SBIR Phase I:  Virucidal surface coatings for prevention of COVID-19 transmission
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Kollbe Ahn, ACATECHOL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2021
* USD 275,864.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from reducing overall COVID-19
mortality, and reducing the incidence of morbid secondary infections in
intubated patients such as ventilator-acquired pneumonia (VAP). The market for
antifouling/antimicrobial indwelling endotracheal tubes (ETTs) was estimated at
$1.85 billion in 2017 with 6.6% annual growth, and further increases are likely
due to the outbreaks of COVID-19 and other respiratory diseases. More than 50%
of COVID-19 deaths are attributable to acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) from secondary healthcare-acquired infections, such as VAP.
Unfortunately, ETTs used for ventilation do not prevent bacterial settlement
upon their surfaces (biofouling). To date there is only one FDA-approved
antimicrobial ETT that does not target fouling as the root cause of VAP, leaving
this critical issue unaddressed. The proposed technology advances the
development of ETTs with novel coatings and can potentially be used in other
indwelling biomedical medical devices, including urinary-, central venous-, and
hemodialysis catheters (estimated market size: $77.7 billion by 2026). A ~10%
reduction infection rate with this technology could prevent 1.7 million
healthcare-acquired infections, annually saving 99,000 lives and $28-45 billion
associated-cost in the US. This technology will also support research in
antimicrobial interactions with surfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase
I project proposes to establish the feasibility of gemini-surfactant inspired
coatings on ETTs to reduce COVID-19 mortality. Current approaches to prevent
biofouling in ETTs involve incorporation of biocidal Ag+ ions or deposition of
hydrophilic polymers resembling traditional surfactants to the surface. However,
such biocide-release coatings liberate Ag+ ions that are cyto- and genotoxic and
are subject to gradual depletion of the active agent. Meanwhile, the polymers
are limited by both intrinsically hydrophobic regions in their backbones and the
low surface activities of conventional “parent” surfactants. This project will
advance the development of a new class of antifouling coatings combining
structural elements of powerful gemini surfactants displaying surface activities
orders of magnitude higher than their conventional counterparts, with the
molecularly precise and durable surface modification technique of silanization.
By mimicking the structures of gemini surfactants, incorporating multiple ionic
“head” groups into the coating via silanization, hydrophilicity and
antifouling/antimicrobial properties will be greatly increased relative to
conventional antifouling coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.