* 2034065
* SBIR Phase I:  Thermal Compression Device for Maintenance of Perioperative Normothermia
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Jeffrey Thompson, Flotherm Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2022
* USD 255,713.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to reduce the risk of patients experiencing a
severe drop in body temperature during surgery, known as inadvertent
perioperative hypothermia (IPH). In the United States, 57.5 million procedures
are performed annually with significant risk of IPH and an estimated 22 million
surgical patients develop clinical complications associated with IPH. IPH leads
to increased wound infections, blood loss, cardiac problems, increased use of
mechanical ventilation, and longer stays in hospital, contributing to 1 million
excess inpatient days and $1.6 billion in yearly costs. The proposed technology
will develop a novel device to prevent IPH, saving an estimated $2,000-$3,500
per patient or $1 billion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to create a body heat transfer model that
accurately integrates the novel device with a tissue model of the lower limb.
The resulting model will enable in silico evaluation of device performance (heat
output), efficacy (heat transfer), and safety (burn risk) across a broad
clinical setting (expanded surgical procedures and patient demographics). We
will collect clinical data from a proof-of-concept feasibility study to create
and validate a model. Further simulation in support of prototype development
efforts enable the optimization of critical parameters. Physical prototypes
(including sub-components) will be developed and manufactured based on the
optimized design. Prototypes will be evaluated for thermal performance under
controlled bench-top tests, with empirical results compared to expected values
generated by the model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.