* 2034508
* I-Corps: Fragmented Learning App based on Knowledge Graphs
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2023
* LiGuo Huang, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a Fragmented Learning App based on knowledge graphs to improve
the effectiveness and efficiency of fragmented learning as a complement to the
traditional collective learning in the classroom setting. This goal is to
examine the impact of the fragmented learning style on various types of domain
knowledge versus the (predominantly used) collective learning style. The
proposed technology will explore how knowledge graphs may represent and organize
knowledge (e.g., concepts, theorems, principles, rules) in various domains and
enable knowledge reasoning and derivation. Data from various types of users will
be collected to enrich and evolve the knowledge graphs based on the latest
learning needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of technology to support fragmented learning, which allows users to
study anytime and anywhere as well as on various platform, improving their
learning effectiveness and efficiency. Specially, the proposed technology is
designed by integrating knowledge graphs with machine/deep learning and Natural
Language Processing models to recommend relevant learning materials based on
coherent and evolving knowledge graphs rather than user-constructed keyword
search. The app constructs both a complete knowledge graph for a knowledge
domain and a personalized knowledge graph for the individual user to generate a
personalized learning plan adapted to his/her individual learning needs.
Leveraging knowledge graphs to represent and organize knowledge from big data
sources (text and video tutorials), the Fragmented Learning App captures
explicit and implicit relations of knowledge and derives new knowledge and
relations to prevent fragmenting the domain knowledge. In addition, the
technology incorporates the social platform and observer roles for user
interaction and knowledge exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.