* 2034987
* SBIR Phase I:  Modular And Reconfigurable Electromagnetic Navigation System For Surgical Interventions And Medical Robotics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Lev Koyrakh, RADWAVE TECHNOLOGIES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a novel electromagnetic navigation system
that offers a transformative solution for a wide range of medical procedures
that demand accuracy, efficiency, and safety. The result of this capability and
its subsequent commercialization will positively affect the outcomes of medical
procedures for patients worldwide. The system will enable tracking medical
instruments over the full procedure space, improve accuracy and reliability, and
reduce patient and staff exposure to harmful radiation while being compatible
with the intraoperative imaging. It will create and augment navigation volumes
on demand during the medical procedures. The system will enable reliable
detection and mitigation of electromagnetic interference. The commercial and
market potential of this solution is significant based on customer discovery
interviews with industry representatives seeking novel electromagnetic
navigation capabilities for minimally invasive and robotic medical procedures.
The broader societal impacts of the technology offer flexible and highly
customizable platforms across key industry sectors important to United States
competitiveness including biomedical, consumer, industrial, and defense sectors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will advance the development of a new electromagnetic navigation system
that requires solving several complex problems involving mathematics, computer
science, and electrical engineering. Millions of minimally invasive procedures
are performed annually worldwide which include cardiac ablations, valve
replacements, bronchoscopies, orthopedic procedures, cancer treatments, etc. All
of these procedures are being treated with increasing robot utilization.
Electromagnetic navigation systems are widely used in these procedures providing
knowledge of locations and orientations when medical instruments are out of the
“line of sight”. Currently available systems, developed before the wide adoption
of robotic surgeries, can handle only fixed navigation volumes and are often
unable to track instruments throughout the full procedure space, which may
require the use of additional harmful X-ray radiation. The current systems use
bulky field generators incompatible with imaging equipment and provide only
limited detection and correction of electromagnetic interference-induced
location distortion in the body. This project will address these shortcomings.
It leverages the industry expertise and demand validation by leading companies
in the minimally invasive and robotics markets, the efficiency and innovation of
an experienced team, and a functional electromagnetic navigation system
prototype developed by the company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.