* 2034883
* Collaborative Research: Sensitivity of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet to 2o Celsius (SWAIS 2C)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* David Harwood, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 757,689.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The West Antarctic Ice Sheet presently holds enough ice
that it would raise global sea level by five meters if it all melted.
Information from satellites demonstrates that the West Antarctic Ice Sheet is
losing ice faster than any other region in the Antarctic. However, how much of
the West Antarctic Ice Sheet will melt and how quickly it will happen when
average global temperatures exceed 2 degrees C is currently unknown. At the
current rate of CO2 emissions to the atmosphere, average global temperatures
will be 1.5 degrees C and 2.0 degrees C above preindustrial levels in 10 and 20
years, respectively. Virtually all pathways to restrict the increase in global
temperatures to 1.5 degrees C now require direct carbon removal from the
atmosphere. Sea level rise is one of the clearest planet-wide signals of this
human-induced climate change. Global mean sea level has increased by ~22 cm
since 1880 and will continue to rise well beyond the 21st century. Given the
far-reaching and international consequences of Antarctica's future contribution
to global sea level rise, the SWAIS 2C Project was developed through
international collaboration to better forecast the size and timing of future
changes. The Sensitivity of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet to 2⁰ Celsius (SWAIS
2C) Project scientists will collect and study geological (rocks), glaciological
(ice), and geophysical (Earth physical properties) data and provide new
information to guide the development of climate and ice sheet numerical models
to better understand and predict how the ice sheet on West Antarctica will
contribute to future sea level rise. The project aims to interpret the state of
past environmental conditions in West Antarctica (warm open marine seas, cold
ice-covered ocean, or polar grounded ice sheet) during recent periods in Earths
history when average global temperatures reached or exceeded 2 degrees C, levels
anticipated within the next two decades. These types of geological studies will
help us understand how much ice melted during past warm periods, what processes
are involved, and how fast it will change. Glaciological and geophysical
information collected by scientists will help us better understand the modern
processes that cause the ice sheet to grow or melt. Modeling studies will use
this new information regarding past and present ice sheet behavior to make
better predictions of how much and how fast the West Antarctic Ice Sheet will
melt in the future. This project will support a United States scientific team
with a range of scientific expertise, with a key goal of broadening the
involvement of early career scientists in Antarctic research. Informative and
impactful education and outreach materials will be developed and shared with
educators to bring polar science into the classroom and provide accurate
information related to ice sheets stability, sea level rise, and global climate
change to students and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Satellite observations
show that the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) is losing mass at an accelerated
rate, much faster than other Antarctic regions. WAIS is considered highly
sensitive to future warming because much of it is grounded 2500 m below sea
level and its associated floating ice shelves are exposed to warming ocean
waters. Future collapse of marine-based sectors and full melting of the WAIS has
the potential to raise global mean sea level by 5 meters. However, Antarctic ice
sheet dynamics remain the largest uncertainty in numerical model projections of
future sea level rise. Existing datasets lack direct physical evidence of WAISs
response to past times when global mean temperatures were 2 degrees C warmer
than during pre-industrial time. The Sensitivity of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
to 2⁰ Celsius (SWAIS 2C) project is a four-year project developed through
international collaboration to integrate geological, glaciological, and
geophysical data with ice sheet and climate modeling studies to better project
future scenarios of WAIS contribution to sea level rise. This approach will aim
to integrate studies of past (using geological records) and present (using
glaciology and geophysical records) ice sheet behavior to inform future
projections (using models) of WAIS response to climate change. This project will
recover two ~200 m-long sediment cores from beneath the WAIS using new drilling
technology in strategic locations adjacent to the grounding zone at Kamb Ice
Stream and at Crary Ice Rise in the inner Ross Embayment along the Siple Coast.
Three SWAIS 2C approaches will determine conditions associated with past WAIS
collapses and will sharpen our predictive tools to assess its future stability
in our warming world: (1) stratigraphic records will provide new
paleoenvironmental information regarding past sensitivities to system
boundaries, processes, and rates of change; (2) modern observations will provide
details of the variables and complexities associated with processes and rates of
change; and (3) numerical model application and development will assess future
scenarios to equilibrium states in accelerated time, and test system
sensitivities and feedbacks. SWAIS 2C Project results will contribute new
information from the southern end (most proximal to the ice grounding zone) of a
transect that extends north to recent drill holes in the outer Ross Embayment to
connect with distal Southern Ocean records. The SWAIS 2C Project is
complementary to the US-UK Thwaites Glacier Project on the other side of West
Antarctica, allowing for a broader understanding of WAIS history and more
accurate predictions of future change. A major goal of this project is to
broaden development of early-career scientists in polar research and work
closely with teaching professionals to provide new, impactful, and assessable
classroom material to educators, and accurate information related to ice sheets
stability, sea level rise, and global climate change to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.