* 2034385
* SitS: Spatial and Temporal Patterns of Soil N and P Cycles Quantified by a Sensor-Model Fusion Framework: Implications for Sustainable Nutrient Management
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Kaiyu Guan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,199,919.00

This award was made through the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" solicitation, a
collaborative partnership between the National Science Foundation and the United
States Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture
(USDA NIFA). High crop productivity in the Midwestern US was achieved by
artificially draining wetlands and applying millions of tons of nitrogen (N) and
phosphorous (P) fertilizers. However, 40-80% of these N and P nutrient inputs
are lost from soils and become pollutants in water bodies and the atmosphere.
Given the continuing need to maintain crop production while reducing concerns
about environmental pollution, managing soil nutrients in a more sustainable and
intelligent manner is a major challenge in this nationally and globally
important agricultural region. This project will integrate recent advances in
nanotechnology, sensing technology, and machine learning to enable new methods
for measuring and managing N and P in croplands to reduce losses to the
environment. The outcomes of this project can be used directly by farmers to
better manage field application of N and P fertilizers and by local/federal
governments and other organizations to pinpoint pollution hotspots and develop
strategies for nutrient reduction. By engaging communities, this project further
aims to enable undergraduate/graduate students, junior and senior professionals,
farmers, and other stakeholders to embrace new-generation technologies to
improve farming management practices and environmental stewardship. If
successful, the technology developed by this project will improve the food and
water security of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To inform and facilitate
sustainable nutrient management in the Midwestern agroecosystems, this project
will develop a sensor-model integration framework to reduce the uncertainty in
estimating key variables related to soil reactive N and P dynamics. The project
will re-purpose a low-cost, graphene-based nanosensor to provide continuous
measurement of soil nitrate and phosphate. To facilitate the calculation of
pools and fluxes of reactive N and P, the team will develop a sensing-inference
system for sub-field hydrological conditions based on the Cosmic Ray Neutron
Sensing (CRNS) system and a hydrology model. Calibration and validation of the
nanosensor and the CRNS system will be performed in tile-drained sites with
already established continuous monitoring for nitrate and phosphate loads as
well as soil moisture. Finally, this project will use a state-of-the-art data
science paradigm, the Physics-Guided Deep Learning (PGDL), as a sensor-model
fusion framework to generalize place-based knowledge about reactive N and P
dynamics to principle-based understanding across multiple scales. PGDL
represents an innovative way to leverage the power of machine learning and
process-based modeling, and, therefore, is expected to significantly advance the
ability to predict and manage N and P in U.S. Midwestern agroecosystems. The
developed sensors and tools can be applicable to other regions worldwide that
face similar balancing issues between the intensification of agricultural
production and the maintenance of environmental
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.