* 2034777
* Collaborative Research: RoL-Rules for Dynamic-Light Environmental Sculpting of Genomes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2025
* Andrew Leakey, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,229,253.00

The problem of getting a clear signal in a noisy environment is a problem that
not only humans must resolve but one that all organisms in nature experience.
The goal of this research is to determine the rules by which plants respond to
noisy and variable light signals. The investigators hypothesize that switching
between low and high levels of light over varying periods of time changes how
light is detected by plants. To study this problem, grasses were chosen because
grasses evolved to grow in many types of light environments such as on the
forest floor where light flickering and shadows are common to open fields where
the light changes very little except for clouds and time of day. The
investigators hypothesize that the ability for grasses to thrive in these
different light environments is encoded in their genomes. The project will
examine how genomically encoded sensing adaptations to dynamic and constant
light environments shapes the physiology, development, genetics, and evolution
of grasses. Investigators will cross train graduate students and post-docs,
especially those from underrepresented groups in state-of-the-art molecular
biology, physiology and genomics. Seminars will bring together internationally
recognized experts in plant ecology, evolutionary biology, plant physiology and
genetics with students and scientists who want to apply these perspectives to
understand how plants respond to dynamic environments. Up to 60 new post-
baccalaureate analysts will participate in international training
workshops.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Changes in genomic elements at several scales
of organization that increase the fitness of an individual are maintained while
those changes that decrease fitness are counter selected for propagation.
Genomic elements that are neutral to fitness are filtered away relative to the
energy cost of maintaining them. These rules are well established at the scale
of genes but not yet scalable to genomes. This project takes an integrative
approach to this question by characterizing the full genomes of a phenotypically
diverse, yet monophyletic, set of grasses from Ecuador. These grasses live in
diverse habitats ranging from the Galapagos Islands, the Paramo’ (alpine
tundra), the rain forest, and riparian and littoral zones. These grasses also
have a wide range of habits (tillering vs vines vs. bushy vs. tree-like),
autotrophic metabolism (C3 vs. C4 carbon fixation), and survival strategies
(perennial vs. annual). The specific question to be addressed is what
genes/alleles shape morphologies/physiologies expressed in dynamic light
environments as opposed to stable light environments. This project brings
together two basic disciplines: botany and genomics but extends the connections
into cell biology, developmental biology, evolution, and
systematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.