* 2034616
* CCSS: Collaborative Research: Intelligent Full-Duplex Cognitive Radio Networks for Pervasive Heterogeneous Wireless Networking
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Brian Mark, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 241,361.00

Wireless devices and services are becoming increasingly pervasive in modern
society. Meanwhile, the wireless spectrum is being shared by diverse wireless
technologies with higher demands and is becoming more and more crowded. To meet
the exponentially growing spectrum demands, there is a critical need for new
wireless technologies that enable dynamic and efficient sharing of the spectrum
and coexistence with other networks. This project addresses the issue of
spectrum scarcity by developing a framework for achieving full-duplex
transmission capability, accurate and efficient detection of available spectrum,
and efficient spectrum sharing among diverse wireless devices and networks. With
full-duplex transmission, a wireless device can transmit and receive information
simultaneously, theoretically doubling the capacity achievable by conventional
half-duplex devices. However, full-duplex transmission incurs both strong self-
interference and additional interference to other devices, which limits its
potential benefits. The project aims to overcome these challenges by applying
machine learning and intelligent use of computational resources in the network.
The project will advance the field of wireless networking by fully realizing the
potential of full-duplex transmission and dynamic spectrum sharing. The project
is expected to have a significant societal impact through enhanced wireless
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will holistically develop enabling
technologies, through a synergistic framework of intelligent full-duplex CR
networks (IFD-CRNs) with distributed software defined network (SDN)
infrastructure at the edge, for pervasive heterogeneous wireless networking
incorporating mobile edge computing. Coupled with an intelligence-enhanced
network function virtualization (NFV) architecture, an IFD-CRN will employ
advanced machine learning algorithms to substantially improve spectrum
efficiency, data rates, and energy efficiency, and achieve efficient resource
utilization with infrastructural flexibility, evolvability, and scalability. An
IFD-CRN performs NFV in the proximity of wireless end users and is inclusive of
the physical layer, making it suitable for hyper-dense, small cell heterogeneous
wireless networks with tight latency requirements. IFD-CRN employs cyclic
feature detection with online spectrum prediction to perform fast spectrum
detection in the presence of strong self-interference caused by full-duplex
transmission. A learning-based mechanism will enable IFD-CRNs to estimate the
network state information and user characteristics to mitigate the unique inter-
user interference caused by full-duplex in a dense
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.