* 2034503
* Novel Modeling and Analytical Approaches for Two-stage Assembly and Related Lot Streaming Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Subhash Sarin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2024
* USD 413,387.00

This award enhances the Nation's competitiveness by investigating improvements
to production scheduling in assembly operations that support product
customization. Enhanced customization demands production of a variety of
products and in smaller batches. Therefore, it is imperative for manufacturers
to respond to such a demand while maintaining or reducing manufacturing costs
and remaining competitive in the global market place. This project investigates
the use of lot streaming via a two-stage assembly system that captures the
essential operational control issues in mass customization, an important
production mode that has emerged for industry to achieve lower cost, shorter
cycle times, and a greater product variety. Two-stage assembly promotes the idea
of postponing final assembly to differentiate between products until the last
step. This approach is also directly applicable to two other closely-related
manufacturing areas, namely, agile manufacturing and hybrid flow shops. This
project will incorporate modeling, solution strategies, and computational
approaches to determine optimal lot sizes and schedules in these production
scenarios. The project will educate and train students to be able to tackle
complex problems arising in the manufacturing critical to the U.S. economy. The
results of the research will be integrated into the courses at the graduate and
undergraduate level, thereby benefitting the other students as well. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The two-stage assembly lot streaming problem (TSA-LSP) has a unique
structure that requires specialized methodology presently lacking in the
literature that exploits its special structure and renders effective solution
approaches. This project has four main thrusts, namely (1) formulation of a
mathematical model incorporating its special features; (2) a comprehensive
polyhedral analysis, enhancement of the model, and development of a new
decomposition-based methodology to determine optimal/near-optimal number of
sublots, sublot sizes and sequencing decisions; (3) a novel approach for the
solution of an assembly lot streaming problem (ALSP) with handling and makespan
costs that arise as a substructure within the TSA-LSP; (4) advancing the use of
lot streaming to a new domain of assembly systems including the Army Sustainable
Readiness Model Scheduling Problem (ASR-MSP), and contributing to the knowledge-
base of lot streaming by discovering new insights and developing useful
algorithms. The ASR-MSP constitutes an important application of the TSA-LSP and
will serve as a case study to validate the methods developed. Insights gained
from an investigation of the ALSP are important on their own right as well as
serving to enhance the solution methodology for the TSA-LSP for solution of
other concrete instances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.