* 2034381
* The Deep Sky Every Minute: Developing the Argus Array
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Nicholas Law, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,087,994.00

The Argus Array is planned to be the first large optical telescope to explore
the entire deep sky simultaneously. Consisting of 650 moderate-aperture
telescopes multiplexed into a common hemispherical dome, the Argus Array will
have the equivalent collecting area of a 5m telescope, and the survey speed of
the Vera Rubin Observatory, but will cover the sky in a very different way. The
Array achieves deep imaging by observing every part of the sky at minute-cadence
for 6-8 hours every night. Over five years, the Array will build a two-color,
million-epoch movie of the northern sky, giving the astronomical community the
unprecedented ability to follow the evolution of every brighter than 23rd-
magnitude time-variable source across the sky simultaneously. This award will
support construction of a prototype system to validate the Argus Array hardware
and software design, while pioneering its science surveys. In terms of broader
impacts, this project will 1) directly train two graduate students in big-data
analysis techniques and astronomical instrumentation; 2) provide the opportunity
for seven graduate students (four first-generation college) to more broadly
participate in experimental astrophysics; 3) build the infrastructure to enable
dozens of graduate students around the country to participate in a new large
survey; 4) involve large numbers of undergraduates in professional astronomical
instrumentation; 5) prototype the full Argus Array's major broader impacts
projects, including the professional design of a world-class time-domain
astronomy planetarium show and the development of middle-school MakerSpace
projects to inspire the next generations of astronomical instrument
builders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Argus Array is a “fly’s eye” system that is
being designed to explore a unique parameter space, with a cadence hundreds of
times faster than any other deep sky survey. The system will be able to follow-
up multiwavelength triggers orders of magnitude faster than current tiling
astronomical surveys, monitor 300 million stars for planet-induced microlensing
events, occultations, flares and other variability, search hundreds of thousands
of white dwarfs for transiting planets and debris, detect supernovae early
enough to probe the explosion's interactions with their progenitor environments,
and will measure rotation rates, shapes and outburst rates for newly-discovered
interstellar asteroids and comets as they cross the solar
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.