* 2034660
* High-fidelity dating of deep-time records: Integrating Earth's dynamical ellipticity and tidal dissipation into astrochronology
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Richard Zeebe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 249,998.00

One way to determine the ages of seafloor sediments and sedimentary rocks is by
using a “calendar” based on astronomical calculations. This time scale makes use
of the fact that predictable changes in the orbits of the planets drive cyclic
changes in Earth’s climate. For example, observed cycles in sediment composition
can be matched to astronomical cycles. Those cycles are calculated by computing
planetary orbits backward in time. Unfortunately, the use of certain orbital
cycles remains challenging because Earth’s gravitational shape and rotation rate
have changed in the past. These changes introduce uncertainty into the orbital
calculations. This project will develop high-fidelity dating methods for
sedimentary records by including Earth’s gravitational shape and rotation rate
into the orbital calculations. All numerical tools will be made available as
open source programs and as add-ons to software packages. The project broader
impacts include support for a graduate student, and a training workshop in
astrochonology methods. The project has the potential to transform our ability
to date sediments from the last 55 million years. It will also improve our
understanding of tidal dissipation and climate forcing in the
past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dating of sedimentary records using
astronomical calculations has led to the astronomical time scale (ATS), today
representing the backbone of cyclostratigraphy and astrochronology, widely used
within and beyond marine geology and geophysics. Age models often rely on the
imprint of astronomically calculated cycles of eccentricity and other solar
system frequencies in sedimentary records (e.g., 405, 173, and ~100 kyr).
However, use of obliquity and precession cycles (at present 41 and ~20 kyr)
remains challenging, mostly due to past changes in Earth's dynamical ellipticity
(gravitational shape) and tidal dissipation (slowdown of Earth's rotation),
which affect the astronomical calculations. This project will develop high-
fidelity dating methods for sedimentary records by integrating dynamical
ellipticity and tidal dissipation into astrochronology, targeting specific time
intervals that feature high-quality sedimentary records. Using selected geologic
records, the study will also test the hypothesis that tidal dissipation was
significantly reduced in the past. Numerical tools will be provided for users to
derive age models, applicable to various published astronomical solutions
(calculated planetary orbital parameters). All dating tools will be made freely
available as open source stand-alone applications, as add-ons to
astrochronological software packages, and introduced to users during a training
workshop. The project has the potential to transform the accuracy of sediment
dating, as well as our understanding of tidal dissipation and obliquity forcing
in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.