* 2034496
* EAGER: CAS-MNP: Mapping the structure–property relationships of micro- and nanoplastics by in-situ nanoscopic imaging and simulation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Paul Braun, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project combines
experiments and simulation to understand micro- and nanoplastics, which are tiny
pieces of plastics invisible to human eyes that have been shown to be
ubiquitously present in the food chain and the environment. Micro- and
nanoplatics thus pose major concerns on their unpredictable impact on human
health, ecosystem, and food. For example, micro-plastics, the larger-sized
population of the plastic pieces, are found in freshwaters, saltwater fish, and
air, at high concentrations and in various shapes such as fragments, foam, and
pellets. Nanoplastics (smaller than 100 nanometers are found in water and could
be particularly worrisome for human health because their sizes fall into a
regime of small grains that living cells could incorporate. Micro- and
nanoplastics cannot be thoroughly examined using the conventional toolkits based
on statistical averaging. It is for these reasons that the research goal of this
proposal is to introduce and use liquid-phase transmission electron microscopy
(TEM). This will enclose a nano-aquarium with water containing micro- and
nanoplastics to record movies of their motion, interactions, and aggregation on
the fly, and then be correlated with theory to inform predictive modeling. The
fundamental understanding to be obtained is relevant to sustainability (e.g.,
upcycling of plastics by separating, harvesting, and recycling of micro- and
nanoplastics) and may apply to other systems such as geological grains (sands,
clays). In addition to interdisciplinary student training, the educational goal
of this project is to provide previously inaccessible experimental and modeling
data to the scientific community that could potentially be applied to different
micro- and nanoplastics in other geographic regions. "Plastics in water"
demonstrations and lectures will be developed for outreach to K-12 students and
the general public. The diverse team of three co-PIs will also actively
encourage women and minorities to pursue scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this experimental‒simulation
collaboration is to understand the fundamental relationships among the structure
(e.g., composition, size, shape), colloidal interactions, and aggregation
dynamics of micro- and nanoplastics in water or in the presence of separation
membranes at unprecedented nanometer resolution, thereby enabling efficient
strategies to minimize the footprint of micro- and nanoplastics in the
ecosystem. The generic irregularity and high dispersity of such plastic
particles has resulted in a knowledge gap in understanding the principles of how
structure encodes their properties and phase behaviors (such as flocculation
into large aggregates or heavy sediments) which needs to be bridged in order to
facilitate their removal. This research project aims to fill this gap through an
integrated effort of polymer synthesis and characterization, nanoimaging and
colloid simulation. New understanding will be obtained by using the special
microscopy suite of low-dose liquid-phase transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) to image the micro- and
nanoplastics in liquids at nanometer and millisecond resolutions in real time.
Starting with (i) mapping the nanoscale structures of model and real-life micro-
and nanoplastics and how the structures relate with the intercolloidal
interaction potential on the single particle and pairwise level, this project
will continue with (ii) elucidating how the interaction potential affects the
aggregation dynamics of micro- and nanoplastics. It will ultimately be followed
by (iii) investigating the effects of environmental variations of practical
relevance on structure and phase behaviors, especially in the presence of
separation membranes so as to understand the fundamental adsorption and
penetration dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.