* 2034958
* MsRI-EC: Conference on Midscale Infrastructure for Quantum Photonic Science, Engineering and Technology.The Conference Will Be Held Virtually In August, 2020.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Daniel Kilper, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 12/31/2020
* USD 46,914.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Quantum Internet has the potential to
transform the way that we understand and interact with the world around us. The
anticipated research infrastructure would accelerate the development of the
Quantum Internet, impacting research at a national scale. This infrastructure
would benefit academic institutions, national laboratories, and commercial
enterprises. This facility would enable large and small corporations to develop
new quantum products and expertise on Quantum Internet technologies. The
proposed workshop will encourage multi-disciplinary collaboration by including
speakers from integrated photonics, optical communications, and optical sensing.
The organizers of the conference are committed to providing an inclusive
environment for individuals of all backgrounds, including those from
underrepresented communities in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference would
be aimed at developing the knowledge base necessary to establish engineering
research infrastructure for the science, engineering and technology of quantum
photonics. This facility would provide an unparalleled environment for research
and education on Quantum Internet technologies, and have the potential to spark
entrepreneurship. Quantum Internet infrastructure would be a proving ground for
major new quantum photonic technologies with tools and services that will enable
researchers to evolve their innovations from ideas to real world, market
transforming products. National laboratories and government institutions could
also rely on the facility to understand and develop the quantum internet for the
security and economic benefit of our nation. The objectives in organizing this
conference are to: 1) develop a clear vision for the development of a national
facility, 2) establish national needs and priority areas, 3) create a framework
for the facility capabilities and operations, 4) organize the community of
stakeholders around the facility vision, 5) develop a plan for the community to
move forward with development of a midscale infrastructure
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.