* 2034045
* RAPID-REU Site: Mitigating the Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic on Undergraduate Research Training in the Biosciences
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Colin Shaw, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2022
* USD 75,042.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has caused an unprecedented disruption in the research
training of undergraduates thru the Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program. Massive cancellations of REU Sites caused undergraduates to be
deprived of both the intellectual and professional development opportunities
they would have received in an REU program. The situation is further aggravated
by the closures of similar undergraduate internship programs sponsored by other
Federal and private agencies. The lack of meaningful summer jobs due to the
pandemic provides little alternatives for college students. The situation is
particularly acute for minority students whose underrepresentation in STEM has
been a continuing challenge for the Nation. This RAPID proposal helps to
mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on Native American and other
underrepresented minority students. Research opportunities in environmental
biosciences, including research in COVID-19 related area, will be made available
to students in the regional areas surrounding Montana State University. The
projects have been designed so that students can conduct the research remotely.
Professional development training will be done virtually thru regularly
scheduled events, similar to what the students would receive in an in-person
training program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID proposal will engage
underrepresented minority students in research thru projects that can be
conducted remotely. Research projects include the quantification of SARS-CoV-2
virus in a managed wastewater treatment system in Montana, where preliminary
studies have shown that viral load can be detected using a standard CDC test kit
protocol for SARS-CoV-2 virus. The metagenomic analysis of the water samples can
be used as an indicator of community spread of the virus and can become one of
the surveillance tools for public health officials. Other projects involve
research that would benefit American Indian reservations in Montana, such as the
ecological study of the impacts and benefits of bison reintroduction on the
Blackfeet reservation, studies on biodiversity, ecosystem services and crop
quality on managed farms on reservation lands, and the role of microbial
communities in the phytoremediation of arsenic in soil. Students will be trained
on the analysis of data and use of modeling tools. Students will be recruited
from tribal colleges and other Montana universities and colleges. Student
professional development will emphasize ethics and the responsible conduct of
research, careers in STEM, and effective scientific communication. Students
present their research at a virtual conference at the end of the 10-week
program. This project is supported by the Division of Biological Infrastructure
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.