* 2034804
* I-Corps:  Zero-power Wireless Flame Detector for Ubiquitous Fire Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2020
* Matteo Rinaldi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a flame detection technology that consumes near zero power in
standby mode, hence enabling the implementation of wireless fire sensor networks
with greatly reduced cost for ubiquitous fire monitoring. A flame detector can
often respond more accurately and faster than a smoke or heat detector, since
its targeting indicator is more exclusive to fires and it does not experience
the delayed detection time. The drawbacks of existing flame detector
technologies include high power consumption, high manufacturing cost, and bulky
form factor. These drawbacks prevent current flame detectors from being widely
adopted in the market. Instead, the proposed miniaturized battery-powered
wireless flame detectors may last up to 10 years without charging and be easily
retrofitted to address multiple deployment needs. The new detectors may provide
a primary safety measure for fire monitoring in broader commercial market
sectors such as construction sites, waste facilities, warehouses and forests.
The project may have an immediate impact on the disruptive fire-related
accidents such as 2019-20 Australian bushfire and Notre Dame Cathedral fire,
saving hundreds of lives and preventing billions of dollars in asset losses
worldwide.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of micromechanical flame
detectors that consume near-zero power in standby mode until awakened by the
specific infrared signature emitted by a flame. Currently, no existing
technology could enable the implementation of large-scale wireless fire sensor
networks due to the prohibitive cost associated with ownership, installation and
maintenance. The fundamental technical challenge lies in the continuous power
consumption of state-of-the-art sensor technologies. Commercially available
sensors rely on active electronics to detect and discriminate signals of
interest. Therefore, current flame detectors consume power continuously to
monitor the environment even when there is no relevant data to be detected,
which results in a short battery lifetime (a few months). The proposed flame
detector relies on the recently developed, zero-power digitizing infrared
sensors that can selectively harvest the energy from specific infrared
signatures emitted from a warm object to operate without using any electrical
power. The fire sensor market requires products to have certificated performance
and to meet different standards and regulations. The goal of is to pinpoint
customers’ needs and develop a commercialization path to deliver products
meeting all requirements for a beachhead market.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.