* 2034030
* RAPID: Building Research Capabilities of Academically Talented Undergraduate Students from Hispanic-Serving Institutions through Virtual Research Experiences
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Ann Gates, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 443,929.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) supports RAPID projects when there is severe urgency with
regard to availability of, or access to, data, facilities or specialized
equipment, including quick-response research on natural or anthropogenic
disasters and similar unanticipated events, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. This
project aims to develop effective virtual internships and undergraduate research
experiences to expand learning and professional development opportunities in
computer sciences to minoritized undergraduate students. The COVID-19 pandemic
caused a disruption in society across all sectors with widespread loss of
internships, jobs, and undergraduate research experiences that negatively impact
the talent pipeline in computing fields and the future of U.S. innovation. Such
disruptions are likely to occur in the near future, and the U.S. must be well-
prepared in offering effective virtual development opportunities and experiences
for students. This project will address this exigency by refining a proven model
for developing professional, research, team, and communication skills so that it
will be effective in a virtual environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will engage students from diverse backgrounds and with diverse experiences in
impactful research projects while proving students funding that will, in part,
support continuation of their education. Broadening participation of minoritized
students in research can increase retention and graduation rates in computing
fields. The proposed project will provide faculty professional development in
the Affinity Research Group (ARG) model, a Computing Alliance of Hispanic-
Serving Institutions (CAHSI) signature and proven practice for immersing
students in research. Faculty will also learn how to incorporate ARG elements
into classroom pedagogical practice to improve teaching and learning. The effort
will lead to a national community of faculty who are skilled at undergraduate
research mentoring informed by the ARG model and who grow through their
involvement with a cohort of researchers and participation in ARG interactive
webinars. The evaluation will identify the practices that work best for the
virtual Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REUs). It will also examine
whether student perceptions of computer science and their career goals change
after participation in a virtual REU. In addition, the evaluation will
investigate the benefit to faculty of joining a cohort community in support of
research with undergraduate. The development of a model for effective virtual
undergraduate research experiences can benefit many students, especially
students who do not have the ability to travel to remote REUs because of family
obligations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Hispanic-
Serving Institutions Program in the Division of Human Resource Development,
Directorate of Education and Human Resources. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at
HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.