* 2034780
* The Impact of the SARS-CoV-2 Virus on the Integrity of the Blood-brain Barrier
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Peter Galie, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2024
* USD 331,758.00

The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic caused by the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus continues to detrimentally
impact the prosperity and welfare of our country. As such, fundamental studies
are needed to understand the effects of the virus on the organ systems in the
body. In these patients, stroke and delirium are not uncommon. These conditions
are associated with breakdown of the blood-brain barrier, which is unique to
blood vessels in the central nervous system. The work done with this award will
study how the spike protein of the virus affects the blood-brain barrier.
Specifically, the junctions between cells lining the inside of blood vessels
will be studied. The overall goal is to identify the mechanisms underlying the
response to the spike protein. The results of this work may suggest new
treatment strategies to mitigate the neurological effects of the SARS-CoV-2
virus. This research will be combined with a program to film instructional on-
demand science videos for middle and high school science teachers who are
teaching remotely during the COVID-19 pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
hypothesis is that binding of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein to angiotensin
converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) disrupts the blood-brain barrier by inhibiting the
protective effect of fluid shear stress mediated by RhoA signaling. Recent
studies using samples from human patients have demonstrated that vasculature in
the brain expresses ACE2, the primary target for the SARS-CoV-2 virus, but the
effects of spike protein-mediated inactivation of ACE2 on the integrity of the
blood-brain barrier remain unclear. Here, the studies will use a three-
dimensional in vitro model of the blood-brain barrier to interrogate the
mechanotransduction mechanisms responsible for the endothelial response to the
S1 peptide of the spike protein in the presence of fluid shear stress,
accounting for both short-term, cytoskeletal-mediated pathways and long-term,
transcriptional changes in the endothelial cells. These studies will elucidate
the mechanistic basis for breakdown of the blood-brain barrier in response to
coronaviruses such as SARS-CoV-2. The results may explain the increased
incidence of stroke and other neuropathologies that occur secondary to the
COVID-19 virus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.