* 2034615
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Privately Collecting and Analyzing V2X Data for Urban Traffic Modeling
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Xuegang Ban, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 208,000.00

When widely deployed, Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) communications in connected
vehicles can result in very large-scale and valuable datasets that can be useful
for a wide range of transportation safety, mobility, and other related
applications. Mandates are being proposed for all new light vehicles to install
V2X devices in the near future for such beneficial data collection. A deployable
privacy preserving toolkit is critically needed for privately collecting and
analyzing V2X data so that the envisioned applications can be fully functional.
This project aims at addressing such privacy concerns in practical V2X data
collection and analysis for urban traffic modeling, and thus will facilitate the
real-world deployment of connected vehicles and V2X systems/applications.
Furthermore, this project integrates research results into the curricula at
Illinois Institute of Technology, and University of Washington, and provides
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, especially under-
represented and minority students, to participate in cutting-edge research. It
also disseminates state-of-the-art privacy preserving techniques into the
intelligent transportation and connected vehicles
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develop a series of novel privacy
preserving V2X data collection and analysis techniques with provable privacy
guarantees. In the first research thrust, novel V2X data collection schemes will
be developed to locally perturb V2X data by each vehicle and they will be
aggregated for large-scale urban traffic modeling while satisfying the emerging
rigorous notion of local differential privacy (LDP). In the second research
thrust, novel cryptographic protocols under the secure multiparty computation
(MPC) theory will be designed for the infrastructure and vehicles to securely
analyze the V2X data for small-scale urban traffic modeling. Such two categories
of privacy preserving techniques are expected to fundamentally advance the
literature of LDP and MPC (e.g., designing new randomization mechanisms for
LDP). The research team will theoretically prove the privacy guarantees for
them, and experimentally evaluate their system performance on emulation
platforms, as well as deploy them in real-world connected vehicles
testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.