* 2034997
* CAREER: The role of ecosystem management on boundary layer development and precipitation in the Northern Plains
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Paul Stoy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2021
* USD 92,179.00

Global temperatures are rising, largely due to the effects of greenhouse gases
from human activities on the amount of radiation from the Sun that is absorbed
at the surface of the Earth instead of being reflected back to space. Within
this global context are some regional cooling trends that also result from human
activity, including those that are beneficial to economic and conservation
objectives. One of these cooling trends has been found in the summer in the
northern North American Great Plains. Maximum air temperatures have decreased by
over three degrees and rainfall has increased by an inch during summer across
parts of the Canadian Prairie Provinces since the 1970s. These changes are
thought to be due to a decrease in the practice of keeping farm fields fallow
during summer; Canada alone has lost around 35 million acres of fallow from the
1970s to the present. The United States has seen a similar decline in fallow
area, largely in the Northern Great Plains, but the effects of these changes on
regional climate in the U.S. have not been studied to date. Fallow was, and
still is, widely practiced to save water for subsequent crops in dry regions,
but also increases soil erosion and degradation and is not considered
sustainable. Producers have also realized that the water-savings benefit of
fallow is often outweighed by the economic losses of not planting a crop. The
goal of this project is to understand how agricultural management practices that
improve soil conservation and may increase on-farm income can also be beneficial
to climate, both now and over the coming decades. As part of the project, a
field course will be designed to link Tribal Colleges in the Montana University
System with the goal of enhancing STEM education among underrepresented
students. Project activities will also enhance existing efforts to improve
after-school educational programs at the grade-school level. An inter-university
consortium will be designed to coordinate research activities in the atmospheric
sciences across Montana, including Tribal Colleges.

To understand the role of land management on regional climate, it is necessary
to understand the mechanisms by which it influences the climate system, and to
integrate this understanding into models that can predict future climate
dynamics. In a region with substantial fallow, warm and dry air from near the
land surface rises and creates a high and dry atmospheric boundary layer that is
unlikely to experience convective precipitation. If plants are present, more
moisture and less heat enters the atmosphere, resulting in a moister atmospheric
boundary layer that is not nearly as high, which makes cloud formation
convective precipitation processes more likely. In this project, the exchange of
heat and water between the surface and atmosphere in fallow, grasslands, and
crops will be measured, and atmospheric boundary layer development, convective
precipitation, and regional climate modeled. Models will be run over the past
three decades to understand how management trends have influenced climate and
over the forthcoming three decades to understand how future land management
changes may, or may not, continue to counter global warming trends.