* 2034558
* EAGER: Exploration of topological self-organizing non-linear dynamical systems with memory as efficient scalable computing fabric
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Massimiliano Di Ventra, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2022
* USD 298,501.00

Unconventional computing models that depart substantially from how our
traditional computers work are emerging as an important research direction in
both fundamental science and technology. Quantum computing is the most
celebrated example, where a phenomenon known as entanglement and unique to
quantum mechanical systems, is expected to help in the solution of some
difficult problems, such as prime factorization. However, there is a wide range
of physical phenomena one can exploit other than entanglement, and that do not
require extreme technological conditions to operate. This means that there is a
vast area of research yet to explore between our traditional computers and
quantum computing. This project will investigate a radically novel computing
fabric that falls within this uncharted territory, and is able to solve
difficult problems efficiently by means of non-quantum dynamical systems. Such a
computing fabric is called memcomputing because it exploits the innate time non-
locality of any physical system, namely memory of their past dynamics. If
successful, this project is expected to usher in a paradigm shift in computing
that will reverberate across practically all aspects of technology. The proposed
activities will contribute to the professional development of highly skilled
personnel with expertise that cuts across different disciplines involved in this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To prove the fundamental value of such a non-von-
Neumann computing fabric, this award will support the development of a simulator
for digital memcomputing machines based on the numerical integration of the
differential equations of appropriate non-quantum, non-linear dynamical systems
with memory. To facilitate an independent verification, the simulator will then
be employed to tackle challenging combinatorial problems, such as prime
factorization, whose solution can be easily checked. This award will thus serve
as the stepping stone towards the ultimate goal of realizing such digital
memcomputing machines in hardware. This project will also advance our knowledge
of the physical requirements to compute efficiently by investigating the deep
relation between computing, topology, and collective behavior of physical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.