* 2034021
* EAGER: Understanding the design principles of biological light harvesting
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Yuval Mazor, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2023
* USD 299,984.00

Photosynthesis is the most powerful biological process on earth. The first step
in photosynthesis is the capture of energy in the form of light by biological
antenna. Currently, the ability to design and construct functional biological
antenna is severely limited. This project will significantly advance the
knowledge of how light energy is captured and converted by biological antenna
during photosynthesis. The products of photosynthesis, oxygen and organic
matter, are used to make and power virtually all other life forms on earth in
addition to providing a significant portion of humanityâ€™s energy needs. Because
light is a diffuse energy source, plants and other photosynthetic microorganisms
deploy large arrays of light harvesting antenna in their cells to concentrate
light into specific locations where chemical reactions occur at high rates.
These biological antennae are made from hundreds of light absorbing molecules
held together in ways which ensures operation with near perfect efficiency. This
proposal will identify the critical structural elements in antennae and explore
ways to engineer them in cells. Understanding the design principles of
biological light harvesting and developing methods to construct new antennae
will open new ways to improve light harvesting systems in crops and increase
their productivity. The project will support the career of one female post-
doctoral fellow and one graduate student. In addition, a program aimed at
introducing children into the basic concepts of Science, technology,
engineering, art and mathematics (STEAM) will be developed with local schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological antennae are mostly membrane bound and contain
hundreds of light harvesting pigments. The ability to construct functional
antenna variants in cells is limited and this hinders the understanding of
antenna in their natural context, as they form super complexes with
photochemical reaction centers. This proposal focuses on one of the major
antennae systems on the planet called IsiA, which is prevalent in the
cyanobacteria phylum. Due to the large diversity of cyanobacteria, a large
number of IsiA sequence variants evolved and can be retrieved from public
databases. This proposal will explore the functional significance of this
variability by introducing chimeric antennae into a model cyanobacterium. In
response to stress IsiA is induced and forms very large and symmetrical antennae
assemblies in cells. The abilities of chimeric antennae to from these
assemblies, to carry out energy transfer and to support cellular growth under
stress will be measured. The results will identify the mechanisms by which
antennae contribute to cellular resistance to stress and will generate a
cellular platform for the construction of novel antennae systems with desired
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.