* 2034470
* RAPID: AI-driven Innovations for COVID-19 Themed Malware Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Yanfang Ye, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 06/30/2021
* USD 106,080.00

The fast evolving and deadly outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has
posed grand challenges to human society. In the fight against the global
pandemic, many social activities have moved online. Society's unprecedented
reliance on the complex cyberspace makes its security more important than ever.
Unfortunately, utilizing both fear and financial incentives, cyber threat actors
are using COVID-19 or coronavirus as a lure all over the spectrum of
sophistication to spread malware (i.e., software that deliberately fulfills the
harmful intent to legitimate users) to gain profits from the pandemic. The
malware with a COVID-19 theme (e.g., CovidLock, COVID-19 Banking Trojans) have
become more and more sophisticated and resilient by using various tactics to
fool the defenders and bypass their detection. This points to an imminent need
for innovative techniques to combat the exponential growth of increasingly
sophisticated COVID-19 themed malware so that users can be better protected in
the cyberspace. By advancing capabilities of artificial intelligence (AI), the
goal of this project is to develop innovative links between AI and security to
design and develop an integrated framework for COVID-19 themed malware detection
to help mitigate its negative effects on public health, society, and the
economy. The outcomes of this project (including open-source codes and generated
benchmarks) will be made publicly available. The project integrates research
with education through innovative curriculum development, student mentoring
activities, and broadening participation of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has three key components. First, in
addition to using content-based features, the project will develop a novel
heterogeneous information network to characterize and represent applications
(apps) and their complex social relations within the new ecosystem in a
comprehensive manner. Second, the team will develop an innovative adversarial
disentangler to separate the distinct, informative factors of variations hidden
in the app representations needed for large-scale COVID-19 themed malware
detection. Third, the team will design and develop a deep learning based
classifier with interpretability enhancement for the detection and understanding
of how malware spread. The developed framework for the understanding of how
malware spread will facilitate a predictive understanding of the spread of
coronavirus. By providing the system for COVID-19 themed malware detection to
reduce mental anguish and financial loss for users, the planned work will help
mitigate the negative effects of COVID-19 on public health, society, and the
economy. The proposed research will be beneficial to multidisciplinary areas,
including phishing fraud detection, spam filtering, and other domains such as
data mining and machine learning where multiple data sources are
involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.