* 2034800
* Research: RFE—Understanding graduate engineering student well-being for prediction of retention
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Jennifer Cromley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 02/28/2025
* USD 347,928.00

Doctoral students frequently leave engineering, thereby reducing the supply of
highly-trained engineers in the US and contributing to lost tuition investments
made for doctoral student tuition. Graduate students face many stresses: from
classwork, from their paid teaching and research commitments, and from other
stressors outside of their graduate work. In this research on the formation of
engineers, we will identify major stressors that PhD-level engineering students
commonly face, create and validate a questionnaire to measure these stressors,
and test how stress can predict students’ intentions to leave their doctoral
programs. The project uses a workplace stress model in which having low control
over job hindrances (e.g. course availability, graduation requirements,
COVID-19) leads to harmful stress. The results of this study can inform a wide
range of programs and personnel who support doctoral engineering students,
including faculty advisors and engineering departments, counselling centers,
career centers, writing centers, and others. Although prior research work has
identified major stressors, little work has been done to compare sources of
stress for graduate PhD students and the effects of these stressors on
retention. With a research-backed identification of major stressors and their
effects, these stakeholders above can be empowered to adopt programmatic changes
or other strategies proactively addressing the stressors we will identify. The
measure of doctoral students’ stressors that we produce can be broadly
implemented by other universities to identify where more supports are needed, to
expand available supports, and by other researchers seeking to understand
effects of stress on STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
project are to identify top stressors for doctoral students across different
phases of engineering PhD programs and to predict the effects of top stressors
on retention in those programs. In Year 1, we will interview a diverse set of
students (N = 57) about stressors and coping, to identify which sources of
stress occur the most frequently and are perceived by participants as being the
most harmful. Participants will also complete existing questionnaires on stress
and anxiety, and we will model changes in those variables over an academic year.
In Year 2, we will develop a new questionnaire measuring the valence and
frequency of top stressors, based on our results from work in Year 1. We will
conduct cognitive interviews with doctoral engineering students to identify any
confusing items and improve the questionnaire. Following this, we will test the
psychometrics of the questionnaire in Year 2 with a diverse sample of 300
doctoral engineering students. In year 3, we will use the newly validated
measure, together with other existing measures of stress and anxiety, to predict
students’ intention of leaving a doctoral engineering program (N = 300).
Outcomes of the project will be findings about the prevalence of different
stressors by groups (e.g., groups under-represented in engineering,
early/middle/late in doctoral studies, domestic vs. international PhD students),
a validated questionnaire widely usable by programs and researchers, and
estimates of the effect of stress on intention to remain in a doctoral
engineering program. A technical manual and non-technical descriptions of the
findings will be made available to the public, together with presentations at
research- and practice-focused conferences. Updates will be available on the
PI’s website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.