* 2034402
* Design Development of Innovative High Throughput CMB Telescope for the South Pole
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Steve Padin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,876,264.00

The search for a background of Primordial Gravitational Waves (PGW, presumably
generated by cosmic inflation) is one of the most compelling goals in cosmology
and physics today. A detection of PGW would open a new window to fundamental
physics at an energy scale inaccessible to terrestrial experiments and provide
insight into the quantum nature of gravity. This detection or a sufficiently
strong upper limit on the PGW signal in the cosmic microwave background (CMB)
would give us new insights into the currently favored paradigm for the origin of
the Universe, the theory of cosmic inflation. The proposed research activity
will also contribute to training the next generation of scientists by
integrating graduate and undergraduate education with the technology
development, astronomical observations, and scientific analyses CMB data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to support the design and development of the
South Pole three mirror anastigmat telescope (SPTMA), which is an innovative
millimeter-wave telescope that would significantly advance the search for PGWs
by providing the significant throughput and necessary control of systematics
needed to achieve this challenging goal. SPTMA is critical to the advancement of
the program of ultra-sensitive CMB measurements, providing a field of view 20
times larger than that of the current South Pole 10-m Telescope (3.5 sq. deg.)
by utilizing larger arrays of detectors and improved raw sensitivity. The
5-meter aperture diameter of the SPTMA's primary monolithic mirror will provide
1.6 arcminute resolution at 2-mm wavelength, which is well matched to the
requirements for next-generation measurements of primary and secondary CMB
anisotropy, including CMB-lensing reconstruction of the distribution of all the
mass in the Universe. In addition to enabling measurements of the most distant
and exotic signals (especially B-mode signal induced on the CMB by PGWs), the
SPTMA will enable key contributions to multi-wavelength and multi-messenger
astronomy and astrophysics from our galaxy through the high redshift Universe.
This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.