* 2034274
* SBIR Phase I:  Empowering Distance Learning for CS/CE Students with Real-time, Personalized Feedback through Anti-Pattern Detection and Correction (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,11/30/2021
* Elaine So, AG350, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Diane Hickey
* 11/30/2021
* USD 251,747.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to address the increasing demand placed on
educators in computer science (CS) and computer engineering (CE) through an
automated feedback mechanism. Courses in CS and CE are growing rapidly. This
project will develop a platform providing automated feedback by leveraging
machine learning. This will allow courses to scale without compromising quality.
In particular, this project would lead to the development of a system that
provides real-time, personalized feedback to students. This system may also help
attract and retain under-represented populations within CS and CE. This product
will greatly enhance the scientific and technical understanding of computing for
all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will create a novel intelligent tutoring system to
provide real-time, personalized feedback to CS and CE students. In particular,
this project will develop a deep learning architecture that detects errors in
student code and clusters them into anti-patterns according to semantic and
behavioral similarity. The proposed research will design and tune the deep
learning architecture to reach sufficient accuracy and precision. To realize
this goal, several technical hurdles must be overcome, including abstract syntax
tree analysis and downstream localization. The ultimate task is to find patches
through edit-paths from incorrect code to correct code and report these repairs
in a human-readable way. This project will advance a comprehensive learning
management system that emphasizes student learning and performance. In
particular, the platform will allow for students to submit course material and
rapidly receive personalized feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.