* 2034911
* Understanding Structure-Function Relationships and Dynamical Restructuring in Near Surface Alloy Catalysts for Selective Oxidations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* E. Charles Sykes, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2023
* USD 561,184.00

The partial oxidation of hydrocarbons can generate compounds that contain oxygen
atoms (oxygenates). Oxygenates are high-value chemicals that are essential
intermediates in industrial processes and important ingredients in many consumer
products. Partial oxidation reactions require efficient catalysts that
selectively yield the desired oxygenate without completely oxidizing the
compound to carbon dioxide. The development of more efficient and selective
catalysts than those used in current chemical manufacturing is essential for
decreasing manufacturing costs while reducing energy consumption and
environmental impacts. Improved catalysts and catalytic processes also will
enhance the competitiveness and sustainability of the U.S. chemical industry.
This research project will study a new class of catalysts comprised of a single
layer of silver atoms on inexpensive copper nanoparticles. Such catalysts hold
significant promise for the selective partial oxidation of unsaturated
hydrocarbons to epoxide-type oxygenates. The researchers will use experimental
and computational methods to prepare the catalysts, to evaluate their
performance, and to understand how the structure and electronic properties of
the catalyst influence its reactivity and selectivity. The knowledge gained from
this research will pave the way for the design of a next generation of partial
oxidation catalysts for chemical manufacturing processes. The project also
includes an outreach program to a local high school in which graduate students
will assist high-school students in preparing their presentations for a local
science fair. The project participants also will collaborate with a neighboring
university on an Upward Bound Math Science program to provide early research
experiences to low-income and first-generation college bound
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Near-surface alloys have been predicted by theory
to have unique electronic structures that lead to deviations from scaling
relationships that limit traditional catalysts. However, such catalysts exhibit
intrinsic disorder and inhomogeneity introduced by segregation and restructuring
that occur under relevant reaction conditions. This research project aims to
develop an atomic-level understanding of AgCu near-surface alloys using surface
science model studies, density functional theory simulations, and steady-state
catalysis kinetics. A silver -terminated, AgCu near-surface alloy has been
chosen for study due to its promising catalytic properties for partial oxidation
reactions, which require both efficient activation of molecular oxygen and weak
surface binding of intermediates. Preliminary data shows that these near-surface
alloys enhance molecular oxygen activation by electronic modification of the
silver layer by the underlying copper. Under reaction conditions isolated copper
atoms are dynamically exposed, which further increases the molecular oxygen
activation rate while maintaining a majority of silver sites at the surface. The
silver sites promote selective oxidation via a bifunctional mechanism. The
preliminary data also includes evidence for dynamic restructuring of AgCu near-
surface alloys in response to surface oxidation. This restructuring yields
highly active and selective model catalytic surfaces displaying 100% selective
butadiene epoxidation. Building on these preliminary data, this research project
will study the structural evolution and epoxidation reactions on model AgCu
near-surface alloys and use density functional theory to enhance understanding
of the structure, energetics, and electronic properties of the near-surface
alloys. New AgCu near-surface alloy epoxidation catalysts will be synthesized
and tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.