* 2034245
* Collaborative Research: SitS:Integrating Novel Greenhouse Gas Sensor Technology with Mechanistic Modeling to Improve Projections of Arctic Soil Responses to Climate Change and Fire
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Yong Xu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2025
* USD 229,724.00

This award was made through the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" solicitation, a
collaborative partnership between the National Science Foundation and the United
States Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture
(USDA NIFA). Co-funding for this award is being provided by the Environmental
Chemical Sciences (ECS) program in the Division of Chemistry, and the Navigating
the New Arctic (NNA) program, one of NSFâ€™s ten Big Ideas. NNA supports projects
that address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic,
empower new research partnerships, diversify the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhance efforts in formal and informal education, and integrate the
co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award aligns with the mission
of the ECS program and the goals of the NNA program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Arctic contains the largest amount of stored carbon of any habitat type. It is
also the most rapidly warming global region. Warming temperatures, along with
increasing fire frequency and extent, may amplify global climate change by
increasing carbon-based greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from Arctic soils.
Current abilities to predict future arctic carbon storage and release dynamics
remain limited due, in part, to a lack of on-site soil GHG sensors that can
operate over Arctic winters. To advance knowledge of the processes regulating
arctic soil carbon storage and release, this collaboration between California
Polytechnic State University, Oakland University, Wayne State University, and
the Woods Hole Research center will develop GHG sensors that are refined to
operate under variable soil conditions. The chemical measurements from these
sensors will be integrated with a model that captures the biological
interactions that govern carbon and nutrient cycling in arctic tundra systems.
This cross- disciplinary collaboration will advance soil sensor technology,
generate novel arctic system data, and improve models of how the Arctic is
responding to fire and warming. The proposed project will be incorporated into
teaching activities and through integration with the Polaris Project, an NSF-
supported arctic undergraduate research program that prioritizes recruitment of
students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental soil
science challenges include the need to develop GHG sensors that can continuously
operate below freezing temperatures within soil profiles and the improvement of
next-generation mechanistic biogeochemical models to project soil processes
which vary in space and time. The primary objective of this research is to
advance understanding of the processes regulating the sequestration and release
of carbon and nitrogen from arctic soils by integrating fine-scale GHG
measurements generated by novel, low-disturbance, and low-power in situ GHG
sensors that can operate continuously under variable soil conditions with the
Stoichiometrically Coupled, Acclimating Microbe-Plant-Soil (SCAMPS) model. This
research, which integrates sensor development with established biogeochemical
data collection and mechanistic modeling, will help to improve understanding of
how arctic terrestrial heterogeneity across fine spatial and temporal scales
affects the timing, magnitude, and form of carbon exchanged between permafrost-
dominated soils and the atmosphere under rapidly changing climate conditions and
extreme events. The in situ soil sensors will be among the first multimodal gas
sensors that can function continuously at arctic soil temperatures, providing
multiple GHG measurements with high sensitivity and specificity at low cost and
low power. These soil sensors can ultimately be distributed in various
ecosystems to study the dynamic changes occurring in the Arctic and other
critical soil environments. This research will advance understanding of carbon
and nutrient cycling in the Arctic by refining and validating novel multimodal
sensors deployed to continuously measure soil GHG production at multiple depths
across low Arctic field sites with varying wildfire histories. In addition to
breakthroughs for arctic research, this project will generate technological
innovations that will advance scientific understanding in the sensor research
community and drive technology toward the long-term goal of monitoring the
signals in the soil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.