* 2034110
* RII Track 4: Isolating the Role of Metal Centers in the Capacitive Behavior of Porous Framework Electrodes
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Nicholas Stadie, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 200,513.00

Electrodes exist in many of our pockets and briefcases (e.g., at either pole of
a lithium-ion battery). These are typically based on a conductive material like
graphite that has the designed property of “storing” or absorbing a large number
of ions (e.g., lithium ions) in the dense bulk “in between” the tightly spaced
rows of atoms that make up its structure. Recently, it has been shown that
ultrafast transport of these ions (leading to rapid charging and discharging of
the energy storage device) can be achieved in novel materials with built-in
molecular channels or pores referred to as metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), if
they are suitably conductive - a nontrivial task for the materials chemist to
design. Our project aims to compare such conductive MOFs with a class of metal-
free carbon frameworks synthesized in Montana, known as zeolite-templated
carbons (ZTCs), providing a logical middle ground between graphite (nonporous
carbon) and MOFs (porous, metal-containing materials). This comparison can be
used to isolate the role of the metal atoms present in the MOFs’ structures, in
order to determine whether and how they play a role in rapid ion storage in
porous framework electrodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A collaborative effort will be
forged between the Stadie Research Group at Montana State University (MSU) and
the Dincă Research Group at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
aimed at bridging the scientific gap between MOFs and ZTCs. These two classes of
open, porous framework solids of bottom-up designable structure and chemistry,
have both been deployed in capacitive energy storage devices such as
supercapacitors and hybrid batteries, but investigations of their
electrochemical properties have been disjointed. The lack of crystalline
structure or a realistic atomistic model have hindered fundamental studies of
ZTCs despite their excellent energy storage properties. On the other hand, more
is known about charge transport, ion mobility, and capacitive energy storage in
MOFs, but these materials have so far fallen short of porous carbons in their
promise for applications. A common language and set of metrics founded on an
atomistic physical chemical perspective are direly needed to effectively combine
the insights gained from each body of research. Our plan is to bring newly
developed, realistic structural models and several samples of pristine ZTCs to
the Dincă laboratory to carry out combined experimental and theoretical
investigations of electrical conductivity and related electrochemical properties
of porous framework solids. A primary goal of this work will be to ascertain the
mechanism of charge transport within the metal-free carbon framework of ZTCs,
and subsequently tailor new MOFs and ZTCs with both high electrical conductivity
and ion storage capacity. These studies will shed new insight into the rational
design of capacitive electrode materials for next-generation energy storage
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.