* 2034054
* I-Corps:  A bioinformatic software platform for rapid microbe diagnoses in plants
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Kitty Cardwell, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a plant disease diagnostic test that is faster to develop,
quicker turn around to diagnostic results, and more reliable and sensitive than
current diagnostic tools. Today’s diagnostic tests are limited and typically
cannot determine which strain of flu you might have, or which cold virus, or
whether what you have is a bacterially-caused sinus infection. In addition, the
ability to quickly develop a diagnostic test and prove its accuracy is critical
to emergency response to a new disease outbreak. Diagnostic technology also must
overcome constraints in time to result while keeping costs low. The proposed
technology may allow a health practitioner to test for multiple organisms in one
test to quickly inform what actions are needed to help the patient. The proposed
technology will be a test for known microbial causes of respiratory disease. all
bacterial infections. It may be possible for a patient to be tested for the same
cost as current technology tests for just one pathogen. The patient may then be
appropriately and specifically treated for their respiratory illness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
computing software that allows rapid development of pathogen-specific probes and
in-silico query of high throughput sequence (HTS) data from any kind of sample.
The technology has the potential to be applied in many fields, including
veterinary and human medicine, plant pathology, water quality, food safety, and
environmental monitoring for biological threats. Current diagnostic technology
requires 10-24 hours to a “yes” or “no” diagnosis per sample, per pathogen.
&lt;br/&gt;The initial proof-of-concept has been conducted with 30 citrus
pathogens of regulatory concern to the U.S. The proposed technology is capable
of diagnosing presence or absence of multiple pathogens in a single sample in as
little as 30 minutes to 3 hours from start to finish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.