* 2034204
* Coupled Thermo-Hydro-Mechanical Behavior of Soils Subjected to Freeze-Thaw Cycles
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Marcelo Sanchez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 361,514.00

Seasonally frozen soils occupy approximately 55 percent of the earth's total
surface land. Rising air temperatures particularly in the upper latitudes are
causing an increase in ground temperatures, intensifying permafrost degradation.
A good understanding of the behavior of frozen soils is critical for safe and
economical design of civil infrastructure in regions seasonally exposed to
freezing temperatures. This aspect is particularly relevant considering the
recent discovery of fossil fuels (e.g., gas hydrates) near the Arctic Circle,
with the associated needs of developing new infrastructure in these regions.
Moreover, artificial ground freezing technique has become an extraordinary ally
for building deeper, quicker, bigger and more complex geotechnical structures
(e.g., tunnels in large urban areas). However, some recent construction issues
associated with this methodology have shown the need to gain a better
understanding of the fundamental aspects associated with the complex nature of
frozen soil behavior. The outcomes of the research contributions in this project
will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate curricula. The project
offers opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students novel technical
skills in geotechnical engineering and a better understanding of the soil
freeze-thaw cycles and its impact on the environment and built infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance the general area of thermal
geotechnics, with contributions towards problems involving soils subjected to
freeze-thaw cycles. The overarching goal of this project is to advance the
current understanding of frozen soil behavior. Particularly, the following
specific objectives will be pursued: (i) gain a better understanding of the key
features associated with the behavior of frozen soils, including permafrost
degradation, the effect of freeze-thaw cycles, the impact of stress history, and
the interaction between the soil-fabric and the changes in water-volume
occurring during water-phase transformations; (ii) produce high-quality
experimental data related to the behavior of frozen soils including a variety of
stress levels, temperatures, stress history, and permafrost degradation
scenarios, which will contribute to expanding the current database in this area;
and (iii) develop advanced constitutive and numerical codes to tackle problems
involving frozen soils subjected to complex freeze-thaw cycles and loading
conditions. A combined experimental, and numerical investigation program will be
conducted to achieve these objectives. Research findings will be disseminated
through scientific publications and a dedicated website. This research aligns
with NSF's Navigating the New Arctic program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.