* 2034363
* SitS: Collaborative Research: Understand and forecast long-term variations of in-situ geophysical and geomechanical characteristics of degrading permafrost in the Arctic
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Ming Xiao, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 769,854.00

Climate change is resulting in warming of the permafrost across the Arctic and
sub-Arctic, which results in changes in the geological and mechanical properties
of soils. Quantifying the changes in soil properties are critical for both
understanding the natural environment and assessing the effects of these changes
on the existing and future built infrastructure, both of which have long-lasting
societal impacts. This project will embed fiber optic sensing cables into the
ground in an Alaskan coastal community. Fiber-optic-sensed signals will be
converted into the geological and geomechanical properties of the ground
material and then used to quantitatively forecast future impacts on permafrost
properties. The project outcomes will enable realistic evaluation of the
performances of infrastructure in Arctic Alaska and improve the design of more
robust infrastructure in the Arctic. The research team will actively recruit and
train women scientists and engineers through convergent research, and the
research team will be involved in educational and outreach activities in
Utqiaġvik, Alaska’s indigenous community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to understand and forecast long-term variations of in-situ
geophysical and geomechanical characteristics of the active layer and permafrost
in Arctic Alaska using an innovative sensing technology, data transmission and
analysis, and modeling. Through advances in sensor systems and modeling, the
project will transform existing capabilities for understanding dynamic, near-
surface soil processes in the active layer and permafrost in an Arctic coastal
community, thus generating quantitative knowledge of long-term and in-situ
permafrost degradation in the Arctic due to climate change. Five tasks will be
conducted: (1) develop and deploy a 1.5-kilometer-long fiber-optic distributed
acoustic sensing (DAS) array in Utqiaġvik, Alaska for long-term in-situ
permafrost monitoring; (2) develop innovative data transmission and analysis of
DAS signals in permafrost and derive temperature-dependent S-wave and P-wave
velocity profiles of changing permafrost in spatial and temporal scales; (3)
obtain ground-truth measurements of geophysical and geomechanical properties
through in-situ and laboratory characterizations; (4) develop correlations
between geophysical and geomechanical properties of permafrost and S- and P-wave
velocities as well as between permafrost temperature and S- and P-wave
velocities; and (5) forecast future changes of geophysical and geomechanical
properties of degrading permafrost. Research outcomes will directly inform
current infrastructure evaluation and future infrastructure development in the
North Slope Borough, Alaska. Methodology developed in this project will provide
transformative and cost-effective geophysical and geotechnical monitoring in the
Arctic and sub-Arctic regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was made through
the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" solicitation, a collaborative partnership
between the National Science Foundation and the United States Department of
Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture (USDA
NIFA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.