* 2034037
* NSF2026: EAGER: The evolution and diversity of the human brain
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Sofie SALAMA, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,990.00

Human-specific cognitive capacity is evident in many forms. For example, no
other species rivals humans’ capacity for speech and language or inter-
generational accumulation of knowledge. But what are the genetic underpinnings
of human-specific brain evolution and cognition? This project will contrast the
genomes of our closest extinct relatives (Neanderthals and Denisovans) with
human genomes to identify genetic variants that may play a role in the evolution
of human-specific brain. Genomic methods will be used to insert the archaic
versions of these genes into human-derived cells. The biology of cells that
carry genetic variants that have been extinct for thousands of years will then
be studied to help discover recently evolved functions in human brain
development and cognition. This project will provide graduate training
opportunities in computational genome analysis and experimental genome
manipulation. The results of this project have high potential for general public
interest as they address fundamental aspects of human uniqueness, and the
project may generate opportunities for wide dissemination via public media
channels. Further, this project may inform clinical and biomedical research by
experimentally describing the functions of genes that work in early brain
development. The proposed research enriches the NSF2026 Idea Machine winning
entries of 'Harnessing the Human Diversity of Mind' and 'Understanding Scaling
of Embodied Cognition.' &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to discover and
describe functional roles for recently evolved human-specific genetic variants
in human-derived cortical organoids. Human-specific variants will be discovered
using an innovative computational analysis (a reconstructed ancestral
recombination graph) of the genomes of humans and their closest, extinct
ancestors – Neanderthals and Denisovans. This approach allows identification of
variants that are present in all humans, but absent in the archaic species.
Variants present in genes involved in neural development, enriched in this set
already, will be prioritized for genetic and functional analysis. Using genome
editing of a panel of human-derived iPS cells, this project will re-introduce
the extinct archaic variants into various human genetic backgrounds. Each edited
iPS line and unedited controls will be assayed for growth, development, and
appropriate molecular endophenotypes such as gene expression through stages of
cortical organoid induction. Phenotypic deviation from controls may reveal the
function roles of the recent genetic innovations in human brain
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.