* 2034864
* NSF-BSF: Uncovering the specific mechanisms of spine and axonal pruning mediated by Semaphorin-Plexin signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2025
* Tracy Tran, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 06/30/2025
* USD 956,235.00

Brain circuits wire themselves by first forming too many connections between
nerve cells (neurons), followed by a precise refinement of these excess
connections to produce fully functional brain networks. Connections are refined
by pruning the neuronal structures that cells connect with, called dendritic
spines (on the receiving end) and axonal terminals (on the sending end). Proper
pruning of neuronal connections is essential for the proper organization and
function of the nervous system; disrupted pruning results in dysfunctional brain
connections and abnormal behavior in organisms. The ways in which the
developmental removal of connections are regulated is one of the big unsolved
mysteries of the brain. The aim of this joint project is to uncover how a family
of molecules called Semaphorins instructs the elimination of excess connections
in a brain region important for memory formation and spatial
orientation/recognition behavior in both rodents and humans (the hippocampus).
To address the research objectives, the project will use isolated mouse neurons
grown in an incubator, as well as intact neurons inside mouse brains that have
been genetically modified in specific ways to examine the role that Semaphorins
play in axonal and dendritic pruning during brain development. In addition, the
project will introduce large numbers of undergraduate students to cutting-edge
3-dimensional brain image analysis techniques, and expand a successful science
outreach program for high school students conducted at a local school with a 98%
minority enrollment (and where 87% of the students are economically
disadvantaged), as well as providing in-depth research training and
participation to undergraduate students. This study will provide new mechanistic
insights into how neurons establish their normal connections, and will provide
answers to the long-standing question of how specific molecules regulate the
complex process of neuronal circuit refinement.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;During
brain development, guidance cues control the complex pruning processes that
dendritic spines (postsynaptic) and axonal terminals (presynaptic) undergo,
mainly through the activation of receptors on the responding neurons. The
specific intracellular signaling mechanisms underlying how guidance cues induce
these responses are poorly understood. Interestingly, the same
Semaphorin/Plexin-signaling system (ligand-receptor pair) appears to operate on
both the postsynaptic and presynaptic side of mouse hippocampal granule cells to
induce spine and axonal pruning, respectively. In this project, novel
genetically-modified mouse lines (generated using CRISPR/cas9 methodology) will
be combined with a variety of in-vitro and in-vivo approaches to ask how the
Semaphorin/Plexin-signaling pathway(s) regulate synaptic pruning at three
different levels. The specific aims will address: 1) the identity of the
ligand/receptor pair(s) responsible for spine versus axon pruning, 2) the role
of specific cytoplasmic motifs within the Plexin receptors and, 3) the novel
Plexin downstream signaling elements involved with each process. This study
brings together expertise in molecular, cellular biology, biochemistry, and
mouse genetics, in a synergistic and collaborative effort to investigate the
specific mechanisms that control dendritic spine and axonal pruning in the
developing organism. The anticipated findings will provide a new level of
understanding about the molecular mechanisms that govern the wiring of the
mammalian brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.