* 2034362
* I-Corps: Field-deployable Diagnostic Laboratory for the Food Industry
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Euiwon Bae, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a field-deployable, food safety assessment platform. Current
protocols require that food samples be shipped and further analyzed in a central
laboratory. Food products under testing will have already been sold and consumed
by the customer. The aims of this effort are to provide the inspection results
within 10-12 hrs so the manufacturers have timely feedback, and to enable
database options to digitally manage the inspection results and records so that
this information could be potentially integrated into the upcoming block chain
revolution in the food safety area. Success will provide earlier time-to-
detection of food pathogens so that regulatory agencies can implement more rapid
countermeasures to potential outbreak situations. For manufacturers, the goal is
to provide timely test to results so that manufacturers themselves may conduct
their own inspections and find the vulnerable spots for contamination. For
farmers and growers, the goal is to provide on-site microbial inspection results
so that they may take measures internally without going through reporting and
full-scale inspections. This effort may help each of the stakeholders so that
they may take the initiative of ensuring effective microbial inspection and keep
the food supply safe for all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based
on the development of a portable food safety instrument. For the food safety
area, the highlight is the bacteriophage-based assay that has high specificity
with respect to the target food-borne pathogen, E.coli O157:H7. This patented
assay only infects the target bacteria by integrating into the chromosome and
does not kill the bacteria itself. At the same time, integrated genes are coded
to generate photons at a wavelength around 495 nm. While conventional methods
require a laboratory-based, high sensitivity measurement system (a luminometer)
to detect the low level photon signal, this technology is pushing the limits of
conventional, complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS)-based senors, which
are often used in smartphone cameras. The proposed hardware design for efficient
photon capturing and the ensemble averaging-based noise reduction algorithm
enables the detection of extremely low levels of light from commercial
smartphones. Food spike testing with ground beef as a food matrix have resulted
in positive signal detection within 10-12 hrs after
inoculation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.