* 2034507
* RAPID: Identifying New ACE2 Receptor-Protein Interactions Using  Evolutionary Inference
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* John Werren, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2021
* USD 17,361.00

The goal of this project is to identify potential interactions between
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and other human proteins that have been
implicated in human health problems related to covid-19 infection. ACE2 is the
human cell receptor that the corona virus SARS-CoV-2 binds to and uses to enter
and infect human cells. It also regulates blood pressure and is involved in
digestion. Identifying previously undescribed ACE2 protein interactions will
advance our understanding of its biological functions and its contribution to
covid-19 pathology. A better understanding of the proteins with which ACE2
interacts can help identify therapeutic targets and lead to reducing the
severity of covid-19 pathologies and complications, a key broader impact of this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a novel computational and
evolutionary approach to identifying candidate ACE2 interacting proteins based
on a set of mammalian proteins that “coevolve” with ACE2. The approach, termed
“evolutionary rate correlation” (ERC) detects proteins that show highly
correlated evolutionary rates during mammalian evolution. Such proteins are
strong candidates for biological interactions with the ACE2 receptor.
Preliminary results have identified candidate interacting proteins that are not
currently known to be ACE2 interactors, but which are relevant to covid-19
pathologies. Among the top 20 coevolving proteins with highly significant
correlations, four are involved in the blood coagulation cascade and six
additional ones are implicated in blood cell related phenotypes. Three other
proteins are implicated in inflammatory processes or endotoxic shock. These are
striking findings, with clear potential implications to major covid-19
pathologies, including severe thrombosis (blood clotting), and Kawasaki-like
syndromes in children. A strong association between ACE2 protein and these blood
associated proteins has not previously been reported. Also detected are strong
ERCs to lipid metabolism proteins. Based on these ERCs, the project will develop
a protein interaction network, and expand the analysis to additional candidate
coronavirus interacting proteins. This RAPID award is made by the Evolutionary
Processes Program in the Division of Environmental Biology, using funds from the
Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.