* 2034783
* NSF-BSF: Interaction of Cholinergic and Dopaminergic Modulation Underlying Associative Learning
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Elaine Franklin, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2025
* USD 800,000.00

Learning and memory is supported by synaptic plasticity, which involves actions
of multiple neuromodulators. Different neuromodulators often target the same
brain areas and neurons to act either synergistically or antagonistically. Major
obstacles to studying the effect of these interactions on the circuit activity
and behavior have been the sheer complexity of the circuit and the presence of
redundant receptor families of neuromodulators. This project will tackle these
issues by utilizing a simple genetic model organism and provide mechanistic
insights into how two major neuromodulator pathways interact with each other to
induce synaptic plasticity. The results of this study will lead to a fundamental
understanding of the key mechanisms of learning and memory that are generally
applicable to multiple species. The project will also contribute to the STEM
education for the general public through the outreach program, in which the
principal investigator will host K-12 teachers for the summer internship. In
addition, both US and Israeli laboratories will train undergraduate and graduate
researchers and facilitate their scientific interactions through close
collaboration across the countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use
olfactory learning in Drosophila as a platform to study interactions between
multiple neuromodulators. The focused brain area is the mushroom body (MB), a
learning center of insects. Although dopamine has been known to play a central
role in modulating olfactory signals in the MB, recent comprehensive
ultrastructural study suggested the existence of abundant cholinergic
interconnections between MB neurons. Despite the fact that acetylcholine is the
main excitatory neurotransmitter in the insect brain, little is known about the
role played by its G-protein-coupled muscarinic receptors in learning and
memory. The objective of this study is to understand how dopamine and
acetylcholine act in concert on the same set of neurons to exert their effects
on learning. Sophisticated genetic tools, in vivo electrophysiology, two-photon
functional imaging and behavioral assays will be employed to determine how
muscarinic receptors modulate olfactory responses in the MB neurons and how they
affect dopamine-induced synaptic plasticity. Since metabotropic glutamate
receptors, which can be regarded as the mammalian counterpart of insect
muscarinic receptors, are widespread in the brain and known to interact with
other neuromodulators, the proposed research is expected not only to contribute
to fundamental progress in the field of Drosophila learning and memory, but also
to provide general insights into neuronal plasticity across multiple brain areas
and species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.