* 2034995
* RAPID: Modeling the Host-Microbiome-Virome Interactions and their Impact on COVID-19 Severity.
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Tomasz Arodz, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

COVID-19 is a complex disease. While sometimes there are no symptoms, many
people suffer life-altering symptoms and side effects that can led to death.
Age, gender, racial background, medical history, and lifestyle all can influence
the rate of infection and its severity. To invade human cells, the virus
attaches to certain macromolecules that are expressed at different levels in
different tissues and organs. The local expression of these macromolecules can
be influenced by the microbiome, i.e. the bacteria that grow in and around the
tissues and organs. This project will analyze how the human microbiome affects
the progression of COVID-19. Computational models will be developed that use
microbiome compositions to predict outcomes of COVID-19 disease. Such models
will provide a better understanding of the basic biology of SARS-COV-2 infection
and lead to improved treatment and prevention strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main hypothesis is that local microbiomes modulate
niche-specific expression of macromolecules critical to COVID-19 development.
These include the ACE2 receptor, TMPRSS2 serine protease, unidentified genes
associated with SARS-COV-2 invasion and replication, and mediators of the
excessive cytokine response. Further, we propose that these differences are
associated with differential disease severity. The goal is to develop a
statistical model for prediction of disease progression and severity of COVID-19
infection. COVID-19 inpatients are enrolled and nasopharyngeal, stool, buccal,
urine and blood samples are collected longitudinally. Blood samples are
processed for cytokine profiles and a selection of the remaining samples are
analyzed by 16S rRNA taxonomic profiling to characterize the local microbiome
and by metatranscriptomic sequencing to characterize gene expression profiles
and the virus genome sequence. Viral loads are measured. These data will be
augmented with metatranscriptomic data from community-collected testing samples
which provide only a single nasopharyngeal sample. This dataset will be used to
construct models aimed at predicting risk of COVID-19 disease progression and
severity. Associations of the multi omic factors with disease severity will be
analyzed using multifactorial modeling techniques that leverage the temporal
dimension of the data and also incorporate racial and demographic factors. The
constructed models will inform risk stratification in screening and increase our
understanding of the host-and-microbiome factors impacting the trajectory of
COVID-19 disease. Development of the disease model for COVID-19 may also inform
the future development of predictive models for other viral infections.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being funding jointly between the Cellular
and Biochemical Engineering Program in ENG/CBET and the Systems and Synthetic
Biology Program in MCB/BIO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.