* 2034198
* Understanding the evolution and transport of indoor bioaerosols
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Yang Wang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 329,907.00

Airborne transmission of pathogens is a global public health concern. The
COVID-19 global pandemic highlights the urgent need to control the transmission
of virus-containing bioaerosols generated via coughing, sneezing, and speaking.
In spite of this need, indoor air transport of bioaerosols is not well
understood, particularly the effect of aerosol size on pathogen transmission and
infectivity. The goal of this project is to advance our understanding of
bioaerosol transport, viability, and infectivity to minimize and mitigate the
transmission and spread of airborne pathogens in indoor environments. To achieve
this goal, researchers will: i) investigate microorganism decay in bioaerosols
in controlled environmental chambers using two viruses and two bacteria as model
pathogens; ii) evaluate the evolution and transport of bioaerosols in indoor air
under different ventilation configurations; and iii) develop and validate a
coupled transport and risk infection model to minimize the dispersion and
transmission of bacterial/viral bioaerosols via indoor ventilation systems. The
successful completion of this project will benefit society through the
development of new knowledge to understand and mitigate the transmission of
bioaerosol pathogens in indoor environments. Further benefits to society will be
achieved through student education, training, and public outreach. STEM training
will be enhanced through the integration of research findings into course
modules, the participation of researchers in K-12 summer science camps, and a
partnership with the Rolla, MO Public Library to disseminate the project
findings to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current Centers for Disease
Control and World Health Organization guidelines do not consider the possible
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 via the inhalation of virus-containing bioaerosols
smaller than 5 microns. This is contrasted with past research with other
pathogens demonstrating that the airborne transmission of small pathogen-laden
bioaerosols can cause acute respiratory diseases. Thus, there is an urgent and
critical need to improve our understanding of bacterial and viral bioaerosols in
indoor environments. The goal of this research is to address this need and
advance our fundamental understanding of the transport, dispersion, and
infectivity of indoor bioaerosols. To achieve this goal, researchers will carry
out an integrated experimental and computational research program using two
model virus pathogens (MS2 and Phi6) and two model bacteria pathogens
(Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus). Research in Task 1 will
investigate the decay of bacteria and viruses in bioaerosols as a function of
time, bioaerosol size, and environmental conditions (humidity and temperature)
inside a controlled environmental chamber. Research in Task II will characterize
the transport and dispersion of the bacteria/virus-laden bioaerosols in a large
environmental chamber to simulate indoor air under different ventilation
configurations. Research in Task III will develop and validate a computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) model of indoor bioaerosol transport coupled with a risk
infection model. Successful completion of this project will lead to new
knowledge and tools that could be utilized to design and implement more
effective ventilation strategies and systems to mitigate the transmission and
infectivity of bioaerosol pathogens in indoor
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.