* 2034718
* RAPID:The Effect of SARS-CoV-2 cellular entry in exacerbating monocyte activation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Elizabeth Wayne, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award supports research to understand
virus-host interactions that may lead to increased morbidity in COVID19 patients
with pre-existing inflammatory conditions. Current data suggests that of all US
patients with COVID-19, 74% had pre-existing hypertension, and 30% had diabetes.
A key feature COVID-19 is acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which is
caused by the infiltration of monocyte/macrophages (MOs). Monocyte/macrophages
are key members of the innate immune system that maintain tissue homeostasis.
This is because they phagocytose foreign pathogens and dying cells, and this
stimulates with the adaptive immune system to make antibodies. However, it is
not well-understood how monocyte/macrophages are affected by SARS-CoV-2
infection, the causative agent of COVID-19. The goal of this study is to
understand how SARS-CoV-2 exacerbates monocyte function in monocytes from
healthy individuals as compared to individuals with diabetes. Results from this
research may identify therapeutics to minimize COVID-19 disease. This research
involves several disciplines including immunology, virology, and biomedical
engineering. This multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden participation of
under-represented groups in research, as well as contribute to the immunological
study of COVID-19 health disparity populations. This proposal also supports the
training of a post-doctoral fellow, a graduate and undergraduate student.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are clinical observations of high
monocyte/macrophage activation observed in COVID19 patients. However, the
intracellular events that lead to this activation are unknown. This project will
build on existing measurements of SARS-CoV-2 infection from other cell types,
and now provides vital missing information about monocyte/macrophage functions
and responses to infection. The objective of the research is to determine (1)
the contributions of healthy and diabetic monocytes to SARS-CoV-2 infection-
induced cytokine release storms, and (2) the global role of virus-host
interactions with key receptors on monocytes that are dysregulated (upregulated
or downregulated expression compared to normal physiological function). The
study will increase the knowledge of how impaired macrophage functions from
diabetic people may affect outcomes of COVID-19 disease. Results from this study
can help aid the development of desperately needed therapies for COVID-19. This
RAPID award is made by the Physiological and Structural Systems Cluster in the
BIO Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, using funds from the Coronavirus
Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.