* 2034486
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Theory and Experiment to Unravel Protein Transport in the ER
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2024
* Laura Westrate, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2024
* USD 351,093.00

The endoplasmic reticulum, or ER, is a specialized intracellular structure
responsible for a myriad of critical cellular functions, including protein
synthesis, quality-control, and export. It is estimated that about one third of
all mammalian proteins are created and then exported from the ER as the first
step on their way to being secreted from the cell to become the signal carriers
and receptors that interface with the extracellular world. The ER itself forms
an interconnected network of sheets and hollow tubules that hosts a variety of
protein processing pathways. This project aims to address a fundamental question
in cell biology -- how does the structural complexity of the ER regulate and
support its functional role as the protein processing hub of the cell? An
interdisciplinary approach combines imaging within live cells, predictive
physical modeling, and state-of-the-art simulation and data-analysis techniques
to explore how proteins navigate through the ER maze. This collaborative effort
seeks to unravel how the unique physical structure of the ER regulates its
critical biological functions of protein sorting and export. The Broader Impacts
of this work includes the intrinsic merit of the research as all eukaryotic
cells have ER and dysfunctions of this organelles have been implicated in such
human afflictions as diabetes and Parkinsonâ€™s disease. Additionally, the work
will be integrated with a broad interdisciplinary educational program that spans
from an elementary school science club, to a high school robotics team, to
undergraduate research interns, aiming to introduce students at all educational
levels to the insights that may be gained by applying physical and mathematical
approaches to biological problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The endoplasmic
reticulum forms a continuous polymorphic network of stacked sheets and hollow
tubules that spans throughout the intracellular space and is responsible for the
folding, quality-control, sorting, and export of secreted proteins. The primary
goal of this project is to establish a structure-function relationship for this
organelle, developing a quantitative understanding of how its unique morphology
supports its role as a protein delivery network. This goal will be approached
collaboratively from the dual perspectives of physical model-building and
dynamic live-cell imaging. A mathematical framework will be developed that
combines analytical results for reaction-diffusion processes in complex
geometries with novel simulation techniques to establish how network morphology
modulates the kinetics of proteins finding binding partners, sorting regions,
and exit sites within the network. Rapid confocal imaging of ER structure and
photoactivated luminal and membrane proteins will enable quantification of the
underlying dynamics of network structures (including tubule junctions and exit
sites) and the embedded proteins. Genetic and pharmacological perturbations will
be leveraged to test predictions of the effect of structure on intra-ER protein
transport. The efficiency of protein sorting and export from the ER will be
quantified using a synchronized accumulation-and-release system, and the
contribution of physical factors such as bulk luminal flow and exit site
distribution will be explored through a confluence of theoretical models and
live-cell measurements. Ultimately, a feedback loop between theory and
experiment will elucidate the underlying principles that link the complex
architecture of the ER with its crucial protein processing
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.