* 2034336
* Exploring the Milliarcsecond Frontier: Open access to the renewed CHARA Array
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Theo ten Brummelaar, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,346,422.00

This award provides open observing time access to the U.S. astronomical
community on the Georgia State University Center for High Angular Resolution
Astronomy (CHARA) Array on Mount Wilson, CA. This renewal makes available more
time than before, up to 100 nights per year. It also funds staff to provide
expertise, advice, and training for better use of the access provided to
archival CHARA data. CHARA will continue to collaborate with graduate training
programs in the U.S. and abroad, hosting undergraduate and graduate students and
postdocs in technical and scientific capacities. CHARA will support a Georgia
State University Signature Experience program for undergraduates, and work with
the Mount Wilson Institute to enhance the experience for the roughly 70,000
annual visitors to the mountain, by helping to renovate the museum and other
visitor facilities. These broader activities impact development of the STEM
workforce and significantly enhance public engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
CHARA Array is an optical and near-infrared interferometer consisting of six
1-meter-aperture telescopes in a Y configuration, providing 15 baselines from 33
to 331 meters, and ten independent closure phase triangles. With the number and
size of its telescopes, its imaging capabilities, the length of its baselines,
the range of wavelength regimes and spectral resolutions covered by its beam
combiners, the CHARA Array is a uniquely powerful facility for milliarcsecond
imaging that is now reaching even deeper levels of sensitivity and performance.
Its scientific results continue to advance our understanding of stellar
astrophysics, exoplanets, dust and debris disks, binaries and multiple stars,
and novae. This award provides for an expansion of services already in place,
supporting both collaboration and external users. It also permits the team to
update several aging systems on the mountain, including the aluminizing
facilities and the telescope drives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.