* 2034886
* RAPID: Tracking the Spatiotemporal Dynamics of the COVID-19 Pandemic in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Andrey Petrov, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 05/31/2024
* USD 387,675.00

This RAPID award supports the development and deployment of a real-time web-
based COVID-19 data hub managed by an interdisciplinary team of experts in data
science, geoinformatics, epidemiology and geography. The team will collect,
analyze, and disseminate data on the spatial and temporal dynamics of the
COVID-19 pandemic in the Arctic. Both datasets and analyses of spatiotemporal
trends at the subregional level will be made available to stakeholders including
Arctic residents, researchers, and policymakers. Pandemic data will be
contextualized through the collection of first-person accounts of the COVID-19
experience in Arctic communities. The team will also develop geovisualization
tools and analyze datasets to address urgent questions related to the spread and
geography of COVID-19 in the Arctic, assessing containment and mitigation
policies and evaluating whether case fatality rates are affected by
environmental, socioeconomic, and/or geographic variables. Long-term curation of
Arctic COVID-19 data and data products will ensure availability for future
analysis, historical study and policy consideration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methods: The research team will build on their
expertise in collection and analysis of diverse, multilingual datasets relevant
to the incidence and spread of COVID-19 in the Arctic. Georeferenced
quantitative data from North America, Scandinavia, and Russia will be collected
from publicly available databases; variables will include basic demographic
data, and rates of testing, morbidity, and mortality. Qualitative data on
pandemic response, quarantine measures, mitigation efforts, and official
announcements will be geotagged and catalogued for theme- and location-based
searches. Multilingual narrative accounts of the experience of COVID-19 in
Arctic communities will be collected virtually and, with informed consent, made
available on the project’s data hub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.