* 2034367
* RAPID: Trade-Offs Between Public Health Promotion and Legal Restrictions During the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Rebecca Sanders, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,251.00

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, emergency laws and powers on a scale not seen
since the 9/11/2001 terrorist attacks have been enacted, with implications for
the everyday lives of Americans. Building on research on public perceptions of
trade-offs between security protections and restrictions on personal freedoms in
the post-9/11 environment, this project will use surveys that explore COVID-19
pandemic mitigation efforts that potentially constrain legal freedoms. As a
result, this research will determine popular tolerance for perceived public
health protections versus legal restrictions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Employing
several waves of survey analyses of a nationally representative sample of the US
population, this project will explore public views on government actions taken
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Econometric models and machine learning techniques
will be utilized to analyze the survey data. Findings will have implications on
several theoretical literatures across disciplines, which will inform policy
makers, scholars, and the public of the balance between competing public health
imperatives and legal protections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
supported by the Law and Science Program (LS) and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities (SMA) in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral
&amp; Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.