* 2034667
* RAPID: A Multinational Analysis of Factors that Determine the Effectiveness of COVID-19 Warning Messages
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Xiangyu Li, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 07/31/2021
* USD 125,243.00

The Covid-19 pandemic, which emerged in late 2019, swept the globe in early 2020
causing significant problems for national health, prosperity, and welfare across
many nations. Official information sources had to balance the need to provide
timely information to dispel rumors against the need for accuracy. This became
increasingly problematic as increasing numbers of staff became unable to work.
As a consequence, unexpected and often unhelpful perceptions of risk sometimes
emerged in communities. These reduced trust and confidence in public servants,
first-responders, the medical and scientific communities, and each other. This
Rapid Response Research (RAPID) study aims to determine the stimuli that
influence community understanding (norms) associated with the Covid-19 pandemic
as well as attitudes towards key stakeholders and protective actions. By
comparing China, which was amongst the most stringently locked-down countries,
and South Korea, which issued restrictions and guidance, rather than formally
locking-down, the researchers will be able to identify the stimuli that
influence community risk perception and attitudinal development. The findings
will have implications for how to shape disaster-related policies to be more
effective. The research will also have implications for communications that
better support public confidence, trust in, and compliance with key public
servants such as local first responders and emergency management, and the
medical and scientific communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design is
based on the observation that, in hazardous situations, unexpected risk
perceptions sometimes emerge due to conflict between observed social cues and
official information. On the other hand, “emergent norms” sometimes act as
relationship moderators, balancing the conflicts between community risk
perception, official information, and trust in public servants. This project
introduces social-norm related moderators into an established theoretical
framework - the Protective Action Decision Model: PADM – in an effort to better
predict protective behaviors in the context of public policies and messages. A
mixed-methods approach -- relying upon both qualitative content analysis and
multivariate statistical analysis of structured survey responses -- will be used
test the posited moderator effects. The mixed-methods approach will limit the
influence of spurious causal relationships by ensuring the analytic results are
examined in relationship to rich, textual accounts provided by individuals
experiencing quarantine. The two countries in the sample frame (China and South
Korea) undertook a range of policy variants, which will be incorporated into the
survey data set for analytic comparison and policy-relevant findings. This team
will conduct surveys based upon the Protective Action Decision Model, which
describes how environmental context and psychological processes together predict
an individual's tendency to protect against or mitigate for risks. Specifically,
the project will yield fundamental understanding about how official and
unofficial messages interact to affect peoples' protective behaviors, which will
have implications for how decision makers can craft more effective messages and
public policies to help keep communities safer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.