* 2034568
* Collaborative Research: Sustainable ABI: Arctos Sustainability
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Christopher Jordan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 287,248.00

An award is made to three partner institutions — the Museum of Vertebrate
Zoology (Univ. California Berkeley), Museum of Southwestern Biology (Univ. New
Mexico Albuquerque), and the Texas Advanced Computer Center (Univ. Texas Austin)
— to perform critical technical and infrastructure work that will establish a
sustainable framework for Arctos, a database and collection management system.
The Arctos community is a group of museum-based professionals representing
natural and cultural history collections at over 40 institutions that share in
the governance, design, maintenance, and development of Arctos. A primary
objective of the Arctos community is to make high quality data on biodiversity
and cultural collections openly accessible and richly networked for
multidisciplinary research and public understanding. This is accomplished
through the Arctos online platform, which serves primary species and cultural
data to national and international users. These data are used to advance
knowledge in a diversity of disciplines and serve as an archival record for
future generations. Additionally, the Arctos platform is used as an educational
tool where students access raw data to design original inquiries. The Arctos
community is dedicated to rigorous management of collections and their data, as
well as mentoring and training the next generation of curators, collection
managers, and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctos views collections
comprehensively and promotes linkages across biological, earth science, art,
archival, and ethnographic collections to add value and relevance for education
and research. For example, cultural and archival records often contribute
temporal, ecological, and behavioral dimensions to biodiversity data from
identifiable species components or observations. Many museums curate more than
one type of collection, and Arctos provides a comprehensive management solution
integrating diverse disciplines. For the last 20 years, Arctos has practiced the
concept of the ‘extended specimen network’. The richly annotated data in Arctos
creates a web of knowledge with deep comprehensive relationships between
cataloged records and all of their derived and associated data, and by using
reliable published resources for globally shared information such as taxonomy,
people names, and geography. To sustain this community-driven infrastructure and
resource, the Arctos database platform will complete migration to open-source
technologies removing the need for costly software. Other benefits include
stabilizing web services, query responses and delivery, spatial functionality,
among other core features. The Arctos model of community engagement and
development is attractive for collections of any size, including small
institutions such as field stations that may lack IT infrastructure, because of
its ease of cloud-based access, community mentorship, and enterprise-level
platform at scaled pricing. Project activities and results will be accessible on
the Arctos websites (arctos.database.museum and
arctosdb.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.