* 2034495
* RECODE: New technologies to illuminate and harness cadherins for the reproducible production of cortical tissue in human cerebral organoids
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2020,09/30/2024
* Megan McCain, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

Brain organoids are clusters of cells that mimic many features of the human
brain. As human stem cells differentiate into brain cells, these clusters form.
Experimenting on human brains poses many challenges. As a result, brain
organoids are used in place of the brain in many studies of early brain
development, neurological disorders, and drug discovery research. High
variability in the production of brain organoids limits the usefulness in these
studies. The goal of this project is to reduce variability through control of
cell-cell adhesion during organoid development. The expected outcome will be a
collection of cell-cell adhesion interventions that broadly improve the
reproducibility of brain organoids production so they can be used as reliable
models for human neural development and disease. As part of the project,
graduate and undergraduate students will be mentored in team leadership across
diverse fields of stem cell biology and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell-
cell adhesion dynamically remodels the brain during development. Our central
hypothesis is that modulation of cell-cell adhesion can manufacture reproducible
cerebral organoids from any human stem cell line. New tools to systematically
interrogate and modulate cell-cell adhesion at different stages of cerebral
organoid differentiation will be developed and implemented. This will be
achieved with three specific aims: (1) Develop a suite of technologies to
control cell-cell adhesion in human pluripotent stem cells; (2) Identify
mechanisms by which cell-cell adhesion regulates neuronal differentiation; and
(3) Measure changes in reproducibility upon differentiation with new cell-cell
adhesion modulation protocols. The expected outcomes of this project include
fundamental knowledge of the role of cell-cell adhesion at early stages of human
neuronal differentiation; new technologies to modulate cell-cell adhesion; new
technologies to culture and monitor organoids; and a workable differentiation
strategy for cerebral organoid development across human pluripotent stem cell
lines. These new tools and insights can likely be translated to understand
adhesion-based morphogenesis in the differentiation of many cell types beyond
cerebral organoids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported
by the Engineering Biology and Health Cluster in ENG/CBET and the Biomechanics
and Mechanobiology Program in ENG/CMMI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.