* 2034040
* Probabilistic Performance Assessment and Control Co-Design of Wave Farms
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Daniel Herber, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 12/31/2023
* USD 529,225.00

The objective of this project is to understand the principles of integrating the
design of an engineering system and its control to achieve system-optimal
performance for complex large-scale dynamic systems. Traditional
sequential/iterative design of a system and then its control is costly and
neglects the design coupling that exists between the two; this may lead to sub-
optimal designs. Also, various uncertainties in the environment need to be
accounted for to establish robust designs. This research will develop a novel,
robust co-design framework and solution methodologies that will enable the
integrated design of systems and their control by properly accounting for design
coupling and uncertainties. The research will lead to more robust and optimal
engineering systems. While this research will focus on application to
plant/layout and control co-design of large-scale wave farms, which include many
interacting wave energy converters (WECs) with complex dynamics, the framework
and methodologies are transferable and generalizable to the design of
engineering systems beyond wave farms, such as onshore and floating offshore
wind turbines in wind farms, vehicle design, smart antennas, and intelligent
structures. Research outcomes will advance design science and advance national
prosperity and welfare by helping to improve both economic and energy security
and by ensuring continued leadership and innovation in clean energy and system
design. Undergraduate students, graduate students, and science teachers will be
trained, and all new methods and algorithms will be shared open-source to reach
and impact a broader audience, including industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to investigate the probabilistic performance of large-scale arrays
of WECs in wave farms and the impacts of control co-design on their performance
(e.g., power output, dynamic motion and loading, and life-cycle performance),
taking into account the complex interactions within the array, the dynamics and
control of WECs, as well as uncertainties in the wave conditions. A robust plant
and control co-design problem will be formulated to optimize the probabilistic
performance of WEC arrays, where a simulation-based approach will be used to
explicitly account for various uncertainties. A novel and efficient nested
solution strategy integrating both single-fidelity and multi-fidelity Bayesian
optimization will be developed. To efficiently model large-scale arrays, a novel
method based on many-body expansion and surrogate models will also be developed.
The research will advance our scientific knowledge of probabilistic performance
and design of large-scale wave farms, and advance existing control design
paradigms by establishing robust control co-design formulations and effective
solution strategies. The methodologies to be developed are general and can be
applied to multiple application domains where control co-design and system
design under uncertainty are critical aspects. The novel surrogate modeling
approach in this project will also lead to advances in performance prediction of
large-scale engineering systems. The research will have broad societal impact by
helping to improve the economic feasibility and competitiveness of renewable
energy, reducing the cost of energy, and ensuring continued national leadership
and innovation in clean energy and system design. Dissemination of the results
in collaboration with the National Renewable Energy Lab, as well as through
open-source tools, will accelerate technology transfer. The integrated education
plan involves training of graduate and undergraduate researchers, creation of
new engineering courses, as well as outreach activities to science teachers to
improve STEM educator development and to help inspire and develop a globally
competitive STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.