* 2034919
* Ice Mass Balance Buoys for the Arctic Observing Network: Observing and Understanding a Changing Arctic Sea Ice Cover
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Donald Perovich, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 01/31/2026
* USD 1,740,512.00

The Arctic sea ice cover is in decline. The areal extent of sea ice is
decreasing and the ice is getting thinner. Observing and understanding this ice
loss is critical to predict future ice conditions and develop plans to respond
to these changes. This project uses autonomous buoys to determine the mass
balance of sea ice. The sea ice mass balance is a simple concept. It is how much
the ice grows in winter and how much it melts in summer; specifically, how much
it melts on the surface of the ice and how much on the bottom of the ice. This
separation enables the relative contributions of the atmosphere and the ocean to
be determined. These buoys will be deployed at key locations in partnership with
other instruments measuring conditions in the atmosphere and ocean. Buoy
deployment locations are influenced by modeling studies and by logistical
opportunities. The ice mass balance data will be used to gain insights into the
drivers of the current rapid sea ice decline and changes in the characteristics
of the upper layers of the Arctic Ocean and to improve models of sea ice and
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seasonal ice mass balance buoys are based on a
spar-type hull design. They are designed to be installed in the ice and to float
stably upright in open water. The sensor package on the buoy provides time
series data on position, barometric pressure, vertical profiles of air-snow-ice-
upper ocean temperature, snow depth, ice thickness, ice growth, surface melt,
bottom melt, and ocean heat flux. This project will procure and deploy a minimum
of eight buoys per year; process and archive the data from these buoys to be
fully, freely, and immediately accessible to all users; implement new sensors
into the buoy production process and make this ever-improving technology
available; and continue to post mass balance results on a publicly accessible
website. The ice mass balance buoys will also be the centerpiece of a middle
school science program called “Adopt-a-buoy.” By working with an observation
site at the school, where they collect data similar to measurements by buoys
installed in the Arctic, eighth-grade students will gain firsthand experience
formulating hypotheses, accessing, processing and analyzing data, and presenting
results to their peers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.