* 2034340
* Collaborative Research: SitS: Development of multiple-scale sensor and remote sensing technology to quantify abiotic carbon dioxide emission in irrigated soils of aridlands
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Saurav Kumar, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2024
* USD 598,496.00

Arid lands cover more than 40% of the terrestrial land surface and host more
than two billion people. To produce more food and support a growing population,
intensive irrigation is being utilized worldwide to convert arid lands to
agricultural fields. However, intensive irrigation of arid lands causes several
problems including high water loss through evaporation, salt accumulation, and
the formation of calcite mineral deposits, which can clog soil pores and change
water-infiltration patterns. Moreover, formation of these calcite minerals is
coupled with the release of carbon dioxide (CO2) that could alter regional and
global carbon balances. The overarching goal of this project is to advance our
fundamental understanding of the release of calcite-derived CO2 from arid
agricultural soils using an irrigated pecan orchard in the El Paso region along
the Rio Grande valley as a test site. To achieve this goal, the investigators
propose to quantify the emission of calcite-derived CO2 from their pecan orchard
test site using a suite of measurement tools including portable CO2 isotope
analyzers, eddy covariance towers and remote sensing systems mounted on an
unmanned aerial vehicle. The successful completion of this project will benefit
society through the collection of new data and the development of new
fundamental knowledge on how much abiotic CO2 is released to the atmosphere when
arid lands are converted to irrigated agricultural fields. Further benefits to
society will be achieved through student education and training, and public
outreach including the mentoring four graduate students (2 PhD and 2 MS), and 3
undergraduate students at UTEP and a postdoctoral scholar at
TAMU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is growing evidence that the formation of
pedogenic carbonate minerals in irrigated arid agricultural lands is coupled
with the release of abiotic CO2 to the atmosphere. Recent studies by the
investigators of this proposal have identified such abiotic CO2 signals in soil
gases from pecan, alfalfa and cotton fields in El Paso. However, the release of
abiotic CO2 from irrigated arid agricultural soils needs further investigation
to evaluate its potential impact on regional/global carbon balances and soil
physicochemical properties. The goal of this project is to address this
knowledge gap through detailed measurements of the flux of abiotic CO2 emitted
to the atmosphere by an irrigated pecan orchard test field located in the El
Paso region of the Rio Grande valley. To advance this goal, the investigators
propose to monitor the ecosystem-atmosphere CO2 exchange in the pecan orchard
test field with high spatial and temporal resolution using CO2 isotope
analyzers, remote sensing with tunable diode laser absorption spectroscopy,
hyperspectral imaging, and coupled eddy covariance flux measurements. Through
this integrated measurement program, the PIs hope that they will be able to
capture the spatiotemporal variations of the abiotic CO2 fluxes, and identify
key parameters/variables (e.g. irrigation intensity, water chemistry and soil
physicochemical properties) that control the release of abiotic CO2 from their
pecan orchard test site. Thus, the successful completion of this project has
potential for transformative impact by providing the first detailed assessment
of the potential of irrigated arid lands to modify the land-atmosphere CO2
exchange at regional, national and even global
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Signals in the Soil (SitS) solicitation, a
collaborative partnership between the National Science Foundation and the United
States Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture
(USDA NIFA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.