* 2034247
* RAPID: Democratizing Genome Sequence Analysis for COVID-19 Using CloudLab
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Wesley Warren, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 05/31/2023
* USD 179,999.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has caused numerous deaths in the United States and around
the world. Human genetic information may hold the answers for COVID-19 drug
discovery. With the ability to sequence the human genome at low cost, this
project aims to democratize genome sequence (GS) analysis on CloudLab
(https://cloudlab.us/, an NSF-funded cloud computing research infrastructure)
for accelerating the process of finding a cure for COVID-19. As a result, any
researcher will be able to study differences in the genetic information of
individuals affected by COVID-19 using CloudLab at no charge. This project will
investigate efficient computing solutions to perform the data-intensive task of
analyzing differences in individuals' genomes. It will also provide training
opportunities for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will democratize
genome sequence (GS) analysis using CloudLab. Deep insights from genomic
information of individuals can be extracted by researchers at scale. This work
will lead to improved understanding of how commodity clusters, cloud
infrastructure, and open-source software could be designed for large-scale GS
storage, processing, and analysis. Specifically, it will result in new
algorithms for exhaustive variant analysis (EVA), scheduling strategies for
efficient execution of variant analysis tasks, and optimization techniques to
speedup EVA and maximize resource utilization in a commodity cluster. It will
provide low-level measurement data for network optimization when processing
large-scale GS workloads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By empowering researchers with
publicly available software tools and computing infrastructure for variant
analysis at scale, this project could advance the understanding of how
individuals respond to COVID-19 infection by uncovering deep relationships in
genomic variants of individuals. It can enable new drug discovery and treatment
strategies for COVID-19. A prototype of the tool will be made publicly available
for research and education. The findings will be disseminated in the form of
publications and software packages. New course modules will be developed; a
workshop for high school students will be conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project website is at https://github.com/MU-Data-Science/EVA. This repository
will be maintained for 5 years after the completion of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.