* 2034974
* A Model-Based Intelligent Agent Approach for Supply Chain Transparency and Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kira Barton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 408,922.00

This award will contribute to the national prosperity by providing new methods
to improve resilience and efficiency of global supply chains, enabling them to
respond to unexpected disruptions promptly and proactively. Supply chains are
critical components of all commercial enterprises, and as the COVID-19 pandemic
has demonstrated, supply chain efficiency must be balanced with the ability of
supply chains to respond to major disruptions. This project will investigate
models for monitoring and operating supply chains using intelligent agents to
represent supply chain components, from raw material suppliers, intermediate
producers, assemblers, distributors, to end users. The agents have the ability
to communicate, share information and negotiate with other agents, as well as to
use this information to make local decisions in real time with other agent's
status and objectives in mind. The research is expected to lead towards improved
operations with lower costs in supply chain management and increased resilience
in the face of large-scale disruptions. The project will build data dashboards
and open-source software that will be widely disseminated to support supply-
chain risk management. The research activities are integrated with educational
and outreach activities, including participation in the Detroit Area Pre-College
Engineering Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will develop, validate,
and calibrate a cloud-based intelligent agent modeling architecture to
characterize information, communication, and negotiation in complex supply
chains. Specific research tasks include: characterization of the set of supply
chain components that will be modeled with agents, their performance objectives
and control activities; construction of communication links and information sets
that each agent uses to negotiate with other agents; development of methods for
different agents to optimize their actions given their own risk attitudes and
uncertainty characterization; and specification of the classes of disturbances
in supply chains and development of mechanisms to detect them promptly. The
framework is expected to improve modern supply chain management through a new
understanding of the characteristics and impact of disruptions and of the
requirements and limitations of agent-based technology in supply chain
management. The project will deliver a new distributed control framework with
modeling flexibility, communication transparency, and the ability to respond to
supply chain disruptions. The approach will be validated through a real-world
case study in automotive manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.