* 2034632
* Conference: MsRI-EW: Modular, Open Hardware-Software Prototyping Platform for the mmWave and Sub-THz Wireless Research Community. To be held virtually in Aug. 2020.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Habarakada Madanayake, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental research in the mm-wave and sub-
THz regime needed for 5G and future wireless networks is held back by the high
cost of instrumentation needed to conduct research. The cost of such experiments
is typically over $200,000. Given these costs, academics struggle to perform
high-impact scientific and engineering research that depends on experimental
verification of wireless communication theory. This conference is aimed at
finding a path to affordable and accessible wireless mm-wave and sub-THz
experiments. The vision is of a versatile and affordable digital platform that
can be used for a plethora of scientific experiments across many scientific
disciplines. This conference is a first step towards fulfilling that vision. The
conference will engage a broad swath of the research engineering community
engaged in wireless research. Education and community outreach will be a primary
focus of the conference. The organizers of the conference are committed to
providing an inclusive environment for individuals from all backgrounds,
including those from underrepresented communities in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental wireless
research in the mm-wave and sub-THz today is conducted primarily by private
companies as the instrumentation cost for such experiments is unaffordable for
academic researchers in the research engineering community. This conference will
point a path to solving this problem through accessible mmWave and sub-THz
wireless experiments. The envisaged infrastructure will implement a scalable,
versatile, programmable, and affordable digital platform that can be used for a
plethora of scientific experiments across many scientific disciplines, including
but not limited to communications, remote sensing, robotics, human computer
interfaces, autonomy, networking, and sub-THz imaging. The long term vision is
an infrastructure project that enables the deployment of an open-source portable
device for use in research laboratories consisting of broadband mmWave
transceivers, reconfigurable digital processors, and associated open-source
programming kits. Deployment of a distributed testbed of such nodes will
initiate experimental research in these emergent frequency bands at research
laboratories across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.