* 2034758
* Mechanisms of Light Regulated Translation in Chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2025
* Alice Barkan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 01/31/2025
* USD 1,002,200.00

This project addresses a fundamental question in biology: How do organisms
regulate gene expression to adapt to environmental fluctuations? It focuses on
effects of light on the synthesis of proteins required for photosynthesis, a
process that consumes atmospheric CO2 and produces the carbohydrates that fuel
life. Light drives photosynthesis, but it also damages the photosynthetic
apparatus. Repair of the damage requires the replacement of damaged parts with
newly synthesized proteins. This project examines how the same light that
damages the photosynthetic apparatus also activates the synthesis of new
proteins required for repair. An understanding of this repair mechanism has
implications for crop productivity and resilience in the face of changing
environmental conditions. High school students, high school teachers, and
undergraduate students will gain hands-on experience with research through
involvement in this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary target of
photodamage is a protein called D1, which resides in Photosystem II (PSII) and
is encoded by the psbA gene. The rate of D1 synthesis increases with light
intensity to provide D1 for PSII repair. In chloroplasts, this regulation occurs
at the level of translation. Prior work revealed an intimate connection between
light-induced D1 damage, the recruitment of ribosomes specifically to psbA mRNA,
and a conserved protein complex in the thylakoid membrane that mediates PSII
assembly and repair. This work culminated in a model that invokes the
assembly/repair complex as the hub of a translational autoregulatory mechanism
that couples psbA translation to the need for D1 following its light-induced
damage. Experiments will test and elaborate on this proposed mechanism, with a
focus on communication between the membrane-bound assembly complex and a
translational activator in the stroma that binds psbA mRNA. Experiments will
employ multifaceted genetic, molecular, genomic, and biochemical approaches in
maize and Arabidopsis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.