* 2034809
* RAPID: Social isolation during COVID-19: Effects on fear learning and implications for trauma
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2021
* Naomi Eisenberger, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 116,722.00

In response to COVID-19, people across the United States have experienced
extreme and abrupt shifts in their level of daily contact with others, forcing
many people into a state of social isolation. This project examines whether the
experience of social isolation amplifies the development of harmful and
persistent fears in humans. The research further tests if social isolation
reduces the ability to eliminate those fears once learned. This study utilizes a
unique situational event (social isolation due to COVID-19), which cannot be
replicated in the laboratory, to provide rare insight into how social isolation
heightens the development of fear and if experiences of social connection can
reverse these effects. This research will contribute to the growing
understanding of the effects of social isolation on increasing fears and
influencing the developmental course of trauma; it may also provide simple
strategies to mitigate those effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research suggests
that social isolation may influence long-term trauma by directly influencing
fear learning processes. Socially isolated animals exhibit increases in fear
responses that persist even when a threat is no longer present, are more likely
to develop PTSD-like symptoms following trauma. Similarly, research suggests
that socially isolated humans are at a greater risk of developing PTSD. To date,
however, no work has directly examined the impact of extreme social isolation on
fear learning in humans. Preliminary data suggests that feeling socially
isolated appears to lead to persistent fears and poorer fear extinction,
although these effects may be eliminated when individuals are reminded of their
social support during fear extinction. This project will evaluate these
hypotheses by sampling people from across the U.S. living in places where some
form of ‘Stay at Home’ order is in place. The research examines whether the
extreme situational social isolation brought about by COVID-19 leads to
increased development of fear associations for neutral images paired with
negative affective stimuli. The study also examines whether a two-week social
connection intervention, during which individuals will be asked to do positive
things for others to promote feelings of connectedness, improves fear extinction
and decreases the development of fear associations in those most severely
isolated. The findings of this work have the potential to shed light on how
social isolation influences the course of trauma and reveal simple, low-cost,
and accessible interventions to reduce this trauma that can be used immediately
and in the future to ease the harmful side effects of necessary measures to
address COVID-19 and similar events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.