* 2034167
* Microswarms: a lens into fault structure and aseismic processes deep in Southern California’s crust
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Zachary Ross, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 04/30/2024
* USD 342,205.00

Earthquake swarms are clusters of seismic events occurring in a given area
within a relatively short period of time. They are distinct from standard
aftershock sequences – series of small earthquakes following large earthquakes -
in that they appear to be driven by non-tectonic factors. Recent analysis
suggests that the most likely processes triggering earthquake swarms are fluid
migration within Earth’s crust, and slow fault creep events. Here, the
researchers examined data collected across Southern California between 2008 and
2020. They used machine learning algorithms which allow extracting small
earthquake signals from the seismic noise. They discovered hundreds of unknown
swarms that lasted 6 months to several years in duration. The team now analyze
these newly identified sequences to quantify their collective spatial and
temporal patterns. One goal is to identify if there are generalizable
characteristics. Another goal is to characterize the underlying driving
processes and document where and how often these swarms occur. The study aims to
provide a more comprehensive regional context for the role of non-tectonic
factors in driving earthquake activity. One of its outcomes is a publicly
searchable high-resolution catalog of recent earthquake swarms in Southern
California. The project also provide support for one graduate student and
outreach to K-12 students and the public. It is funded by both NSF Geophysics
and Geoinformatics programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earthquake swarms are believed
to be driven mainly by aseismic processes. The spatiotemporal evolution of these
sequences therefore encodes unique information: the structural and permeability
architecture of fault zones, the aseismic processes responsible, and the
coupling between fault properties and earthquake physics. Here, the researchers
leveraged recent advances in earthquake monitoring capabilities with deep
learning algorithms. They showed that during the last decade, Southern
California has experienced hundreds of previously unknown swarm episodes that
persist for months to years. These earthquake microswarms are now used to map
the potential origins of fluids deep within the seismogenic crust and to
quantify the frequency and duration of these transient episodes. The timing of
the initiation and arrest of microswarms will be examined systematically for
connections to the largest regional events. Furthermore, the large collection of
microswarms will be used to provide constraints on the geometrical, structural,
and permeability architecture of the fault zones at depth. These data are
critical to understanding the complex evolution of earthquake swarms in space
and time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.