* 2034964
* RAPID: A Computational Model for Multiscale Investigation of Regional Lung Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Alex Vadati, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2023
* USD 115,177.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will offer new fundamental insights
into the mechanical aspects of breathing and mechanical ventilation based on
imaging data from hospitalized COVID-19 patients. While mechanical ventilation
is often used, our scientific understanding of how it works is sparse. A
multidisciplinary team of engineers and physicians will work together to better
understand how the lungs respond to mechanical ventilation. This work will use
imaging data from COVID-19 patients to create detailed computer models of the
infected and inflamed lungs. These patient-specific computer simulations will
enable mechanistic understanding of lung function in healthy and diseased
states. The virtual lungs created in this study will then be used to simulate a
digital twin of the COVID-19 infected lungs on mechanical ventilation. Thus, our
fundamental knowledge of the mechanical aspects of lung disease and the physical
response to ventilation will be advanced. Furthermore, the computer models
developed in this project will be used as instructional material for multiple
university courses. This will introduce low-income and first-generation college
students from rural communities to cutting-edge modeling and simulation
techniques. This experience can have a profound impact on these students'
interest in foundational research and career goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ventilation and respiration events in the lungs span
multiple length and time scales. Furthermore, these events involve multiple
physical phenomena, including deformation and motion of the lung parenchyme,
fluid-solid interaction between air, airway walls and the alveoli, and finally
diffusion and gas exchange with the blood flowing through the alveolar
capillaries. While modest progress has been made towards understanding the
mechanics of the lung at the macroscale, our knowledge of the microscale and
mesoscale mechanics of the lung at the level of alveoli, the smallest functional
unit of the lung, remains rudimentary. Our proposed research on multiscale and
multiphysics computational modeling of the lung in a disease state, based on CT
imaging in COVID-19 subjects, offers the potential to advance our fundamental
and mechanistic knowledge of lung dynamics. Understanding and exploring the
mechanisms of reduced alveolar diffusion in COVID-19 patients through patient-
specific multi-physics and multiscale modeling can advance our knowledge base
and provide new insights into the role of mechanics in lung inflammation.
Furthermore, multiscale simulation of the lung using an acute inflammation model
and CT data can inform and educate about the science of inflammation-induced
changes in the lungs and the alveolar-capillary
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.