* 2034631
* Molecular Mechanisms of Protein Association with Plastoglobule Lipid Droplets
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Peter Lundquist, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 01/31/2024
* USD 589,299.00

This project will explore the mechanisms of protein association with
plastoglobules, lipid droplets that exist in the photosynthetic compartment of
plant cells. Accumulated evidence indicates that plastoglobules are highly
important for effective plant tolerance to a range of environmental stresses.
However, it remains unclear what role they play in the cell to facilitate stress
tolerance within plants. This research will unravel the relationship between
plastoglobule function and stress tolerance by uncovering principles governing
the establishment and dynamic regulation of the plastoglobule protein set.
Results from this research may provide a foundation for development of
agricultural and horticultural crops that are more nutritious and more resilient
to environmental challenges. This project will provide scientific training to
researchers of diverse backgrounds and career stages. Lesson materials and in-
class demonstrations for elementary school students will be developed based on
concepts and results of the project that will serve thousands of children from
highly diverse socioeconomic and ethnic groups. These lessons will educate
students about the value of plants as a source of food, the challenges plants
face in nature, and the role of plant science in overcoming these
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dozens of structural and enzymatic proteins
associate peripherally at the surface of plastoglobule lipid droplets of
chloroplasts. Most of these plastoglobule-associated proteins are known to
specifically associate to the plastoglobule, although the molecular mechanisms
which underlie this remarkable specificity are unknown. This project will employ
integrated biochemical and microscopic techniques to uncover mechanistic
principles governing the specific association of proteins. Sequence regions
necessary for plastoglobule association will be identified by testing
fluorescent localization of truncated and site-directed mutagenized proteins.
Lipid-binding capabilities of proteins and relevant sequence regions will be
investigated using lipid overlay and vesicle-binding experiments. To determine
the impact of post-translational modifications on plastoglobule association,
coupled top-down and bottom-up proteomics will be conducted on isolated
chloroplast sub-compartments. The research will develop understanding of
protein-membrane interactions at a mechanistic level, with implications for all
domains of life, particularly other curved or monolayer membranes such as
cytoplasmic lipid droplets, micelles, or lipoprotein
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.