* 2034732
* I-Corps:  A Solar Electrodialysis Device for Water Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Syed Mubeen Jawahar Hussaini, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
translation of a decentralized solar-powered water treatment unit with the
potential to increase global desalination operations and to promote secure and
sustainable water resources. The proposed technology may be attractive to
customers, including rural/tribal communities, large gated communities, golf
courses and resorts, rural hospitals and schools, governmental properties for
emergency/disaster settings, and industrial applications such as gas production
facilities and agricultural farmland. Since the core technology may provide
significant benefits in either new treatment facilities or for plant retrofits,
existing large-scale water treatment plants also may be potential customers.
Overall, the proposed technology is well-positioned to lower freshwater
production costs as well as the carbon footprint for communities requiring
decentralized water solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development and translation of a cost-effective, energy-efficient,
solar-powered electrodialysis (ED) technology that will address the needs of
brackish groundwater desalination plants. The proposed process will use an
integrated solar cell/three-dimensional (3D) electrodialysis unit to recover
&gt;98% of the water from brackish sources using photon energy from sunlight as
the only energy input. Currently, over one-third of the total operating cost of
a typical desalination plant is the electrical cost of running the plant. The
proposed technology will use Sunâ€™s energy to drive the desalination process,
enabling a reduction in energy consumption and carbon footprint. While energy
costs constitute one-third of the total operating cost in incumbent ED systems,
the electrodes constitute nearly one-third of the overall system cost. To lower
the system cost, the technology will employ a proprietary electrode design that
replaces of current platinum group-based planar electrodes with low-cost carbon-
based three-dimensional (3-D) electrodes. The initial results demonstrate
significantly improved (3x) demineralization and higher current efficiencies
compared to planar electrodes when operated in a commercial ED reversal system.
The 3-D electrodes also prevent unwanted side reactions, thereby improving the
overall stability of the electrodialysis stack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.