* 2034626
* RAPID: Highly Customizable, Breathable N95 Mask Design Utilizing Kirigami-enabled Filters and Sensor Platforms to Maximize Comfort and Monitor usage Patterns
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Sean Ahlquist, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 01/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to develop a rapidly
manufacturable novel N95 class respirator design platform that decouples the
relationship between comfort and filtering efficiency. The majority of N95
respirator masks are worn improperly even by trained medical personnel, caused
by improper donning and fit when optimizing for comfort instead of filtering
efficacy. The proposed N95 respirators would enable the monitoring and
minimization of face touching and track cleaning cycles and usage patterns. The
project will circumvent several fundamental shortcomings in the design of
current N95 style respirator masks, as well as their fit and wear protocols. The
proposed design maximizes compactness, comfort, and manufacturability, while
enabling real-time monitoring of face-touch events. The research team will use
the latest advances in knitting technology that controllably place stiff and
compliant elements in a seamless and semi-customized manner, sensing algorithms
that can run on widely deployed wearable technology, as well as novel
kirigami/origami-inspired sensor platforms and mechanical enhancement for filter
effectiveness. Despite the advanced nature of these elements, the project will
use current hardware and manufacturing capacity and plans to quickly transition
to cost-effective implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Studies have implied that gaps (as caused by an improper fit
of the mask) can result in over a 60% decrease in the filtration efficiency,
implying the need for future cloth mask design studies to take into account
issues of "fit" and leakage, while allowing the exhaled air to vent efficiently.
The knitting-enabled approach used in this project allows for N-95 class of
masks to be manufactured with a wider variety of size and fit options, using
industrial capacity that has not been used to date for medical-grade masks.
Successful implementation of these designs will result in greater numbers of PPE
produced and made available to healthcare workers. Although the proposed
manufacturing process will be more costly initially, the mask construction will
meet the necessary standards to allow for reusability and continued fit over
time; significantly reducing its per-use cost. Furthermore, this approach to
achieving semi- or fully customized fit of something as varied as the human face
can be more broadly adapted to a variety of wearable garments and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.