* 2034896
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the thermal effects of fluid circulation in oceanic crust entering the Cascadia subduction zone
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Glenn Spinelli, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 398,631.00

Collaborative Research: Quantifying the thermal effects of fluid circulation in
oceanic crust entering the Cascadia subduction
zone&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subduction zones, where one tectonic plate moves under
another, generate the world’s largest earthquakes and tsunamis. Temperatures
along the subduction zone fault that separates the two tectonic plates affect
friction, thus influencing the size and distribution of earthquakes. In
addition, subduction zone temperatures affect a wide range of other physical and
chemical processes, including the generation of magma that supplies some
volcanoes. To understand these processes, it is important to accurately estimate
subduction zone temperatures. Seawater circulating in the subducting tectonic
plate can be an important control on subduction zone temperatures. For the
Cascadia subduction zone offshore the Pacific Northwest of the United States,
the spatial extent and vigor of this seawater circulation is not well known,
leading to substantial uncertainty in temperature estimates for this hazardous
subduction zone. This study will collect temperature measurements in seafloor
sediments offshore Washington and Oregon, and map the distribution of those
sediments, to understand the controls on temperatures in the system and improve
estimates of subduction zone temperatures. The results of this research have
direct societal benefit, by informing earthquake hazard estimates. In addition,
the proposed project will enhance education at New Mexico Tech, a STEM-focused
Hispanic-serving institution. Two graduate students will be trained in
geophysics and hydrogeology. Results of the project will be incorporated into
“using data in the classroom” efforts, improving hands-on experience in
undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate estimates of
subduction zone temperatures are required to understand a variety of critical
processes, including controls on seismogenic and aseismic behavior on subduction
megathrusts. For the Cascadia subduction zone, the dearth of instrumentally
recorded interplate seismicity requires a reliance on indirect methods
(including temperature) to estimate the extent of the seismogenic zone. The
extent to which fluid circulation redistributes heat within the subducting plate
has profound implications for temperature distributions in the Cascadia
subduction zone. In Cascadia, a lack of heat flux data immediately seaward of
the deformation front is a significant knowledge gap for understanding
subduction zone temperatures. This study will fill this hole by collecting ~600
km of seismic reflection lines and ~200 heat flux measurements at 5 sites
offshore Washington and Oregon with a focus on quantifying the extent and vigor
of hydrothermal circulation in the Juan de Fuca plate. Hydrothermal circulation
associated with basement relief generates large anomalies in heat flux across
the seafloor; this signal provides a test for the presence of hydrothermal
circulation. Combining data from multiple sites will provide information on
whether hydrothermal circulation is local or regional. The central hypotheses
are: 1) Hydrothermal circulation is ubiquitous in the upper oceanic crustal
aquifer; it persists in the aquifer covered by a thick mantle of sediment near
the deformation front and in the shallowly subducted crust; and 2) Pseudofaults
along propagator wakes are zones of high permeability through the full thickness
of the crust; thus, they are zones of enhanced fluid and heat circulation
relative to areas outside of propagator wakes. Comparisons of mean heat flux
values with those predicted from lithospheric cooling models will allow
assessment of whether heat in addition to the basal heat flux is added to the
system (e.g., heat transported seaward through the subducting oceanic crust
and/or heat advected upwards through faults in propagator wakes). Analyzing and
interpreting the controls on the thermal state of the Juan de Fuca plate near
the deformation front will allow for the development of improved predictive
models of subduction zone temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.