* 2034160
* Collaborative Research: Empowering Next Generation Offshore Wind Farms Through Systematic Characterization of Floating Wind Turbine Array Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Raul Cal, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 388,018.00

Higher and more consistent wind speeds, along with the abundance of available
area, make offshore wind a promising pathway to increasing the percentage of US
electricity supplied by renewable energy sources, such as utility scale wind
farms. The depth of the water in many locations, e.g., off the west coast of the
US, and the ability to place installations further from shore, where they are
less controversial, make floating platforms an appealing choice for future
installations. While onshore wind farms are well established, far less is known
about how interactions between the ocean environment (e.g., waves) and turbine
motions and their wakes affect power output efficiency and turbine wear in
floating wind farms. This grant will support research that employs laboratory
experiments and high-fidelity computer simulations that will enable more robust
and realistic predictions of wind plant power output. The data to be generated
in this project can be leveraged to make design and control changes to increase
efficiency and resilience of floating wind farms. These advances will help pave
the way to more installed wind power that increases the use of clean, renewable
technologies, thereby decreasing the carbon footprint of our energy system. The
construction and operation of large-scale power plants will also help create and
sustain a vibrant new US wind energy economy. The project will train graduate
students in the broad interdisciplinary tools of wind energy science. Broader
community outreach will be achieved through curriculum developed for public
entities (e.g., museums) and summer programs for K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop state-of-the art
laboratory experiments and numerical simulation tools to measure, analyze and
characterize the coupled wind, wave, wake and platform dynamics affecting the
power output and local turbine properties in floating wind farms. The new
knowledge and data developed through these studies will be exploited to create a
suite of dynamical systems modeling, estimation and analysis tools that will
provide better predictions of critical wind farm properties such as power output
and turbine loading. The data will be interrogated using dynamical systems tools
such as proper orthogonal decomposition and dynamic (Koopman) mode decomposition
that enable us to infer important system properties for further analysis, model
validation and to develop estimation techniques as the building blocks for
future real-time estimation and control algorithms. The outcomes of this work
include: (1) New system characterization approaches that couple laboratory and
simulation tools to systematically explore how the coupled wind, wave, turbine
wake and platform dynamics affect the wind farm properties over a broad range of
interacting spatial and temporal scales; (2) A suite of physics-informed models
that describe the dynamics of the interactions most relevant to operation,
design and control of floating wind farms; and (3) Estimation approaches that
exploit the data and modeling tools, while taking into account the sensing and
actuation approaches that can be implemented within real-time control
paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.