* 2034824
* Breaking Barriers to Participation: A Cultural Approach to Increasing Native Hawaiian Representation in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Woochul Lee, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 03/31/2024
* USD 641,379.00

Enhancing diversity can lead to success, not only for minorities, but for
everyone. Multicultural experiences can make people more creative, and diverse
groups are more likely to think deeply and achieve higher quality outcomes
compared to homogenous groups. In universities and in the workplace, embracing
the talents and experiences of people from diverse backgrounds will be
beneficial for society more broadly. Yet certain groups are underrepresented in
universities and in particular fields. Specifically, Native Hawaiians are one of
the most underrepresented groups in the engineering workforce and also in
engineering programs at four-year institutions. As the primary public
institution in Hawai‘i, University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa serves a central role in
engaging Native Hawaiians in engineering programs. Native Hawaiian engineering
graduates will have numerous benefits in their future careers (including higher
wages) and can have various opportunities to contribute to their local
communities. In this light, it is presently important to use evidence-based
approaches and seamlessly adapt preexisting practices in engineering education
for supporting more Native Hawaiian students. This project will increase the
participation of Native Hawaiians in engineering, with implementation via
educational and mentoring initiatives and specific focus on outcomes at the
graduate level. Broadening the participation of Native Hawaiians in university
engineering programs will benefit the Native Hawaiian community while also
strengthening the U.S. engineering workforce as a whole.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To support Native Hawaiian students’ retention in
engineering programs and pursuit of graduate degrees, we aim to provide key
resources and support first at the undergraduate level. Specifically, this
project will: 1) identify potential culture-specific barriers for entering
graduate engineering programs through a cultural psychological approach; 2)
develop course materials originating from Native Hawaiian culture for a more
culturally aligned engineering education; and 3) establish multi-disciplinary
programs for professional development and cohesive mentoring based on students’
academic and personal needs. This project will develop culture-based pedagogical
tools consistent with Native Hawaiian ways of learning and integrate them within
the engineering curriculum. In addition, we will establish professional
development and mentoring programs to create an environment that fosters Native
Hawaiians’ educational aspirations and stimulates Native Hawaiians to thrive in
their future engineering careers. We expect that our evidence-based approach,
combined with concrete educational and mentoring initiatives, will increase
Native Hawaiian students’ sense of belonging, academic performance in
engineering, and interest in engineering graduate program enrollment. By
increasing inclusion of Native Hawaiians, the culture of engineering programs at
UHM will be transformed to enable greater diversity. The broad participation of
Native Hawaiians in engineering graduate programs will further enhance diversity
in a wide range of engineering job sectors. Furthermore, Native Hawaiian
individuals with strong engineering backgrounds will be able to play a much-
needed role in bridging a gap between policy makers and the local Native
Hawaiian community to understand unique cultures and perspectives on each side.
Findings and outcomes from this project have high potential to benefit others,
who are underrepresented in STEM including, but not limited to, Other Pacific
Islanders, Alaska Native and Native American
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.