* 2034885
* Principles of intelligent sensorimotor behavior under informational constraints
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Laura Kloepper, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2024
* USD 600,407.00

Most people think about learning, problem-solving, tool-use, navigation, and
communication when considering animal intelligence. However, this view of
intelligence is shifting. Increasingly, researchers recognize that merely
interacting with the environment requires animals to solve very complex
problems. Many of these problems turn out to be more challenging to solve than
what is classically defined as intelligent behavior. For example, consider an
insect walking across uneven, unpredictable terrain. Coordinating the movement
of six legs is a challenging problem. Interacting with the environment is
difficult because the animal does not have complete knowledge about its body or
the terrain. Nor does it have much time to gather information. This lack of
information is common when animals interact with the world. Currently, we do not
have a good idea of how animals deal with this lack of knowledge. Bats are ideal
animals in which to study this problem. Their sonar system provides them only
with limited information about their surroundings. Despite this, they perform
astoundingly coordinated and intelligent behavior. The current project
investigates strategies echolocating bats use to overcome the lack of sensory
information. The aim is to use robots to model several bat behaviors under
conditions where the lack of sensory information is the most severe, for
example, during the emergence from caves. Using robots instead of computer
simulations allows mimicking the sonar signals received by bats faithfully. By
examining strategies bats can use to deal with informational deficiencies, the
project aims at understanding how animals more generally can overcome this
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animal intelligence is often typified
by abilities such as learning, problem-solving, tool use, and other facets of
higher-order cognition. However, more recent views on animal intelligence
emphasize the ability to adjust behavior to the moment-to-moment contingencies
arising in interaction with the physical environment. Coping with the dynamic,
unpredictable world is challenging. Most importantly, because action and
perception have to proceed in the face of substantial informational deficiency.
While acting, animals do not have complete knowledge about the world or their
bodies. This project proposes and tests strategies for dealing with
informational constraints by building bio-robotic models of bat sonar behavior,
allowing for veracious mimicking of sonar signals. In particular, it is proposed
that direct mapping of task-specific sensory input to action is a fundamental
principle for dealing with informational constraints. Echolocating bats are
ideal for understanding animal intelligence under informational constraints
because their sonar system only provides limited information about the
environment. Nevertheless, echolocating bats perform astounding intelligent
behavior in interaction with complex environments. Understanding principles for
intelligent sensorimotor control might help to understand the so-called higher
cognitive functions in animals. These are not discontinuous with sensorimotor
behavior. Indeed, understanding the fundamental principles of animal
intelligence (and potentially human intelligence) may require learning about
their sensorimotor control origins. As a result, investigating the principles
supporting vertebrate sensorimotor intelligence might help explain functions
more classically associated with intelligence (e.g., tool use and planning). As
such, this proposal aims at contributing to a deeper understanding of animal
intelligence and cognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.