* 2034643
* RAPID:  Characterization of the shear stress enhanced electric field gradients in MOF/Polymers composite thin films and multilayered fibers.
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Sophia Suarez, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 211,867.00

Non-technical Summary: This RAPID project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, is focused on
fundamental investigations, aimed at advancing our knowledge about materials
with nanoscale-level filtration capabilities that have possible applications in
the development of longer lasting respirators with increased ease-of-wear. This
type of research has become necessary due to the current coronavirus (COVID-19)
pandemic, of which the loss of lives, reduced financial livelihoods and reduced
quality of lives are just a few of the already manifested consequences. In order
to regain safe living and working environments, one of the main things needed is
personal protective equipment such as facemasks and respirators. Unfortunately,
there are worldwide shortages which have resulted in excessive reuse of these
protective equipment, oftentimes to the detriment of not only the wearer, but
others. Additionally, respirators are also uncomfortable to wear for most
people, due to the inherent large pressure gradients and relatively low water
vapor transmission. This project provides researchers in academia and industries
involved in the development and application of filtration media with specific
tuning procedures, which will in turn advance the welfare of society through
improvements in our health, living and environmental conditions. Beyond personal
protective equipment, the benefits of better nanoscale filtration media also
extend to applications including water membrane treatments, nanoreactors, and
chemical catalysis. The project involves the participation of students from
various socioeconomic and education levels, and because of its interdisciplinary
nature, they gain the knowledge and research experience involving aspects of
chemistry, engineering, physics and material science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: With support from the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, this RAPID
research project focuses on fundamentally characterizing the variable shear
stress enhanced local electric field gradients in composite polymers/metal
organic frameworks (MOFs) thin films, and multilayered electrospun fibrous
materials. The principal investigator and her research group study whether
materials that have greater electric fields gradients (EFGs) exhibit superior
filtration/adsorption properties. Generally, the filtration properties of
composite polymers can be tuned by modification of their surface morphology
(diameter, surface roughness, etc.) and one way to accomplish this is by the
incorporation of MOFs. To further increase nano-filtration properties, the
electrostatic characteristics must be enhanced, and this project accomplishes
this by the directional alignment and enhancement of the local electric field
gradients using variable sheer stresses. Multinuclear (1H, 2H, and 17O) Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) provide information about
the local interactions between the various polymers, as well as between the MOFs
and the polymers. Information about the electric field gradients is accessed
through the quadrupole 2H and 17O nuclei and their magnitudes correlated with
the degree of shear stress applied. Polymer type, crystallinity and morphology
are also investigated, along with different MOF types and content as well as the
order of layering used to construct the multilayered fibrous
composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.