* 2034108
* Exploring Particle Dispersion and Charge Percolation in Suspension Electrodes: Bridging Electrochemical Performance and Rheology
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Emin Caglan Kumbur, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2023
* USD 384,474.00

Growing concerns over sustainable energy sources and access to clean water have
prompted the need for development of efficient and cost-effective technologies
that can be readily scaled to meet the increasing demand. Among the recent
advances, the concept of flowable suspension electrodes has emerged as a highly
promising approach for addressing the challenges in large-scale energy storage
and water purification. Suspension electrodes can be broadly defined as a slurry
of electrochemically active materials suspended in a liquid electrolyte.
Performance of these electrodes is governed by the flow conditions and the
system design, making them significantly more challenging to characterize than
conventional electrodes. This project is designed to address some of the open
questions related to the electrochemical performance and the flow
characteristics of these electrodes to help determine optimal engineering design
choices for this new class of electrodes. Accordingly, a number of studies will
be conducted to explore and reveal the complex relation between the flowability
and the electrochemical performance of these electrodes. The resulting
discoveries and new knowledge gained from these studies will benefit research on
emerging energy storage and water treatment technologies and help develop new
scalable technologies that utilize this new class of electrodes. This project
will also offer significant opportunities to extend and amplify the impact of
the research to a larger society. It will target energy-themed activities and
help enhance the education of a broad range of students, attracting young
talented people to STEM careers in the areas of strategic national
interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suspension electrodes rely on volume-spanning
networks of conducting particles to effectively facilitate charge transport and
minimize ohmic losses. Such particle networks are expected to have a minimum
impact on the viscosity of the electrode so that the energy losses incurred by
pumping can be minimized during operation. This trade-off between the electrical
conductivity and the viscosity imposes critical design limitations; therefore,
the most rational path forward to improve the performance metrics of these
flowable electrodes is to explore ways to design suspensions that have the
desired electrochemical properties with matching rheological characteristics.
Motivated by this need, the objective of this project is to establish a new
physics-based framework for rational design of high-performance suspension
electrodes with optimized particle networks that enable enhanced flowability and
facile charge transport. Toward this goal, a key objective of this work will be
to quantify the critical tunable parameters that govern particle interactions,
particle clustering, and the evolution of percolation networks for charge
transport in these electrodes. This understanding will enable direct control of
the particle networks and offer a certain level of tunability of the key
properties to arrive at the optimal engineering design choices. A set of
hypothesis-driven studies will be conducted to provide new insights into
materials, processing, particle interaction, charge transfer, and percolation
processes in these electrodes. It is anticipated that these studies will help
expand the knowledge in colloidal science by investigating a unique class of
suspensions for a broader research community. Findings of this study are also
expected to aid in the design of functional inks for a variety of applications.
The resulting discoveries and new knowledge gained from this work will also
benefit research on emerging water desalination technologies and help formulate
optimized suspensions for these applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.