* 2034123
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Foundations of Secure Multi-Robot Computation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Leonardo Bobadilla, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 07/31/2023
* USD 97,494.00

As people are starting to face the prospect of robots becoming part of our
everyday lives, it has become increasingly clear that the information robots
could gather can be both sensitive and valuable. But the robots may need to
gather this information in order to function properly: as elsewhere in our
lives, we need to understand how to best reconcile the tension between utility
and privacy. The scientific progress made to date on algorithms for planning,
control, and coordination of multi-robot systems has been enormous, but it also
has paid too little attention to "who knows what." This research effort sets out
to understand how the essential computational operations underlying many common
robotic tasks can be safely accomplished in circumstances where there is some
doubt about the integrity of other elements in the system, including whether
they can be trusted to never expose information. This is crucial for autonomous
robots operating within socially sensitive settings, as well as contested or
adversarial scenarios. Beyond the anticipated impact on robotics research, the
project will benefit society by addressing questions of strategic national
interest and help facilitate privacy protections. It includes education and
outreach activities that serve underrepresented groups, firstly via direct
engagement with undergraduate and graduate students at Florida International
University and Texas A&amp;M, and secondly, in working with and mentoring high
school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct both
theoretical and empirical research, through a multi-part research agenda that
will enable privacy-preserving filtering and planning in multi-robot scenarios
via secure multi-party computation methods. This research endeavor represents a
radical departure from present computational assumptions for robots: it aims to
introduce abstractions, algorithms, and systems to solve robot tasks in
scenarios characterized by collaboration between mutually distrusting robots,
this is the first systematic effort to do so. The research will allow multiple
robots to coordinate their use of shared resources, without divulging sensitive
information that each robot possesses, despite their effective cooperation
actually depending on that sensitive information. The research program will
produce: (1) a new set of geometric primitives that allow the solution of motion
planning (and related) problems in a privacy-preserving fashion; (2) novel
filters, constructed to preserve privacy; and (3) constructions for calculating
and querying computational topology properties, subject to limits on information
shared. Together, these pieces lay groundwork, establishing the research area of
secure multi-robot computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.