* 2034107
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Historical Ecology of Alluvial Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Arlene Rosen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 31,700.00

In recent decades, archaeological research has provided critical understanding
about the history of environmental impacts of crop domestication, low-level
cultivation, and the spread of agriculture in diverse landscapes. Mounting
paleo-botanical evidence has demonstrated that pre-colonial societies, starting
millennia ago, had the tools and knowledge to modify and adapt to environmental
variability. Present-day communities are facing new challenges from shifting
seasonal patterns, recurring droughts, and intense and more frequent hurricanes.
Geoarchaeological records from around the world have provided examples of how
past communities adapted to similar challenges, and thus supply lessons for
guiding future land-use management decisions. This project contributes to the
emerging scholarship of the Anthropocene in island settings by identifying
different episodes of social and environmental change during the pre-colonial
period in a region that is highly underrepresented in geoarchaeological
research. Local undergraduate and graduate students from multiple disciplines
will participate in the field and laboratory components of this research, where
they will learn geoarchaeological methods, theoretical frameworks, and analyses.
Through these experiences, students build skills and gain knowledge that are
crucial to their own and societal resilience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
doctoral dissertation project traces the long-term history of human land-use and
its impacts in two lower catchments of alluvial valleys that are susceptible to
environmental variability and human land-use, but which have been preferred
locations for settlement. The investigators ask: how has the vegetation and
hydrology of the region changed over time? How do episodes of landscape change
relate to contemporary human land-use in these catchments? What are the
ecological legacies of these anthropogenic landscapes and how are present-day
communities still adapting to these cumulative legacies? To address these
questions, the project assesses long-term environmental changes associated with
settlement patterns and subsistence economies. Specifically, the researchers
will systematically collect sediments cores from these river floodplains and a
lagoon, and then analyze their chemistry and physical properties, phytoliths,
and radiocarbon dates. These various lines of paleoenvironmental evidence will
be combined with archival information about archaeological sites within the
boundaries the catchment basins. The project will produce and test models of
human occupation of both catchments from early periods to the
present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.