* 2034479
* BigData:IA:Collaborative Research: TIMES: A tensor factorization platform for spatio-temporal data
* CSE,IIS
* 01/16/2020,09/30/2023
* Jimeng Sun, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 09/30/2023
* USD 755,110.00

Spatio-temporal analyses can enable many discoveries including reducing traffic
congestion, identifying hotspot areas to deploy mobile clinics, and urban
planning. Unfortunately, the data poses many computational challenges. Standard
assumptions in machine learning and data mining algorithms are violated by the
complex nature of spatio-temporal data. These include spatial and temporal
correlation of observations, dynamic and abrupt changes in observations,
variability in measurements with respect to length and frequency, and multi-
sourced data that spans multiple sources of information. In recognition of these
challenges, various efforts have been undertaken to develop specialized
spatiotemporal models. Yet, to date, these algorithms are predominately designed
to analyze small- to medium-sized datasets. The goal of this project is to
develop a comprehensive computational tensor platform to perform automated,
data-driven discovery from spatio-temporal data across a broad range of
applications. The project also includes a set of integrated educational
activities such as a Massive Open Online Course that covers cross-disciplinary
topics at the confluence of computer science and geospatial applications, annual
spatio-temporal data challenges and hackathons, and an annual event at the
Atlanta Science Festival to create public awareness and encourage participation
by women and minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contain
algorithmic innovations that reflect appropriate assumptions of spatio-temporal
data without sacrificing real-time performance, computational scalability, and
cross-site learning even under privacy constraints. The proposed platform will
generalize tensor modeling to encompass the complex nature of spatio-temporal
data including time irregularity, spatiotemporal correlations, and evolving
distributions. It will enable the integration of multi-sourced data from
heterogeneous sources to yield robust and cohesive learned patterns. The novel
algorithms will also facilitate learning in decentralized settings while
preserving privacy. The computational platform will contain interchangeable
modules that can adapt to new spatio-temporal settings and incorporate
additional contextual information. The accompanying suite of algorithms will
enable predictive learning, pattern mining, and change detection from large-
sized spatio-temporal data. The broad applicability of the project will be
demonstrated on a diverse range of data including urban transportation services,
real estate market transactions, and population health. The algorithmic
innovations introduced can be used to scale other machine learning
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.