* 2034817
* Organization of Tropical East Pacific Convection (OTREC) - Post-Campaign Analysis
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* David Raymond, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/29/2024
* USD 538,727.00

This award supports analysis of observations collected during the Organization
of Tropical East Pacific Convection (OTREC) field campaign. The campaign was
designed to study the formation and development of tropical convective clouds
and associated heavy rainfall in the adjacent but distinct regions of the
eastern equatorial Pacific and the southwest Caribbean, along with their
evolution over the intervening portions of Central America and Colombia. The
campaign also considered the genesis and evolution of easterly waves, large
westward-moving atmospheric disturbances (wavelengths of about 2,000 km) which
occur on a weekly basis in the Caribbean and eastern Pacific.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The campaign deployment, based in western Costa Rica, took
place from August to October 2019 and featured 22 flights of the Gulfstream V
research aircraft maintained by the National Center for Atmospheric Research.
The aircraft flew at about 40,000 feet using dropsondes and a W-band radar to
make observations of clouds and atmospheric conditions. Dropsondes contain the
same instrument package as standard weather balloons, only dropped from the
aircraft with a small parachute. The radar determines cloud properties including
the concentrations of ice particles and liquid droplets, and uses Doppler shift
to measure cloud updraft and downdraft speeds. The aircraft sampling was
augmented by observations collected at ground sites in Costa Rica and
Colombia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project continues the campaign's effort to
identify the mechanisms that lead to the development of deep tropical
convection. Much of the work is devoted to analysis of vertical mass flux
profiles in convecting regions, in paticular whether rising motions in clouds
occur in the lower to middle troposphere or the upper troposphere. The work is
motivated by a theory of tropical convection developed by the Principle
Investigators and others which emphasizes the association between bottom-heavy
vertical mass flux profiles and heavy rainfall, as well as an inverse
relationship between atmospheric stability and moisture content. Work here
determines the extent to which the theory applies to all the OTREC study regions
despite their differences in sea surface temperature and other conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also considers whether easterly waves found in
the eastern Pacific form locally or if they are the same easterly waves seen
propagating across the Atlantic after forming in West Africa. Additional work
considers the impact of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO), a large-scale
topical weather pattern, on convection observed during the campaign. The MJO
caused a shift in low-level wind direction during the campaign and the effects
of the wind shift on convection are not yet clear. Finally, the research
includes collaborations with the European Centre for Medium-range Weather
Forecasts to evaluate weather forecasts in the OTREC study area, and with
colleagues at the National University of Colombia who bring surface-based
observations and regional expertise to the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work is of societal interest due to the importance of tropical convection for
weather and climate across the globe. Easterly waves are of particular interest
for weather forecasting given their tendency to spawn hurricanes. Better
understanding of tropical convection and easterly waves is thus of interest for
the improvement of weather and climate models and for helping decision makers
anticipate the likely consequences of climate variability and change. The work
also promotes international collaboration in atmospheric science through the
collaborations mentioned above. The Principle Investigators pursue education and
outreach through public lectures, a class on the "Science of Weather" for high
school science teachers, and interactions with K-12 students. The project
provides support and training to a graduate student and an
undergraduate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.