* 2034176
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Towards a scientific theory of lattice reduction
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jintai Ding, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2023
* USD 483,432.00

As the era of quantum computing draws near, there is an imminent need for our
society to prepare for its immense impact on cybersecurity. Since quantum
computers will be capable of breaking all the main cryptosystems we are heavily
relying on today, it is necessary to develop new cryptosystems that are quantum-
resistant, and the National Institute of Standard of Technology is the process
to develop the post-quantum cryptographic standards. Lattice-based cryptography
represents one of the most promising families of such quantum-resistant
cryptosystems. However, despite its successes so far, there has been a severe
lack of understanding as to how the basic components of lattice-based
cryptography, namely lattices and reduction algorithms, operate. This knowledge
gap is harmful in a number of ways, such as the compromise of the performance of
lattice-based systems, the inaccurate and unreliable evaluation of their
security, and even the potential threat to the very idea of lattice-based
cryptography itself. The goal of the present proposal is to confront these
problems by developing a solid theoretical foundation for lattice-based
cryptography. Our theory will be applied systematically to improve the practice
of lattice-based cryptography and to scientifically assess the security of
lattice-based systems, thereby contributing to humanity's effort to prepare for
the quantum era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project largely consists of two parts
that will be combined into one for a complete analysis of lattice reduction
algorithms. First, the project will refine the number-theoretic tools used to
study the statistics of lattice vectors. This was originally pioneered by the
works of Siegel, Schmidt, and Rogers in the 1940-50's, but the current practice
of lattice-based cryptography calls for the extensions of those tools to broader
contexts, so as to be able to handle lattices defined over a general number
field, or count sublattices of lesser rank rather than just lattice vectors.
They will serve to replace the Gaussian heuristic in order to provide more
accurate predictions of lattice behavior. Second, recently the PIs found that
lattice reduction algorithms may be interpreted as sandpile models from
statistical physics, and these two systems of very different origins behave in a
remarkably similar way. This provides an exciting and promising approach to a
scientific study of reduction algorithms, which is exactly what this project
will pursue: apply the physical theory of sandpiles to reduction algorithms.
Once this project establishes the explanatory and predictive power of both sets
of results, the project will apply them to revising the security estimates of
lattice-based cryptosystems and the current practices in parameter choices, in
particular, for the lattice-based cryptosystems in the ongoing NIST post-quantum
standardization process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.