* 2034114
* Electromagnetic Shields Based on MXene Nano-Metamaterials
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Yury Gogotsi, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 05/31/2024
* USD 489,998.00

All modern electronics uses electromagnetic shields to cut down on electrical
interferences that can completely destroy information stored and passed by the
electronic components. This is particularly important in military applications,
medical electronics and consumer wireless systems including wearable devices and
5G cell phones. The present day electromagnetic shielding technology is
challenged to keep up with the need for being lighter and smaller. Conventional
metal shields commonly used today are bulky and lack mechanical flexibility. The
proposed work focuses on developing new highly effective electromagnetic shields
of dramatically reduced weight and size. They will be thinner than sheets of
paper and completely flexible. This new technology is based on the recently
discovered new class of materials called MXenes. The proposal will develop MXene
electromagnetic shields that can be laid over flexible electronics and even
spray painted over it. We will learn how to optimize shielding behavior of these
novel materials and develop software and models to help creators of modern
electronics to design the most effective electromagnetic
shields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While previous work demonstrated that MXene layers
thinner than typical copper shields are capable of shielding electromagnetic
fields in the RF and microwave region just as well, there has been no clear
explanation for the reasons behind such outstanding performance. Yet,
understanding is critical to developing thinner, lighter and more flexible
shielding devices. Preliminary measurements indicate that MXene, despite having
conductivity lower than copper, has an anomalously high effective dielectric
constant. This seems to result in the material characteristic impedance low
enough to explain MXeneâ€™s great shielding performance. It is known that high
dielectric constant can be obtained in artificially created conducting
structures known as meta-materials. We conjecture that MXene has certain micro-
structural features that, although somewhat random, result in meta-material-like
behavior. To develop a much better understanding of this behavior and to design
more effective shields, the proposed work will combine analytical and numerical
electromagnetic modeling and simulations with fabrication of MXene shielding
devices and their experimental testing. Modeling and simulation work will focus
on quasi-periodic micro-structure of MXenes in order to determine the
circumstances under which these materials would have high effective dielectric
constant combined with high effective conductivity. Candidate MXene structures
most likely to yield best shields will be fabricated into sheets and filler
epoxy-based shields and tested using waveguides and near-field measurements.
Modeling and simulation results will be compared with the experimental
measurements for model validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.