* 2034661
* I-Corps:   Algorithm to Support Teams and Teamwork Through Artificial Intelligence
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Malte Jung, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of teams of the future using computer science and artificial
intelligence. As various work environments within society shift away from the
paradigm of individuals working independently and towards a team based model, it
is essential to understand how algorithms can be developed to support such
teams. As these algorithms increasingly begin take on more roles—such as
decision maker or resource allocator—within human teams, many face a common
problem of adoptability by team. The difficulty in integrating various forms of
algorithms into teams stems from the lack of understanding of the impact that
they have on the complex interpersonal dynamics between team members. As such,
it is vital to develop algorithmic solutions that include social rules (e.g.
fairness) within their optimization criteria. The proposed Vida algorithm may be
among the first set of AI solutions aimed at real time support of teams and
teamwork through the inclusion of fair resource allocation. Such an algorithm
has a broad range of applications including sports teams, teaching, and software
teams where team leaders need to make decisions about how to allocate their
attention or resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project's intellectual
merit lies in its ability to support various forms of teams throughout a given
task. A large body of research highlights the influence that the allocation of
resources has on individuals. Yet, there is still a dearth of algorithms that
implement notions of fairness into its allocation decisions. Research has shown
that people have the tendency to alter their motivations when unfairness is
perceived. The proposed AI-driven Vida algorithm would reinforce research on
fairness allocations within human teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.