* 2034415
* SitS: The Soil Macroscope: A Multivariable Subterranean Sensor Network
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Roser Matamala Paradeda, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,199,618.00

This award was made through the "Signals in the Soil (SitS)" solicitation, a
collaborative partnership between the National Science Foundation and the United
States Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture
(USDA NIFA). One of the major challenges of the 21st century is to meet the
goals of food security and environmental sustainability through more efficient
utilization of soil and water resources. This requires a better understanding of
the chemical, physical, geological, and biological processes and reactions of
soil, and their effects on plant growth and ecosystem productivity. This in turn
requires orders-of-magnitude improvements in the size and resolution of soil
data. This research will accomplish these improvements by the proposed Soil
Macroscope, a fully buried low power wireless underground sensor network that
collects soil data in real time and with high resolution. This sensor network
will enable the scientific fragmentation of the land into visual “geo-pixels”
with multi-variate sensor inputs creating layers of soil data and related data.
The objectives of the Soil Macroscope project are twofold: (i) to lay the
foundation for reliable, field-scale subterranean sensor networks and real time
data collection/curation systems; and (ii) demonstrate that such networks can
operate in the field over an extended period of time to produce an integrated
view of the soil environment and its local fluctuations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives will be accomplished by combining
progress in sensor and wireless technologies to build buried soil sensor
networks. These networks will be deployed for field-scale experiments in a farm
and a grassland ecosystem. By capturing the dynamics of soil moisture,
temperature, oxygen, and nutrients simultaneously in time and space, it is
hypothesized that techniques can be developed to predict soil emergent
properties and the collective influence the properties have in regulating the
biogeochemistry of an ecosystem and plant productivity. This prediction can
significantly improve understanding of soil processes and enhance agricultural
efficiency. This research is comprised of three thrusts: (i) sensor research
where to develop a new on-chip silicon photonics based compact soil nitrate
sensor with high sensitivity and a new technique for mapping volume water
content of soil using the attenuation of the wireless signal used for data
communications; (ii), wireless research to explore a new 150 MHz MURS band
frequency and a new time coded low power communication protocol specialized for
wireless transmissions underground for both 150 MHz and 902 MHz transmissions;
and (iii), building a robust, scalable Soil Macroscope to enable field-scale
experiments characterizing soil biogeochemistry and ecosystem productivity using
the results from the previous two thrusts. The Soil Macroscope project is
uniquely cross-disciplinary: spanning materials science, wireless communication,
and soil science to develop experimental field deployments that will rigorously
test the research output across these disciplines. In addition to incorporating
the software, hardware, and field data into existing and new coursework,
existing programs at the University of Chicago and University of Wisconsin will
be leveraged to reach out to and involve school students in deploying sensors,
analyzing the data, and devising experiments. The Soil Macroscope, if
successful, has the potential to dramatically change the way soil science and
agricultural practices evolve and can lead to new
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.