* 2034801
* RAPID: Fate of freshwater and heat in the West Greenland Current
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2022
* Robert Pickart, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 03/31/2022
* USD 199,997.00

The amount of freshwater in the Arctic Ocean has been increasing substantially
over the past two decades, and climate projections indicate that this will lead
to enhanced transfer of this water southward to the North Atlantic Ocean. At the
same time, the meltwater discharge from the Greenland ice sheet has been
accelerating over the last 30 years. Both of these sources of freshwater end up
in the boundary current that encircles Greenland. It is imperative to determine
the ultimate fate of this water. If it gets fluxed offshore of the boundary
current it could impact the large-scale global overturning circulation that
helps maintain Earth’s climate. Furthermore, underneath this freshwater, the
boundary current carries warm water that originated from the subtropics. This
heat has been implicated in causing basal melt in Greenland’s glaciers – which
in turn would lead to more freshwater release. As such, we need to understand
how the warm subtropical-origin water makes it to the glaciers. The proposed
project is designed to address the pathways and fate of both the freshwater and
heat carried in the boundary current along West Greenland. We will conduct a
detailed shipboard survey in Baffin Bay, including measurements along some of
the channels leading to west Greenland’s glacial fjords. This is made possible
because the US icebreaker Healy is undertaking a rare mission to the eastern
sector of the Arctic, allowing for this unique set of measurements. Two
contributing studies will be undertaken by collaborators, at no cost to the
project. The first will address the different sources of freshwater using
chemical measurements, and the second will shed light the circulation near the
fjords using a remotely operated vehicle. A post-doc and three graduate students
will participate on the cruise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An extensive
hydrographic/velocity survey will be conducted on the USCGC Healy, from Davis
Strait to the northern part of Baffin Bay, to determine the pathways and fate of
heat and freshwater that are advected into the region by the West Greenland
Current (WGC). The project takes advantage of the fact that Healy will be
operating in the eastern Arctic in summer/fall 2021 and is available for a
scientific cruise from mid-September to mid-October. A strategic set of high-
resolution sections has been designed to (1) estimate the flux of freshwater
from the WGC into the interior; (2) address the two-way exchange of the WGC with
the fjords draining several West Greenland glaciers via deep troughs on the
shelf; and (3) quantify the structure and evolution of the WGC, as well as the
circulation of Baffin Bay to assess its volume, freshwater, and heat budgets.
Such a survey has never been done in the study region at small enough station
spacing to resolve all of the important currents, with the inclusion of direct
velocity measurements, while simultaneously providing the broad coverage
necessary to address basin-wide issues. We will use Healy’s conductivity-
temperature-depth (CTD) system, and its hullmounted acoustic Doppler current
profilers (ADCPs), along with expendable CTDs to fill in gaps. Two collaborative
programs will be carried out at no-cost to the project. The first will measure
nutrients and oxygen isotopes to help distinguish the freshwater sources, and
the second will deploy a Seaglider to map out warm water pathways and mixing
near Jakobshavn glacier. A post-doc and three graduate students will participate
on the cruise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.