* 2034637
* MsRI-EW: Precision Nanoscale Patterning and Characterization – From Cybernetic Proteins to Nanoengineered Quantum Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Suchismita Guha, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2021
* USD 41,932.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An enormous challenge lies in developing
nanoscale patterning methods to combine nanoelectronics with biological systems.
Conventional patterning techniques have severe limitations when combining hard
and soft materials. For example, electron beam lithography (EBL) can create
patterns only a few nanometers in size, but requires sacrificial resists. These
resists can be incompatible with biological materials and have environmental and
safety concerns. Ice lithography is a novel technique that uses solid condensed
gas instead of resist. This technique offers a path to atomically precise
manufacturing to create nanophotonic and nanolectronic structures. There is,
however, no such infrastructure in the United States. This conference will lay
the foundations for a world-unique high precision facility that combines ice
lithography with in-situ electron and scanning probe
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this multidisciplinary workshop is to bring together scientists and
researchers from engineering, physics, chemistry, and biology in order to
exchange ideas in recent innovations and trends in high resolution (below 5 nm)
nanofabrication and characterization techniques. The workshop will highlight the
science and technology at the cross-roads of quantum phenomena and bio-inspired
materials. The natural self-assembly process, inherent to several classes of
bio-inspired materials, has resulted in some of the most intriguing
nanostructures. Tailoring the functionality of these structures remains a
challenge that requires new processes for nanopatterning and nanofabrication.
The workshop will provide a unique platform for researchers in academia and
industry for envisioning a path forward towards advancing 3D nanofabrication,
additive manufacturing, and nano-electronic devices using ice lithography.
Additionally, the workshop will serve as a forum for integrating ideas on the
synthesis and nanoscale characterization of functional nanomaterials and devices
that seamlessly bridge condensed matter and biology. The workshop will lay the
foundation for the establishment of future research
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.