* 2034642
* HI-TEC 2020: Transforming to a Virtual Event and Dissemination Opportunity
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Mark Whitney, CORD
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2021
* USD 48,567.00

The challenges brought on by COVID-19 have forced the cancellation of
conferences and workshops across the U.S. The High Impact Technology Conference
(HI-TEC) face-to-face event scheduled for this year has been cancelled. Prior to
canceling the in-person conference, significant efforts had gone into creating a
program with 92 accepted presentations, 16 workshops, 20 poster presentations
and six special interest group meetings, as well as an exhibit hall. This prior
work will be leveraged to support the transformation of HI-TEC to a virtual
event. HI-TEC has been produced since 2009 by a consortium of centers and
projects funded through the Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program. This
conference has provided a national forum for addressing critical issues in
advanced technological education. Applications of cutting-edge technology,
interactive workshops ,and sessions focusing on a broad range of related topics
such as recruitment of diverse and underserved student populations, integration
of research into the classroom, faculty development techniques, and best
practices in education-industry partnerships have been hallmarks of the
conference. This proposal supports transitioning the conference to a virtual
event with the theme “Preparing America’s Skilled Technical
Workforce.”&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The virtual conference will support two main
goals: 1) Engage and continue to build the technical education and workforce
development community; and 2) Deepen sharing and broaden the implementation of
evidence-based models and best practices for preparing the skilled technical
workforce including an emphasis on post-COVID-19 strategies. The conference
executive committee will reach out nationally to the technical education
community through digital media. The producing NSF ATE centers and projects will
participate in the outreach effort by disseminating conference information to
their own networks. Keynote speakers who were identified for the face-to-face
conference have agreed to speak at the virtual event. Panelists for an industry
panel and an educator panel have been identified. Support will be provided to
registrants to convert their presentations to a virtual format, and the event
will be held using an online platform. Opportunities for audience interaction
will be provided and participant questions will be fielded. Sessions will be
recorded and made available after the event. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.