* 2034874
* Collaborative Research: Snow Transport in Katabatic Winds and Implications for the Antarctic Surface Mass Balance: Observations, Theory, and Numerical Modeling
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Scott Salesky, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 08/31/2024
* USD 530,297.00

1. A non-technical explanation of the project's broader significance and
importance, that serves as a public justification for NSF funding. This part
should be understandable to an educated reader who is not a scientist or
engineer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Katabatic or drainage winds, carry high-density
air from a higher elevation down a slope under the force of gravity. Although
katabatic flows are ubiquitous in alpine and polar regions, a surface-layer
similarity theory is currently lacking for these flows, undermining the accuracy
of numerical weather and climate prediction models. This project is
interdisciplinary, and will give graduate and undergraduate students valuable
experience interacting with researchers outside their core discipline.
Furthermore, this project will broaden participating in science through
recruitment of students from under-represented groups at OU and CU through
established programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Antarctic Ice Sheet drives many
processes in the Earth system through its modulation of regional and global
atmospheric and oceanic circulations, storage of fresh water, and effects on
global albedo and climate. An understanding of the surface mass balance of the
ice sheets is critical for predicting future sea level rise and for interpreting
ice core records. Yet, the evolution of the ice sheets through snow deposition,
erosion, and transport in katabatic winds (which are persistent across much of
the Antarctic) remains poorly understood due to the lack of an overarching
theoretical framework, scarcity of in situ observational datasets, and a lack of
accurate numerical modeling tools. Advances in the fundamental understanding and
modeling capabilities of katabatic transport processes are urgently needed in
view of the future climatic and snowfall changes that are projected to occur
within the Antarctic continent. This project will leverage the expertise of a
multidisciplinary team of investigators (with backgrounds spanning cryospheric
science, environmental fluid mechanics, and atmospheric science) to address
these knowledge gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. A technical description
of the project that states the problem to be studied, the goals and scope of the
research, and the methods and approaches to be used. In many cases, the
technical project description may be a modified version of the project summary
submitted with the proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using field observations and
direct numerical simulations of katabatic flow, this project is expected--- for
the first time---to lead to a surface-layer similarity theory for katabatic
flows relating turbulent fluxes to mean vertical gradients. The similarity
theory will be used to develop surface boundary conditions for large eddy
simulations (LES), enabling the first accurate LES of katabatic
flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The numerical tools that the PIs will develop will
allow them to investigate how the partitioning between snow redistribution,
transport, and sublimation depends on the environmental parameters typically
encountered in Antarctica (e.g. atmospheric stratification, surface sloping
angles, and humidity profiles), and to develop simple models to infer snow
transport based on satellite remote sensing and regional climate
models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.