* 2034621
* RAPID: Quantifying Hyperlocal Digital Equity: A Path to Supporting Digital Participation
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Walter Lewis, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2023
* USD 196,271.00

This urgent research will swiftly address how the COVID-19 has made the digital
divide untenable for people living in communities already marginalized by
systemic disparities, by developing short-term immediate interventions that
inform longer-term digital equity infrastructure. As many services shift to
online delivery, suddenly the most vulnerable members of society are expected to
own and master the most complex human-built artifacts: hardware, software, and
the Internet, for daily living. The goals of this project are to (1) collect
community data to understand the knowledge barriers individuals have faced with
regards to the shift to digital health, education, and human services during the
pandemic and the social structural roots of these digital gaps; (2) develop
bottom-up and data-driven community digital participation indicators to evaluate
the impact of a community coalition's ongoing work in distributing hardware and
internet access to households across two neighborhoods of Pittsburgh, (3)
quantify the digital know-hows within these communities and estimate the
training cost, and (4) work closely with community-based organizations and
resident leaders to design a peer-to-peer digital participation intervention for
the purpose of training residents as community digital ambassadors who can
address the identified digital participation barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is innovative in developing a framework to quantify digital equity at
the hyperlocal level and designing customized tools and processes to support a
community-based digital ambassador program. The research aims to answer
questions of (1) What are the factors associated with the hyperlocal barriers to
digital participation beyond hardware and broadband access? (2) How can this
insight be translated into models that inform human service providers and
policymakers in supporting digital equity? (3) How can this insight be utilized
to develop an effective community-based digital ambassador program? The findings
will investigate the hyperlocal, community-based factors in technology learning
and diffusion, thus complement the existing studies and theories in innovation
diffusion and learning, social mobilization, and regional economic
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.