* 2034627
* MsRI-EW: Workshop for Clinical Translation of Implantable Devices. To be Held  Virtually, August 10-12, 2020.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Shadi Dayeh, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,981.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers cannot obtain FDA clearance to
test devices in a clinical setting due to the lack of Current Good Manufacturing
Practice (CGMP) certification. The uncertified nature of university laboratories
blocks innovation and reduces the benefit of research to patients and taxpayers.
The creation of CGMP facilities within a university campus will accelerate the
development of implantable devices and place the U.S. at the forefront of
innovative medical research. This virtual conference will bring together leaders
in the research engineering community to discuss and outline the needs for
infrastructure to accelerate the clinical translation of bioelectronics devices
developed by U.S. universities and start-up companies. This conference addresses
community research priorities, national economic competitiveness and general
health. The conference will serve as the first step toward establishing an
academic CGMP facility. That will in turn accelerate innovative neurotechnology
research efforts across the country and place the U.S. at the forefront of
medical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
virtual conference will bring together the leaders in human neuromodulation
devices to discuss and outline the needs for an infrastructure to accelerate the
clinical translation of bioelectronics modulation devices developed by U.S.
universities and startups. Currently, the majority of approved FDA devices are
controlled by only a handful of companies, which negatively impacts the cost of
healthcare. Despite research demonstrating the effectiveness of implantable
devices being developed at universities across the nation, technological
advances that could permit safer and more effective interrogation and modulation
paradigms are unable to attain FDA clearance due to the uncertified nature of
university labs, thus halting innovation at the bench and reducing the benefit
of research to patients and taxpayers. The majority of laboratories that are
certified to meet the FDA’s Current Good Manufacturing Practice (CGMP)
regulations, which contain minimum requirements for the methods, facilities, and
controls used in the manufacturing process, remain almost exclusively an
industry resource, creating a cost and convenience barrier to the bench-to-
bedside translation of academic-developed biomedical technologies. The creation
of CGMP facilities within university campus settings could be a means to help
accelerate innovative neurotechnology efforts across the country and place the
U.S. at the forefront of implantable medical devices. The proposed workshop will
specifically focus on the current progress and gaps in the clinical translation
of neuromodulation devices developed in universities and startups, and outline
the needs for an infrastructure to fill this gap. The workshop will serve as the
first step toward establishing a CGMP facility within a university campus that
will help accelerate innovative neurotechnology efforts across the country and
place the U.S. at the forefront of implantable medical
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.