* 2034212
* 12th US-Japan Seminar on Plant-Pathogen Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Adam Bogdanove, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 06/30/2023
* USD 28,000.00

The rapid pace of discovery in the relationships between microbes and plants has
created the need and the opportunity for international gatherings to present
recent results that are especially conducive to interaction and discussion, and
that will support the professional development of young researchers. This
conference will support graduate student and postdoctoral researcher
participation in the in-person 12th US-Japan Seminar on Plant-Pathogen
Interactions to be held at Cornell University February 27-March 3, 2022. It will
also support livestreaming to broaden participation. Continuing a series of
scientific workshops initiated in 1966 to foster collaboration between US and
Japanese researchers, the conference will feature speakers from both countries,
with the goal of merging conceptual and theoretical understanding with
translational delivery of solutions for plant health. Participation is open to
anyone. The theme is “Remodeling of the plant-microbe interface during disease,
defense, and mutualism.” Keynote and short talks along with poster sessions and
social activities will provide platforms for scientists at diverse career stages
to interact. The conference will meet the following objectives: 1) Discussion of
fundamental and translational science in the area of plant-pathogen and plant-
microbe interactions; 2) Continued development and fostering of bilateral,
international, collaboration through research, cultural, and professional
activities; 3) Training of graduate students and postdocs in professional
scientific experiences, including panel moderation, presentation, and strategic
planning, and 4) Identification of knowledge and resource gaps and opportunities
for future investment in translational, and transformative, plant-microbe
interactions research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research has shed light on
how plants and microbes use molecular dialogue to physically and chemically
reshape the plant-microbe interface, either to favor or prevent microbial
colonization. This conference will highlight and explore aspects of pathogenesis
and beneficial symbioses in this context and identify gaps in knowledge. Indeed,
our understanding of plant-microbe interactions has evolved from that of an
apparent, and overly simplified, bipartite interaction, to one that encompasses
multiple environments (i.e., microbiomes), evolving genotypes, and a changing
climate. The 12th US-Japan Seminar meeting will enable a convergence of
conceptual and theoretical understanding with translational science, across
diverse pathosystems and beneficial interactions, focused under the specific
theme of “remodeling.” Now in its sixth decade, the series of US-Japan Seminars
has successfully encouraged the exchange of ideas and scientific discussion, and
the establishment and nurture of productive research collaborations. The 12th
Seminar is designed specifically to emphasize career development, networking,
and training for graduate and early career scientists, an aim that will be
facilitated by holding the seminar on a university campus and by engaging these
individuals for short talks and as session moderators. To broaden participation,
discounted registration will be offered to graduate students and postdocs; broad
advertising as well as targeted recruitment through existing connections with
1890s institutions and REU programs will be leveraged; interactive, online
access to talks and posters will be provided; and the proceedings will be
published as a special, open access issue of the journal Physiological and
Molecular Plant Pathology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.