* 2034189
* RAISE: Guiding Earth Educators to Transformative Resources: Broadening the Scope and Increasing the Efficacy of the SERC Discovery System
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Cailin Orr, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2025
* USD 999,200.00

This project will improve the tools and practices that support resource
discovery for Earth educators visiting SERC-hosted websites. The Earth education
community identified improving discovery as its highest priority action for
maximizing the impact of the SERC-held collections of education materials. In
addition, we will modify tools in the Serckit platform to allow users of the
SERC sites to discover Earth education materials hosted by other organizations.
This will increase the visibility of resources from many sources and provide the
community with a one-stop portal for finding high quality educational materials.
The new search and exploration tools will directly support connecting users to
materials that: integrate research-driven pedagogy, prioritize student
engagement with current research data, and increase the visibility of the
community's diversity, equity and inclusion efforts, thereby elevating the
spread of these important practices. The investigators will use a systematic,
community-informed process to guide the upgrades, ensuring changes lead to
increasing impact of the materials and resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will engage in a user-centered design process: a cyclical feedback
loop of gathering community input, making targeted improvements and evaluating
the results. The focus of this process will be to 1) make iterative improvements
to a wide-range of site features intended to improve discovery and 2) expand the
range of resources discoverable to include those not directly hosted by SERC.
This expanded scope, facilitated by SERC tools for cataloging external
resources, will connect the large Earth education audience already on SERC sites
to the rich array of resources, projects, and events developed by external Earth
education programs including research centers (e.g., UNAVCO, IRIS, UCAR, OOI,
CUAHSI) and efforts funded by GEOPAths and NSF INCLUDES. The evaluative part of
the design cycle will require developing a deeper understanding of how users
engage in discovery with the current site and establishing metrics that
characterize how well the modifications and expansion made serve the
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.