* 2034271
* Transitions: Mechanistic insights into ribosome rescue and quality control in the Archaea
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Jocelyne DiRuggiero, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 12/31/2023
* USD 779,269.00

Cells use a process called translation to synthesize proteins according to the
code in an mRNA molecule. Mistakes in translating the code can cause many
deleterious effects. Ribosomes are the cellular nanomachines that translate the
mRNA code and synthesize proteins. Ribosomes are in constant use and must be
reused many times and there are two processes necessary for this reuse. First,
after translation of one mRNA concludes, there is an active process called
ribosome recycling that separates the ribosome from the mRNA so that it can be
reused. Second, sometimes ribosomes stall or even collide during translation and
cannot restart on their own; again in this case there is an active process that
separates the mRNA from the disrupted ribosomes so that the ribosomes can be
reused. This research project will investigate how the least-understood domain
of life, known as the archaea, accomplish ribosome rescue and recycling. The
project will also provide training for graduate students and include high school
students from the Baltimore City public schools in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To do the scientific investigations, the research
team will use Haloferax volcanii, a halophilic archaeon that is amenable to
genetic and biochemical investigation. In aim 1, the researchers will identify
protein factors that recognize stalled ribosomes and promote ribosome splitting
activity in archaea. They will use genetic and biochemical approaches to
discover novel factors that are currently unknown in the archaea. In aim 2, the
researchers will determine the landscape of ribosome collisions in archaea.
Ribosome collisions result in ribosome dimers called disomes; deep-sequencing of
disome-protected fragments will provide a genome-wide characterization of
collision motifs and the ability to test the role of novel factors of interest
in ribosome rescue, in vivo. In aim 3, the researchers will identify the
mechanisms for proteolytic targeting of polypeptides produced by stalled
ribosomes. These experiments will provide first knowledge of Ribosome-associated
Quality Control (RQC) pathways in archaea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.