* 2034693
* STTR Phase I:  COVID-19 - High-Brightness Fluorescent Probes for Quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Dongyan Zhang, StabiLux Biosciences, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2022
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop a new probe to detect low levels
of viral load, such as that causing COVID-19. Rapid and reliable kits are not
currently readily available. This project will provide rapid detection of viral
material using exsiting cost-effective techniques with fewer detection errors.
Being able to quantify and track viral loads at low concentration and high
accuracy will expedite tests, reduce false negatives, and accelerate vaccine and
drug development to combat COVID-19, and future
pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project will develop
innovative fluorescent probes based on high-brightness fluorophores/dyes (HBFs)
that offer tunable extinction coefficients up to several thousand times higher
than commercial dyes. Based on this HBF platform technology, we will be able to
create high-brightness qPCR probes that can specifically quantify viral RNAs by
strong and tunable fluorescent signals at fewer amplification cycles and minimum
replication errors. The activity, efficiency, and specificity of high-brightness
qPCR probes will be evaluated in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.