* 2034902
* Collaborative Research: Creep-enabled 3D solid-state lithium metal batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2020,09/30/2023
* Ju Li, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2023
* USD 350,736.00

The development of all-solid-state rechargeable batteries based on lithium (Li)
metal plating and stripping has highlighted a grand challenge: Li metal is
chemically highly corrosive and mechanically stressful to the surrounding solid
components, causing both electrochemical and mechanical instabilities. This
project includes fundamental research to design a solid-state battery
architecture in which Li metal functions as “a working fluid” rising and falling
during electrochemical cycling with minimal electrochemical corrosion and
mechanical stress generation. Insights from this project will potentially result
in safer and higher density all-solid-state Li-metal batteries. Further, in this
project a diverse group of students will be trained in a multidisciplinary
setting and enhance underrepresented minority groups involvement and
participation in science and engineering in general and mechanoelectrochemistry
in particular at Penn State and MIT. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Li metal is a soft
crystal and exhibits either solid-like displacive behavior or fluid-like
diffusive behavior. Li metal is also chemically aggressive, causing
decomposition of solid electrolytes, consumption of active Li inventory, and
uncontrollable growth of solid-electrolyte interphase. Li-metal anodes thus face
stress-corrosion cracking under dual aggressive chemical and mechanical driving
forces, making stable contact against Li metal challenging. To overcome these
limitations, this project aims to construct a three-dimensional (3D) Li-metal
host made of mixed ionic-electronic conductors (MIECs) and electronic and Li-ion
insulators (ELIs). The project will develop design principles for the 3D
MIEC/ELI based battery through integrated multi-faceted experimental
characterization and multiscale computational modeling. Experimentally, in-situ
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) will be carried out to directly observe
Li deposition/stripping in the composite structure and scale up to battery-cell
level testing. Computationally, molecular dynamics and multi-field continuum-
level models will be coupled to simulate Li deposition/stripping and identify
the dominant interfacial processes. Such an in-depth characterization and
understanding will offer guidance to the optimization of the 3D MIEC/ELI based
Li-metal batteries with improved cycling performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.