* 2034074
* Scale Bridging in Ductile Fracture via Kernel-based Machine Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Ahmed Aziz Ezzat, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2024
* USD 576,943.00

Ductile metals such as aluminum and steel are used ubiquitously across a variety
of industries such as energy, defense, and transportation, and thus impact
everyoneâ€™s daily life. Unfortunately, the mechanisms by which ductile metals
fail or crack are poorly understood, making it difficult to accurately predict
when fracture will occur. These knowledge gaps drive up the costs of products,
decrease their energy efficiency, and limit our ability to develop stronger,
more fracture-resistant materials needed for future energy and defense
applications, e.g., high-temperature materials. The goal of this project is to
formulate a physics-informed, machine-learning-enabled model for ductile
fracture that will lead to reduced product costs and higher energy efficiency.
For example, the ability to produce lighter vehicle structures would reduce
vehicle carbon emissions while simultaneously reducing fuel costs for consumers.
The project will promote science and engineering to undergraduates through
research projects and enriched classroom instruction, and to high school
students through the development of new modeling- and machine learning-focused
modules for high school classrooms. In collaboration with a high school
educator, these learning modules will be piloted in a high school physics
classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models of ductile fracture via nucleation,
growth and coalescence of voids are largely phenomenological with many uncertain
parameters that are difficult to determine. Under this project, a predictive,
micromechanically informed model for void nucleation will be developed by
coupling molecular dynamics simulations with kernel-based machine learning.
Molecular dynamics simulations will reveal the fundamental mechanics underlying
void nucleation at hard particles while quantifying the void nucleation rate.
This rate is affected by a large set of features, including stress, temperature,
and defects such as vacancies, solutes, and dislocations. To render model
development tractable, a set of kernel-based machine learning models and
algorithms will be formulated with two objectives: (i) to extract and engineer a
minimally sized set of physical features for quantifying nucleation rates in
microstructures, and (ii) to probabilistically establish an accurate closed-form
statistical mapping between this microstructural feature set and the nucleation
rates. Finally, the resulting machine learning model will be implemented into
the finite element method as part of the commonly used Gurson-Tvergaard-
Needleman model for ductile fracture. This effort will serve as a prototype for
the use of machine learning towards upscaling of nano- and microscale
information to engineering scale models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.