* 2034043
* RAISE: Collective neuromechanical control in the locomotion of sea stars
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Matthew McHenry, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 12/31/2024
* USD 999,995.00

Locomotion is controlled through interactions between the nervous system and
mechanics of an animal’s body. This control is hierarchical, with local networks
of neurons handling rapid reflex actions and brain centers serving to navigate
an animal with respect to environmental sensory cues. In many animals, such as
in swimming fish and running centipedes, local controllers coordinate with one
another rather than depending solely on instructions from the animal’s brain;
this coordination is reminiscent of how animals in a group coordinate their
collective behavior. The supported research aims to develop theory on how these
local interactions guide animal locomotion. This work will focus on sea stars,
which use hundreds of tube feet to navigate through rough marine terrain with a
distributed nervous system and no brain. The research will combine
experimentation, mathematical modeling, and machine learning to understand how
the mechanics of the tube feet and body govern the hierarchical control of
locomotion. A general theory for locomotor control has the potential for
applications in numerous areas of biological and engineering research. This work
will enhance our understanding of how diverse animals control locomotion and
will generate novel paradigms for the design of soft robots. The proposal will
support science and engineering training opportunities for under-represented
minorities. It will develop software that will be made freely available to the
community of scientists and engineers. The investigators will additionally
engage K-12 citizen-scientists on research projects that will be based at a
public aquarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animal locomotion is mediated in part by
local nervous controllers that interact with one another in a manner similar to
the collective behavior of animal groups. The supported research will develop
the theory of collective neuromechanical control through experimentation and
mathematical modeling focused on sea stars. The arrays of tube feet used by
these animals provide sensing, integration, and actuation that is distributed
throughout the body. This work will be organized around lines of investigation
that seek to (1) understand how tube feet are controlled locally, (2) examine
how sea stars climb and run, and (3) investigate how sea stars navigate with
respect to light and gravity. Throughout, we will use reinforcement learning to
formulate hypothetical control laws that we will test experimentally. Collective
neuromechanical control offers great potential to influence our understanding of
animal locomotion and to inspire the development of engineered devices. The tube
feet of sea stars can inform knowledge of the neuromuscular control of other
biological as well as soft robotic systems. The proposed work is highly
interdisciplinary, with all components requiring interdependent efforts in
engineering and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.