* 2034738
* Exploring the Interplay between Charge, Strain and Polarization in Ferroelectric Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Xiaoqing Pan, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 02/28/2025
* USD 546,744.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Ferroelectric materials are characterized by a
spontaneous electric polarization, which can be reoriented with an applied
electric field. The ability to form and manipulate nanoscale regions of uniform
polarization (domains) makes ferroelectrics a promising candidate for future
low-power electronic devices, particularly computer memories. When
ferroelectrics is integrated with other materials, new and unique properties can
emerge from interfaces where the two materials join. To understand these
emergent properties, it is critical to characterize the atomic structure,
chemical bonding, electric field, charge distribution at interfaces. Modern
electron microscopy is capable of directly imaging the atomic structure, but the
other properties must generally be inferred from these images. This project aims
to develop new imaging methods that enable to determine all of these properties
simultaneously. This will give a full picture of how and why unique properties
can emerge at the interface and will inform the design and fabrication of future
electronic devices. Although the research focuses on ferroelectrics, the
microscopy techniques developed during and scientific knowledge gained from this
project are broadly applicable to many different types of materials. The
research is integrated with education and outreach activities to attract diverse
junior scientists, including women and underrepresented minority groups, and
will help train future leaders to address critical societal
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project leverages
unique electron microscopy facilities at the Irvine Materials Research Institute
where the PI serves as the director. This project aims to develop a novel four-
dimensional scanning transmission electron microscopy (4D STEM) method that
enables the measurement of atomic scale structure, local electric field, charge
density, valence states, and polarization configuration in nanostructures and
interfaces under different boundary conditions with atomic resolution. 4D STEM
will also be combined with electron energy-loss spectroscopy and scanning probe
microscopy in a unique multimodal approach to probe the atomic scale structure
and properties of interfaces and to gain a fundamental understanding of the
interaction between ferroelectric polarization, bound charge, epitaxial strain,
charge screening, and structure reconstruction in ferroelectric interfaces under
different conditions or surrounding topological defects in doped ferroelectric
thin films. The detailed characterization of ferroelectric interfaces is
required to gain deep insights into the atomic mechanisms of emergent phenomena
at interfaces and provide guidance for engineering ferroelectric nanostructures
with novel functionalities. The integration of this research with the education
and training of students allows the results from this project to be disseminated
to the diverse student populations on campus through coursework and independent
studies for undergraduate students, as well as to high school students from
diverse backgrounds through summer school programs, which promotes their
interest in scientific research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.