* 2034453
* SBIR Phase I:  COVID-19-impermeable high-performance porous coatings for respiratory personal protective equipment
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Anka Veleva, BENANOVA Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project encompasses development new coatings for face masks and
filtration pieces for N95-grade respirators. The outer layer will repel the
viral particles while the inner layer will adsorb moisture, making the mask
comfortable for wear and assisting with social distancing compliance during the
COVID-19 pandemic. The coatings are efficient in their function, provide
reliable protection, and are durable. This technology is also highly promising
for applications in other types of personal protective equipment such as gowns,
drapes, medical aprons, as well as coatings on disposable medical devices. Apart
from the medical sector, this platform has potential advantages for other goods,
pharmaceutical formulations, and personal care products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop innovative
formulations for deposition of high-performance superhydrophobic and
superhydrophilic coatings on textile surfaces for personal protective equipment.
The technical innovation is fabrication of novel dendritic polymer particles
with extraordinary high surface area and unusually strong adhesivity. The soft
dendritic colloids are formed when a polymer solution is injected into
turbulently sheared anti-solvent medium. Random stretching of the polymer
solution droplets by the turbulent anti-solvent flow causes the polymer to
precipitate in the form of soft dendritic structures. The critical technical
hurdle is scaling manufacturing of large volumes of soft dendritic particles
with fractal morphology. Technical objectives are: 1) develop an efficient
liquid-based process for soft dendritic colloids fabrication on a bench scale;
and 2) characterize textiles coated with the new formulations using a series of
morphological, filtration efficiency, and breathability
tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.