* 2034242
* GOALI: Exploiting Charge Separation in Ice for Electrostatic De-Icing
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Jessica Cummings, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 11/30/2023
* USD 533,040.00

The accumulation of ice and frost on infrastructure and vehicles results in
billions of dollars in economic losses annually in the United States. The use of
heat and antifreeze chemicals to remove ice is costly and harmful to the
environment, and mechanical de-icing is often impractical and can damage
underlying surfaces. This GOALI project will develop a completely novel approach
to de-icing that exploits the fact that ice can become spontaneously
electrified. A combination of experimental measurements and numerical
simulations will characterize the extent to which ice and frost can become
electrified under various conditions. By placing charged electrodes over the
ice, it can be forced to rapidly detach from an underlying surface by virtue of
the resulting electrostatic force. This new technique of electrostatic de-icing
will be examined for three different kinds of ice: planar ice sheets, dendritic
frost sheets, and rime ice. The research team will collaborate with Rolls-Royce
in applying electrostatic de-icing to aircraft to protect jet engines from
harmful ice ingestion. The researchers will also create an exhibit for the
Science Museum of Western Virginia that connects the concept of electrostatic
de-icing to the electrification of clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two
primary objectives to the project: gaining a comprehensive understanding of
charge separation in ice and exploiting the effect to enable electrostatic de-
icing. It is already known that the primary mechanism for charge separation in
ice is the presence of a temperature differential, which causes the preferential
migration of certain (naturally occurring) ionic defects over others. However,
existing models of charge separation in ice apply only at steady-state, rely on
several untested assumptions, lack controlled experimental or numerical
validation, and are narrowly focused on the specific context of the
electrification of clouds. In contrast, the project will utilize sophisticated
numerical techniques in conjunction with advanced experimental characterization.
The temperature gradient, environmental conditions, and geometric structure of
the ice/frost will be widely varied to determine their effect on the extent of
charge separation. Second, these findings will be exploited by maximizing the
extent of charge separation in ice and applying an opposing charge to rapidly
detach and remove the ice from its surface. This new de-icing construct, termed
electrostatic de-icing, is unprecedented. In addition to enabling a practical
and novel de-icing construct, the insights gained regarding charge separation in
ice will lead to a better understanding of the electrification of
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.