* 2034647
* Developing structure-function relationships for CO2-assisted ethane dehydrogenation through zeolite-supported chromium sites
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Ron Runnebaum, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 11/30/2023
* USD 595,097.00

Domestic natural gas is an important contributor to the U.S. energy and chemical
manufacturing sectors, with strong effects on the economy and national security.
In the context of the chemicals industry, a unique opportunity exists to utilize
light alkane components of natural gas, such as ethane, as feedstocks for
production of value-added chemicals. Notably, ethane can be catalytically
dehydrogenated to produce ethylene, which is a critically important building
block feedstock for the manufacture of many types of polymers. Current ethane
dehydrogenation process economics are limited by low yields, which result from
the prevalence of side reactions and catalyst deactivation. The use of carbon
dioxide (CO2) as a co-reactant enhances catalyst activity, facilitates high
ethylene selectivity, and extends catalyst lifetimes. Additionally, the CO2 (an
industrial waste product and greenhouse gas) is converted to carbon monoxide
(CO), which is itself a value-added product used in the chemicals industry.
Nevertheless, advances are needed in catalyst technology to assure commercial
viability of carbon dioxide-assisted ethane dehydrogenation. The project
develops fundamental insights into this conversion process through novel
engineering of catalyst structures coupled with systematic investigation of the
chemical reactions. Overall, the study will generate critical fundamental
information on the mechanistic origins of high single-pass olefin yields, which
will translate to improved process economics for combined alkane-CO2 conversion
systems. The project is supported by broader efforts to enhance educational and
research opportunities for women and underrepresented groups, especially the
large Hispanic population served by the investigatorsâ€™
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on zeolite-supported
chromium (Cr) catalysts to develop insights into multiple aspects of the overall
catalytic process: ethane activation, CO2 activation, competition and
cooperation between co-occurring reactions, and the influence of both metal-
support interactions and active site structure. Specifically, heteroatom-
substituted zeotype supports (including framework Al, B, and Ga in MFI zeolites)
are used to generate Cr active sites with consistent coordination geometry but
with varied metal-support interaction (which will be determined by the targeted
heteroatom elemental composition). Structural, chemical, and electronic
properties of the dispersed Cr sites will be related to catalytic performance
via a comprehensive suite of characterization tools, including probe molecule
adsorption infrared spectroscopy, ex situ and operando synchrotron-based X-ray
absorption spectroscopy, chemisorption and thermogravimetric analysis with mass
spectrometry, and Raman spectroscopy. Using well-defined catalysts, the impact
of CO2 on reaction kinetics will be isolated and interpreted in the context of
the parallel ethane dehydrogenation and reverse water-gas shift (RWGS)
reactions. The reaction network will be analyzed through reactor studies,
employing varying feed compositions, probe reactions, and isotope labeling
experiments. Catalyst structure-function relationships and optimized reaction
conditions, obtained at low ethane conversion, will be further investigated in
the high conversion regime, relevant to commercial single-pass reactor
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.