* 2034518
* RAPID: Facilitating Rapid and Actionable Responses to Social, Behavioral, and Economic-Related COVID Questions: The Societal Experts Action Network (SEAN)
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Monica Feit, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2021
* USD 197,739.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted nearly every aspect of life across the
globe. As decision-makers at the federal, state, and local level respond, they
are grappling with numerous complex scientific questions. Many of these
questions are grounded in the social, behavioral, and economic (SBE) sciences.
Questions such as: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; • What strategies are most likely to
restart economic growth in critically important sectors that were heavily
affected by COVID-19?&lt;br/&gt; • How can governments more effectively
encourage use of masks and other strategies to reduce disease
transmission?&lt;br/&gt; • What recent knowledge will allow public and private
sector educational entities to improve on-line learning outcomes?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and
Education (DBASSE) at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine (NASEM), in collaboration with the National Science Foundation,
establishes the Societal Experts Action Network (SEAN). SEAN produce products
designed to provide actionable responses to urgent policy questions asked by
federal, state, and local decision-makers. SEAN is unique in its focus on rapid,
readable, and research-based insights in response to questions on issues such as
the reopening of businesses and economic growth, the education of children, the
mental health and resilience of our communities, and many more. The resulting
products are made publicly available and widely disseminated, which benefits not
only the requesting official, but a broad range of decision-makers and the
public. The value of SBE sciences in addressing problems of national importance
is shared with an expansive audience, thus contributing to our nation’s
overarching understanding of how best to deploy SBE knowledge in pandemic and
other crisis situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.