* 2034625
* RAPID: Understanding and Enhancing Internet Connectivity of Underserved Communities During the COVID-19 Crisis
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Prashant Krishnamurthy, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,303.00

In the absence of pharmaceutical interventions for COVID-19, governments and
authorities had to rely on other measures for curbing the impact of the
pandemic. Almost everywhere in the world, measures of social distancing and
shelter-at-home orders were put in place, leading to the need for people to work
from home (WFH), including schooling. This situation once again highlighted the
issue of digital divide. Even today, not everyone in the US has access to
computing and broadband Internet connection. The objective of this project is
twofold; (a) understand how underserved communities in Pittsburgh gained
Internet access and what problems they faced, and (b) identify ways to improve
the connectivity of underserved communities, by utilizing and significantly
enhancing existing wireless mesh technologies, that will allow to share highly
underutilized bandwidth resources with communities in need. The project seeks to
bridge local information divide – which is leading to well-being divide – in the
pandemic situation, where reliance on networked technologies is impacting
people’s livelihoods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main expected technical
contributions of this project is the design of networks that can “ship” network
capacity from underutilized locations to underserved locations, using low-cost
mesh networks. Unlike previous approaches to mesh networking, the constraints of
this problem are the immutable locations and the tradeoffs between capacity that
can be allocated and the capacity that is needed. The limitations on these
degrees of freedom will influence network design, as well as, mechanisms
(routing, wireless channelization, adaptive rates) to dynamically deliver
capacity to location which have the demand. The project will also provide a
data-driven way to identify and target underutilized network resources, as well
as, underserved locations and populations in need for network access. The
dimensions of this problem are numerous, not well understood, and span social,
infrastructural and technological factor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will support the work of MetaMesh in operating and expanding PittMesh, which is
a crucial resource for underserved communities especially in times of crisis.
Furthermore, the findings can support the development of policies to promote
connectivity of unserved communities. While this would be applicable to
widespread emergencies such as the COVID-19 pandemic shutdown, the project will
explore policy proposals that would support narrower emergency response, as well
as, promoting resilient service to underserved communities. In a world that is
changing to online interactions (either mid-term or long-term), broadband
connectivity is practically an essential household utility. Additional
information about the project can be found at:
http://www.pitt.edu/~kpele/PROJECTS/covid-
netaccess.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.