* 2034337
* U.S. Community Access to Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network - A Time-Domain Follow-up System
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Nikolaus Volgenau, Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,970,000.00

This award will make the Las Cumbres Observatory (LCO) global network of optical
telescopes available to the US astronomical community over a period of 3 years.
The network consists of two 2m telescopes, eleven 1m telescopes, and ten 0.4m
telescopes at multiple locations around the world. Broader impacts of the work
include student and postdoctoral researcher training as well as public outreach.
In addition to providing unique resources to scientists, LCO runs a vibrant
education program. LCO lowers barriers for both science and education observers.
Observations can be requested from anywhere in world with an approved observing
program and access to the internet. This award advances the goals of the Windows
on the Universe Big Idea via LCO’s strong relevance to Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observing time will be made available over 6
semesters, with 200 hours/semester on the 2m telescopes and 1250 hours/semester
on the 1m telescopes, plus community involvement in key projects. Unique
capabilities of the facility include continuous monitoring (24H/day), flexible
cadence, long-term stable observations, and rapid target-of-opportunity
response. Access to the telescopes will allow interesting individual projects to
be conducted by the US community, enhance on-going surveys at other telescopes,
and provide follow-up opportunities for discoveries by NSF's Vera Rubin
Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.