* 2034020
* SBIR Phase I: Auto Pairing Direct to Cellular Telehealth Gateway for Improved COVID-19 Home Health Monitoring Adherence
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,09/30/2021
* John Fitch, Birkeland Current LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2021
* USD 255,430.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) Phase I project includes the ability to eliminate two of the
primary barriers in dealing with seniors and technology: user interfaces and
internet availability. The approach makes use of recent (2019) national network
coverage for Narrow-Band Internet of Things (NB-IoT) enabling low power, low
cost access for direct to cellular low bandwidth applications. The auto pairing
direct to cellular gateway provides COVID-19 diagnosed patients with the
capability to effectively monitor symptoms from home resulting in improved
disease impact tracking and monitoring adherence while reducing hospital demand,
disease spread, and system costs over current smart phone-based system. Current
systems require lengthy user training and account setup as well as cumbersome
measurement data transfers using an app during each reading. This currently
challenging interface would be replaced with a single device requiring no set up
or direct interaction with the user. The approach greatly simplifies and
streamlines the disease related measurements while reducing the time and cost of
getting devices provisioned and into the end usersâ€™ hands. Although focused on
COVID-19 monitoring, the technology also provides broad application for
effective telemedicine adoption by seniors for chronic care monitoring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I
project seeks to provide a solution which is more cost effective and enables
greater adoption and compliance for long-term, in-home, self-monitoring of
seniors and at-risk populations diagnosed with COVID-19. The research goals of
this project include demonstrating an auto pairing direct to cellular device
that meets the requirements for COVID-19 monitoring under the global COVID-19
Emergency Response Solution. The research approach includes: demonstrating a
design with optimized narrow band performance; demonstrating FCC/IC end unit
certification; and demonstrating testing required for network certifications.
The anticipated technical results of this Phase I project enable smartphone-
based monitoring systems and a gateway into senior populations for chronic care
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.