* 2034630
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Health effects and associated socio-economic costs of increasing temperatures and wildfires - A global assessment
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Trevor Houser, RHODIUM GROUP, LLC
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,495.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working together in this Collaborative Research
Action, the partner agencies have provided support to foster global
transdisciplinary research teams of natural (including climate), health and
social scientists and stakeholders from across the globe to improve
understanding of climate, environment and health pathways to protect and promote
health. The projects will provide crucial new understanding into the health
implications arising from the impacts of climate change and variability on; 1)
the quality/quantity of food, 2) chronic exposure to increases/changes in heat
and humidity and 3) changes in the distribution and incidence of a range of
infectious diseases and emergence of novel pathogens. This award provides
support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of
partners from at least three of the participating countries to increase our
knowledge of the complex linkages and pathways between the climate, environment
and health to help solve complex challenges that face societies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on the health effects and
associated socio-economic costs of increasing temperatures and wildfires to
quantify the changes in cardiopulmonary mortality and morbidity and associated
economic costs due to extreme heat and air pollution under alternative climate
and socioeconomic scenarios. The project will produce a global heat index
projection related to air pollution data including that of wildfires, projection
of cardiopulmonary diseases burden under different scenarios, and data on socio-
economic costs associated to co-occurring events of extreme heat and high
pollution. The project brings together an international research consortium with
expertise in climate modelling, epidemiology, economics and health impact
assessments. The team of academics, non-governmental and private sector
researchers will work together to assess the link between heat, air pollution
and human health and quantify the associated health burden. The project will
benefit a broad range of local and national-level stakeholders, including local
communities, government, health service agencies, and local and national
decision-makers. The major impacts will be improved capability in assessing
health impacts; cohesive resilience towards climate change; data to inform major
international scientific assessments; strategies to ease economic burden of
diseases and improve public health and safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.