* 2034209
* ACEAP Network Growth Initiative (ANGI)
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Timothy Spuck, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2024
* USD 105,719.00

The project will continue building and diversifying the capacity of the
Astronomy in Chile Education Ambassadors Program (ACEAP). This program has
developed a network of amateur astronomers, educators, and outreach
professionals who have visited the NSF facilities in Chile. The members of this
network then disseminate information and resources associated with US astronomy
in Chile. The project will support travel to Chile for five ambassadors per
year. An additional five ambassadors will be self-supporting. The project will
then provide training to the ambassadors to ensure effective communication to
the public following their return to the US. The project will focus on
organizations like the Society for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native
Americans in Science (SACNAS), the National Society of Black Physicists (NSBP),
HBCUs and MSIs for recruitment of the supported ambassadors to help broaden
participation from traditionally underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will recruit ambassador candidates
through the existing ACEAP network and add new emphasis on organizations that
support underrepresented groups in STEM. The project will select a group of
ambassadors who represent formal pre-Kindergarten through college education,
science centers/plantariums, astronomy/STEM communicators, and amateur astronomy
who are reflective of the social demographics of the US. Prior to traveling to
Chile, the ambassadors will receive training in traveling internationally and
conversational Spanish. The ambassadors will also receive training in using
social media, effectively tailoring presentations to their audience, and
engaging with the media. Ambassadors will be expected to broadly disseminate
their experiences to the public when they return from
Chile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.