* 2034698
* I-Corps: Visible optics-enabled diagnostics for site-specific gas leak detection
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Ganesh Balasubramanian, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology for detecting leakage of harmful gases, providing
billions of dollars in economic savings per year in addition to preventing the
loss of human lives and increasing environmental hazards. Reducing unwanted
gaseous chemical releases to the environment, e.g., leaks in the natural gas
supply chain, will contribute to saving lives from exposure to hazardous gases
and lessen carbon emission. The technology may prevent health issues for workers
operating equipment in power plants, semiconductor manufacturing, and oil and
natural gas industries, as well as limit gas leakages that result in potential
downtime in the production cycle. In addition, multimillion dollar legal
liabilities of associated (multinational) companies may be
averted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is focused on the translation
of technology that is able to detect density changes in transparent media with
off-the-shelf optical tools and a customized mathematical and software framework
for image-processing. Refraction of visible light occurs when light passes
across transparent media with dissimilar densities. The changes in density for a
gaseous medium can arise due to several factors, e.g., variations in
temperature, composition, and pressure fluctuations. The movement of fluid
particles from the site of leakage once distinctly identified at different time
instances, i.e., at different frames of a video recorded continuously in the
field of view of the leakage location, facilitates the measurement of particle
speed from one frame to the other using particle image velocimetry. Calibrating
the results with a predetermined distance measure, the velocity of flow in the
physical dimension is obtained. Using the area of the leakage spot, the volume
flow rate of the leak is estimated rapidly. Unlike contemporary methods that use
volatile organic compound sensors, infrared light, or thermal imaging, the
proposed technology employs visible optics. The proposed diagnostics technology
may detect gas leaks in real time and identify hot spots that require precise
detection and maintenance, triggering rapid mitigation
procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.