* 2034703
* SBIR Phase II:  High Energy Density Lithium-ion Battery Cells With Graphenic Anodes
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Tereza Paronyan, Hexalayer, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2024
* USD 999,913.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project is the
development and adoption of next generation portable energy storage devices.
Lithium-ion batteries are the most common energy storage technology for a wide
variety of applications. Most recently, they have been adopted by small to
medium sized Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) and electric vehicles (EV). The
weight carrying capacity and flight/operating time and range of these UAS and EV
are issues mainly dependent on battery components and materials. With the
proposed lithium-ion battery technology, high-capacity, lightweight, and
advanced batteries may store significantly more energy without increasing their
weight. The development and integration of the next generation battery
technology may significantly increase the performance of battery powered
vehicles and their adoption by society. This technology has the potential to
have a drastic commercial impact in the UAS/drone industry; For example, with
successful batteries, medicine, blood, and organs can be quickly delivered to
remote locations on unmanned platforms. Utility workers may be able to identify
pipeline leaks or transmission line damages in advance of an accident and
packages may be delivered faster, with significantly less carbon footprint,
along with myriad of other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II
project seeks to develop high capacity, lightweight lithium-ion battery (LIB)
cells with a novel carbon-based anode component. Existing LIBs still utilize
graphite with additives as the primary anode material due to their ability to
restore the charge and provide consistency in voltage. However, graphite's
limited capacity (theoretically, 372 mAh/g) prohibits the development of long
lasting, higher energy density (over 340 Wh/kg) LIBs. Graphite's internal
structure limits sufficient lithium diffusion into interlayer spaces. This
project offers a new class of higher energy density (over 500 Wh/kg) LIBs, with
an innovative multilayer graphenic anode. Replacing graphite with the multilayer
graphenic anode offers a solution in overcoming the issue of the limited
capacity of the carbon anode. This patent-pending, commercially feasible, only
carbon-based anode has the unique capability of an intense lithium (Li)
intercalation within its networks. The large Li/electrolyte interface
contributes enhanced charge-transfer kinetics, resulting in effective
charge/discharge cycling throughout hundreds of cycles with over 1500 mAh/g
specific capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.