* 2034772
* RAPID: Motif-based Classification and Systems Analysis of CoV-2 Virulence Mechanism
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Carolyn Talcott, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2021
* USD 198,043.00

The COVID-19 pandemic demands intensive fundamental research to decipher how the
SARS-CoV-2 virus has adapted to infect humans and spread globally. The research
supported through this RAPID award uncovers new insights into how SARS-CoV-2 and
other viruses mimic human biology to facilitate infection and adaptation
strategies. Previous research has revealed that host mimicry is essential for
viral infection mechanisms yet currently there is a deficiency of tools to
comprehensively identify and classify ‘signatures’ of host mimicry in viral
sequence data. Identifying and classifying these sequence signatures (motifs)
enable researchers to more accurately predict host targets based on viral
adaptation strategies that underly the transmission and spread of COVID-19. This
project delivers new data on human mimicry by the SARS-CoV-2 virus and open-
source algorithms with supporting information to the scientific community
through web-based resources. Discoveries from this project have potential use to
guide the development of novel treatment strategies for SARS-CoV-2 and other
viruses. This project also offers a training opportunity for an undergraduate
student in systems virology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing body of literature
documents how viruses mimic host motifs to hijack cells, particularly through
evasion of host immune functions. Motifs are small in size (3-10 amino acids in
disordered proteins or regions) and hence require only a limited number of
mutations for rapidly evolving viruses to acquire host motifs. Against this
backdrop, this project is designed to develop a viral classification system
based on motifs to identify host mimicry elements in SARS-CoV-2 and other
viruses. The project then infers target host pathways used in viral mechanisms
that are illustrated in a use case. Curation of existing data from viral
sequence databases, newly published sequences, along with the collection of
motif types from the Eukaryotic Linear Motif (ELM) resource, provides training
data for machine-learning (ML) algorithm development. The algorithm in turn
provides a classifier that i) makes predictions of host motifs in viruses, ii)
defines enrichment and co-occurrence of motif types, iii) defines association of
motifs with structured and disordered viral protein domains, and iv) predicts
host targets and pathways. In the use case, evaluation of precision and recall
against selected viruses with known mechanisms of action, supported by a
knowledge base of experimental evidence, provides a test of the classification
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.