* 2034567
* RAPID: Rational Design of Biomimetic Virus-Trapping Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Robert Woods, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SARS-CoV-2 virus has
caused a pandemic of profound global impact. Its high infectivity enabled it to
spread rapidly across the world. In severe cases, infection with SARS-CoV-2
leads to respiratory failure, septic shock, and failure of vital organs,
including the liver and kidneys. In the absence of an effective vaccine or
therapeutic agent, reducing the population’s exposure to the virus is the only
viable strategy for preventing infections and overburdening of the health care
system. Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 occurs through multiple routes. Prevention of
SARS-CoV-2 transmission requires effective and easy-to-use technologies directed
against all modes of transmission. Funded by the Biomaterials Program in the
Division of Materials Research of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate, and cofunded by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences of the Biological Sciences Directorate, this
Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant supports research into the development of
biomimetic polymers that exploit the carbohydrate-binding properties of SARS-
CoV-2 for virus immobilization. The developed polymers will be designed to
produce virus-immobilizing gels and surfaces for applications in protective
formulations and devices as well as functional studies, isolation, and
purification of virions in scientific settings. The research serves the national
interest by advancing the science of biomimetic materials and developing
materials for the improvement of national health. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SARS-CoV-2 virus consists of single-
stranded RNA that is enclosed in the nucleocapsid protein. This viral core is
surrounded by a lipid membrane with three embedded proteins: the envelope
protein, the membrane protein, and the spike (S) protein, which is responsible
for binding to host cell receptors and host cell entry. The S protein has
recently been shown to bind to the glycosaminoglycan (GAG) heparin. This project
will integrate simulation, synthesis, and characterization in a forward- and
backward-feeding loop approach to rationally design carbohydrate-conjugated
polymers for immobilization of SARS-CoV-2 virions. Computer simulations will
focus on defining the preferred GAG structures and topology of the S protein
binding regions and will include structure modeling of the S protein, molecular
docking of GAG oligosaccharides to the S protein, and molecular dynamics
simulation of the co-complexes. Synthesis strategies toward GAG-conjugated
polymers will include self-condensing ring-opening polymerization, self-
condensing vinyl polymerization, and surface-initiated polymerization.
Characterization and quantification of binding to the S-protein will be done by
biolayer interferometry, surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy, and quartz
crystal microgravimetry with dissipation monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.