* 2034264
* TRTech-PGR: NSF BSF - Recombining Allelic Diversity via Genome Editing for Dissecting Complex Plant Traits
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Markita Landry, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Global sustainability efforts rely on improvements in plant breeding technology
particularly for crops of relevance for human consumption such as cereal crops.
Wild relatives of domesticated plants harbor many of the genes that enable
plants to become robust against stress. However, our ability to identify these
genes and allocate their function to plant stress resilience has been difficult
due to the low throughput of experiments needed to identify plant resilience
genes. A main bottleneck limiting the throughput of testing crop genetic
resilience is the ability to deliver biological molecules into plant cells,
where the plant cell wall presents a largely impenetrable barrier for the
introduction of the molecular biology tools needed for plant genetic mapping. In
this project, nanoparticles will be developed to deliver genetic material into
plant cells, with a focus on cereal crop barley. These nanoparticles will be
chemically functionalized to deliver genome editing cargoes into plants, which
will enable probing of specific plant genes in their relevance for plant stress
tolerance. The project will seek to identify what genes enable cereal crops to
be robust against environmental stress, and to leverage this knowledge to learn
about stress tolerance in other crops of relevance for the global food supply.
The research above will also support underrepresented undergraduate students as
research trainees for the synthesis and characterization of nanomaterials and
will develop a student workshop on nanomaterials science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to study genotype to phenotype relationships
in plants is critical for identification of plant biotic and abiotic stress
genes. Specifically, crop wild relatives harbor genes that confer traits
relevant for crop adaptation to climate change. Mapping genotype to phenotype
relationships through functional genomics has benefitted greatly from the
emergence of CRISPR genome editing technologies. However, the efficiency of
genome editing in plants limits the utility of this method for functional
genomics. In this project, nanoparticles will be developed for the
physiochemical adsorption of CRISPR-based DNA plasmids and, separately,
Cas9-gRNA ribonucleoprotein complexes. These nanoparticle-biomolecule cargo
complexes will be tested for delivery and genome editing efficacy in model
plants and in the cereal crop barley. The ability to deliver CRISPR plasmids in
a non-integrating manner or to achieve DNA-free genome editing through Cas9-gRNA
complex delivery would enable faster and more precise mapping of plant traits by
avoiding transgene integration and the need for transgene segregation.
Furthermore, the abiotic nature of nanoparticle-based DNA or protein delivery
may enable facile genetic manipulation and functional genomics in other crops of
relevance beyond those tested in the current work. In addition to the above
efforts, this proposal will support training of undergraduate students from the
Society for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science, and the
development of a workshop to teach nanomaterials science to students from a
broad variety of backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.