* 2034437
* Exploring &amp; Exploiting the Dynamic Optical Sky
* MPS,AST
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2024
* Thomas Prince, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 11/30/2024
* USD 5,993,301.00

For millennia, human beings have noticed "new stars" appearing and disappearing
in the night sky. Thanks to advances in sensors, computation and algorithms
astronomers are now able to discover millions of changes in the night sky. The
objects range from near-earth asteroids to explosive stellar deaths across the
Universe. This vibrant field of “time-domain astronomy” is now addressing
fundamental scientific questions such as the origin of the elements in the
Universe, as well as playing a critical role in identifying exotic astronomical
events which are bright in gravitational waves or neutrinos and providing unique
insights into stars. Time-domain astronomy is one of the four scientific pillars
of the Vera Rubin Observatory, the NSF’s high priority ground-based observatory
for the next decade. The Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) is preparing the
astronomy community including students to become adept users of the Rubin
Observatory. ZTF-II builds on the success of ZTF-I which began survey operations
in March 2018 and has been responsible for 50% of global supernova discoveries
over the past year, along with a slew of other discoveries from both the real-
time alert stream and the multi-billion object catalog releases. This award
advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big Idea via ZTF’s strong
relevance to Multi-Messenger Astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ZTF-II is a
state-of-the art time-domain survey employing a 47 square degrees field-of-view
camera on the Palomar 48-inch Samuel Oschin Schmidt telescope. It operates a
public survey covering the visible northern sky (declination above -30 degrees)
every 2 nights in g- and r-bands to about 20.5 magnitude. Each ZTF observation
is processed by an image differencing pipeline which generates real-time alerts
for all 5-sigma detections of point-source transient events, amounting to
several hundred thousand alerts per night. These alerts contain thumbnail images
of the discovery image, a reference image, and the difference between the two,
as well as a 30-day light curve history, and various metadata, such as a real-
bogus score, details of the nearest PS1 source, and pipeline parameters. Daily
spectral classifications of all supernovae brighter than 18.5 mag are obtained
using a robotic spectrometer and announced via the Transient Name Server. Each
ZTF observation is also processed by a Point Spread Function photometry pipeline
which produces a single epoch catalog covering all identified sources. These are
archived at IPAC and used to create light-curves for all detected objects in ZTF
data releases - in ZTF-II, these will be released on a 2-month cycle starting in
2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.