* 2034218
* CAREER: Toward Autonomous Decision Making and Coordination in Intelligent Unmanned Aerial Vehicles' Operation in Dynamic Uncertain Remote Areas
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Fatemeh Afghah, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 244,239.00

Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have been increasingly utilized in several
commercial and civil applications such as package delivery, traffic monitoring,
precision agriculture, remote sensing, border patrol, hazard monitoring,
disaster relief, and search and rescue operations to collect data/imagery for a
ground command station nearby. Current implementations of UAV-based operations
heavily rely on control, inference, task allocation, and planning from a human
controller that can limit the operation of drones in missions where the
operation field is not fully observable to the human controller prior to the
mission and reliable and continuous communication is not available between the
UAVs and the ground station or among the teammate UAVs during the mission. The
UAVs can be particularly useful in such unstructured and unknown environments to
provide agile surveying or search-and-rescue operations. Therefore, the future
of UAV technology focuses on the development of small, low-cost, and smart
drones with a higher level of autonomy. Such drones can facilitate a wide range
of sophisticated missions performed by a fleet of cooperative UAVs with minimum
human intervention and lower cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to develop theoretical and practical frameworks for operation,
situational awareness, coordination, and communication of a network of fully
autonomous multi-agent systems (e.g., UAVs) in dynamic and unknown environments
with minimum human interventions. This research can facilitate a new set of
applications for autonomous multi-agent systems in remote and dynamic
environments. This project involves an integrated set of research,
implementation, and experimental validation thrusts to develop novel frameworks
for autonomous decision making, coalition formation, coordination, spectrum
management, and task allocation in UAV systems. The developed techniques can be
utilized in other multi-agent cognitive systems such as robotic systems, and
autonomous driving vehicles where quick search, surveillance, and reactions are
required with limited human interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
also offers a number of educational and outreach activities to integrate the
results of this research in curriculum enhancement, student mentorship, engaging
underrepresented minority and female students, developing hands-on UAV-based
sensing experiments for elementary and middle school students and outreach to
the community to enhance public awareness about new applications of UAV systems
through collaboration with Flagstaff Festival of
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.