* 2034202
* CAREER: DYNAMIC LIVING HYDROGEL NETWORKS FOR SPATIO-TEMPORAL CONTROL OF CELL SIGNALING
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Ankur Singh, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 02/28/2022
* USD 234,040.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Biomaterials-based three-dimensional hydrogels that
better reflect the extracellular microenvironment of native tissues are
important for tissue repair and regeneration as well as cell-matrix interaction
studies. Importantly, the biochemical signals between cell and surrounding
matrix are dynamic over multiple time (seconds-weeks) and length (nm-cm) scales,
and are dependent on tissue stiffness. Therefore, materials engineered to
modulate cell response must be similarly dynamic in their spatio-temporal
presentation of bio-ligands and material stiffness. Although hydrogels that
control spatial and temporal presentation of bio-ligands by use of external
triggers have been realized, these hydrogels have not yet provided 3 key
properties: a) spatial control of cell signaling, b) simultaneous temporal
presentation of bio-adhesivity, and c) independent control of bio-adhesivity and
material stiffness to parse individual contributions to cell modulation. This
NSF CAREER award, funded by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research, will enable development of a new class of nanocomposite
hydrogels with control over the above mentioned three key properties within a
single hydrogel. This work will advance current understanding of the role of
biomaterial properties in controlling human stem cell fate through user-directed
spatio-temporal control of cell-matrix interactions. This work will make
interactive inquiry based learning permeate the underprivileged middle and high
schools by training teachers and students. This CAREER award will grow the
infrastructure of US engineers, in particular those from underrepresented
minorities, with strong disciplinary competence in biomaterials through pedagogy
and cutting-edge research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Biomaterials-based 3D hydrogels that better reflect the niche
of native tissues and capture critical aspects of the dynamic microenvironment
are of increasing importance for culturing of mammalian cells, including stem
cells, for a wide range of applications in biomedicine. The flow of information
between cells and their surrounding niche is spatially and temporally dependent
on biochemical signals and cell-cell interactions. Despite advancement in the
field of biomaterials, independent role of spatio-temporal biochemical signaling
and biophysical properties of materials cannot be effectively studied using a
single hydrogel system. This NSF CAREER award will overcome the current
bottlenecks in biomaterials research by enabling the development of a new class
of hydrogel that dynamically communicates with cells to control their fates. The
proposed research will benefit society by developing advanced bio-functional
tissues for regenerative medicine. In particular we expect this work to generate
dynamic biomaterials for better understanding of stem cells and their
interactions with local surroundings that will help treatment of neurological
disorders and enable regeneration of neural grafts for short and long nerve
gaps. The outcomes of this research will catalyze potential avenues of
investigation in multiple disciplines, including cell culture, tissue
fabrication, blood vessel generation, drug delivery, tumor engineering, and
implants. This work will make interactive inquiry based learning permeate the
underprivileged middle and high schools by training teachers and students. This
CAREER proposal will grow the infrastructure of US engineers, in particular
undergraduate and graduate students including those from underrepresented
minorities, with strong disciplinary competence in biomaterials through pedagogy
and cutting-edge research.