* 2035945
* SBIR Phase I:  Open Vascular Surgical Training System for Skill Acquisition and Evaluation
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2022
* Hannah Eherenfeldt, Resuture Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 01/31/2022
* USD 273,462.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to streamline surgical training and reduce
the burden of surgical complications by creating a device that can train and
evaluate surgeons. The proposed project will demonstrate the feasibility of
progressive skills education and quantitative assessment on a simulated open
surgery system. This project will develop a high-fidelity modular system and
synthetic vasculature to effectively train surgeons in open vascular
surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will advance development of an educational tool to support
surgical training. The device must provide progressive skills education, expose
users to a comprehensive range of open surgical procedures, and provide
objective feedback metrics. The proposed research will first investigate the
feasibility of developing a variety of simulated vascular components, including
those with abnormalities, and subsequently integrating them into the benchtop
system. The synthetic training models will be evaluated by practicing surgeons
using a bipolar scaling method. The mechanical properties of the synthetic
vascular tissue will be measured and compared to live tissue. This project will
additionally develop components to measure surgical performance. The metrics
will be evaluated in a pilot study of a panel of experienced and inexperienced
surgeons. The anticipated results are a synthetic vascular material with similar
mechanical properties as live tissue, surgical models that are validated as
realistic by a panel of expert surgeons, and a system with sensors and
components that are capable of differentiating between user skill
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.