* 2035225
* Reconciling Atmospheric OH Reactivity Measurements with PTR-ToF-MS Observations and Photochemical Box Model Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Alex Guenther, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 569,010.00

Ozone and particulate matter are components of air pollution that affect the
environment and human health; however, gaps remain in current understanding of
how these components are formed. In the present project, laboratory experiments
are conducted to shed light on reactions of atmospheric precursor molecules.
Results are compared to existing models and field data and will provide new
mechanistic insight that can help inform air pollution control strategies.
Participating graduate students are integrated in the outreach plan to engage
K-12 students and teaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systematic laboratory studies
are performed on reactive volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and oxidation
intermediates and products to improve current understanding of tropospheric
photochemistry. The tandem chamber reactor system used for experiments is
equipped with state-of-the-art analytical tools including high-resolution proton
transfer reaction-mass spectrometry (PTR-ToF-MS) and comparative reactivity
method (CRM) for analysis of components and to quantify OH reactivity,
respectively. Method development and instrument calibration are an integral part
of this work. New observations are evaluated with existing box models and
compared to previously obtained field datasets for re-examination. Results may
reveal fundamental new mechanisms and help gain greater insight into ozone and
particulate matter production under various pollution levels. PIs and diverse
graduate students are supported through this project, and outreach is planned to
elementary school students and teachers, while middle school students will be
provided opportunities to visit campus and experience hands-on air sampling and
gas analyses instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.