* 2035165
* Bridging the STEM Entrepreneurial Gap for Under-Represented Minority Women By Using the NSF I-Corps' Program Methodology
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Tonya Matthews, JULIAN C. MADISON BUILDING LLC, THE
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

The Julian C. Madison Building, LLC (JCMB) project includes the research,
evaluation, and reporting of the STEM Entrepreneurial Excellence Program (STEEP)
– a pilot initiative to enhance cultural and contextual relevancy for a proven
STEM entrepreneurship support program using the NSF I-Corps™ framework as the
model program methodology. In service to national interests promoting the
progress of science, this project targets under-represented minority (URM) women
interested in advancing their STEM education and experience for business
ownership. By increasing diversity in STEM-related career options, this project
provides broad societal benefits and advances in education for marginalized
sectors of the US population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEEP Training Initiative
goal is to broaden participation in the NSF I-Corps™ program for URM women
interested in entrepreneurship. This project’s scope focuses on evaluating
readiness activities that collectively utilize STEEP’s entrepreneurial planning
and NSF program methodology for maximum efficacy. The project team tracks STEEP
participants’ engagement with corporate partners to leverage mentoring
opportunities. Utilizing pre-, interim, and post-training surveys and
interviews, data is collected across the project timeline to analyze its
intended results. The approach serves as a solid research model for long-term
sustainability for STEM-focused entrepreneurship, as well as NSF I-Corps™
program participation for URM women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
create a broader-access community in this innovative research area by capturing
critical data (e.g. obstacles – real or perceived) on URM women participants
with entrepreneurial spirits; engaging the national and international community
through academic, professional development and mentorship networks; and
establishing new and/or improved interdisciplinary programs among the
participating academic institutions. This project is scalable and transferable
across the NSF Innovation Network (NIN) where Nodes, Hubs, Teams, and
participating institutions of higher education (IHE) can implement the expected
research findings to improve diversity and participation for URM women across
STEM programs that encourage innovation and
entrepreneurism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;JCMB maintains an internal repository of
survey data and interviews that is processed, then summarized to protect
confidentiality (biographical information from the respondents). Summarized
project survey and individual interview results are assigned pseudonyms prior to
any publication (i.e. scientific or managerial journals). Once collected and
analyzed, JCMB will present all data in aggregate form ensuring that the
identity of respondents is maintained. Personally-identifiable data is access-
controlled during the project and for three years after the study is complete;
then destroyed. JCMB intends to distribute sanitized/summarized results to a
broad audience concerned with the lack of diversity in STEM
entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.