* 2035430
* SBIR Phase I:  Predictive Tools for Characterizing Carbon Sequestration in Mined Materials
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Tamara Diedrich, MINERALOGIC LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2022
* USD 254,741.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project provides tools to identify and realize opportunities to use mine waste
rock in carbon sequestration projects. This project encompasses research and
development activities necessary to translate observations on the geochemistry
of rock weathering into a comprehensive toolset for mining companies to
characterize the potential for geologic materials excavated during mining to
sequester atmospheric carbon dioxide as solid, geologically stable carbonate
mineral phases. The service will employ a novel predictive modelling tool and a
method for determining the site-specific data to parameterize the model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will characterize the carbon
sequestration potential of mined materials through a novel framework for
conceptualizing silicate mineral weathering. Currently no established tools
characterize this potential with sufficient accuracy to optimize the design of
rock storage systems for carbon sequestration. The proposed innovation will
include a novel implementation of mathematics of the “shrinking core model” into
a reactive transport framework to simulate diffusion-controlled silicate mineral
weathering and subsequent carbonate mineral precipitation. The innovation also
includes a novel application of mine waste characterization test work to
identify site-specific reaction kinetics of multi-mineral assemblages for model
parameterization. Research and development activities include mineral
characterization of weathered mine waste and waste analogues, mathematical model
development, and re-interpretation of published and proprietary kinetic data.
Geochemical data on the weathering of mined materials at the lab and field-test
scale will be provided by industry. The model will be used to predict the rate
of sequestration occurring at the field tests. The predictive skill of the model
will be tested via comparison to observed carbon sequestration
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.