* 2035793
* SBIR Phase I:  Stress Pathway Inhibition Prevents COVID-19 Infection (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2021
* Donald Davidson, CREATIVE BIOTHERAPEUTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 12/31/2021
* USD 255,700.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the pursuit of developing a first-in-class, non-toxic, inexpensive,
and effective treatment for COVID-19 for vulnerable patients including the
elderly and those at additional risk from cancer, high blood pressure, diabetes
and obesity. These conditions produce high levels of stress on diseased cells
compared to normal cells. This project leverages insights that COVID-19 uses the
same pathway to enhance viral infection as cancer cells use for survival; this
process causes immune system weakening which allows tumor cells and viruses to
multiply. The proposed project will create innovative anti-viral therapies by
exploring how this survival pathway increases COVID-19 infectivity, weakens the
immune system and induces tumor cell resistance. Its use can be expanded to
other new targets and therapies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
leverages insights regarding similarities between tumors and viral infections.
This project will advance translation of a novel inhibitor to a survival factor
that continually keeps these wounds from healing by increasing tumor survival
and enhancing viral infections. This novel inhibitor can potently block the
binding of COVID-19 spike protein to this survival factor, which has been shown
to be highly expressed on stressed lung cells as a result of cancer and other
inflammatory diseases. The goals of this project are to 1) show that the
proposed COVID-19 inhibitor can block COVID-19 infection of stressed lung cells;
2) reduce cytokine expression to lessen the cytokine storm associated with
COVID-19 infection; 3) prevent immune weakening and 4) inhibit coagulopathy to
lessen the “blood clot storm”. The project will use standard in vitro viral
infectivity assays and in vivo immune competent tumor-bearing mice models
infected with a lethal strain of COVID-19. Together, these studies will
demonstrate that the proposed lead survival factor inhibitor can significantly
reduce the attachment, entry and replication of COVID-19 virus as well as reduce
the immune suppressive nature of infected lung alveolar epithelial cells in
vitro and in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.