* 2035488
* Collaborative Research: Effect of Pulsatility on Expiratory Droplet-Laden Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Vrishank Raghav, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 01/31/2024
* USD 254,618.00

Predicting the dispersion of droplets and aerosols generated during expiratory
events like sneezing, coughing, or speech is a key step towards understanding
the spread of infectious diseases and to develop effective countermeasures to
contain outbreaks. Existing open-source and commercial tools used in industry
and academia, to predict dispersion of droplets and aerosols, rely on simplistic
models that fail to capture details of the underlying turbulent flow physics. In
this project, through a combined experimental and computational approach,
advancements are made towards the development of improved models that could be
easily embraced through direct implementation into existing tools. This project
also encompasses significant education and outreach activities. The
investigators will expand their ongoing efforts to adopt Virtual Reality based
imaging to enable immersive three-dimensional representations of droplet-laden
expiratory flow as an educational tool. These educational tools will be used for
outreach events and workshops at both Auburn University and the University of
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this collaborative
experimental and computational project is to quantify the fundamental flow
physics that govern the transport and dispersion of droplets in a pulsatile
expiratory flow. Using an ex-vivo cough simulator and human subject experiments
combined with direct numerical simulations we will quantify the role of flow
interactions, generated by pulsatile expiratory flow, on aerosol dispersion and
assess the penetration length of secondary expulsions. By combining time-
resolved velocimetry with an extensively validated fluid-particle simulation
methodology, this effort will break ground in uncovering new flow physics
relating the influence of flow interactions on the entrainment and dispersion of
droplets. Some of the anticipated outcomes include: (1) an extensive database of
experimental measurements and high-resolution simulations; and (2) a sound
theoretical foundation for modeling turbulent disperse two-phase flows. Such
improved quantification of flow physics and development of reduced-order models
will enable better prediction of droplet dispersion, a key step towards
understanding the spread of viral infections. The methods developed will be used
to study the interaction of droplet-laden expiratory jets with flow barriers
(for example face shields) and evaluate their efficacy to mitigate the
dispersion of impinging expiratory flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.