* 2035050
* RCN: Mid-Atlantic Research Network for Synthetic Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2025
* Michael Timko, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2025
* USD 511,134.00

The overall goal of this project is the creation of a research network in the
Mid-Atlantic region (MD, DE, VA, NC, SC, and GA), focused on enhancing the
productivity, sustainability, and resilience of water and agricultural-based
resources. These entwined resources are of economic importance (&gt; $12 billion
annually) and provide food and water security. A field of research that is
proving increasingly relevant to protecting and enhancing these resources is
synthetic biology. This field of scientific study is a joint application of
science, technology, and engineering that manipulates cells to be used as tools
to, for example, detect or mitigate biological or chemical threats in the
environment. Such research already exists in the Mid-Atlantic region at academic
institutions, in the private sector, and government laboratories. However, this
research often occurs in isolation nor is it drawn collectively toward solving
region-level challenges. This project is bringing regional research entities
into a community to determine how synthetic biology in particular can be
leveraged to enhance and protect agricultural and water resources. Alongside
accelerating research by making expertise and resources known and shared
efficiently, this project is developing a STEM workforce as well as
entrepreneurship opportunities to accelerate regional economic development. This
project represents the first phase in the development of a coordinated synthetic
biology-enabled research network in the Mid-Atlantic
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To build an evolvable, regional, synthetic biology-
based research network, this project is bringing together new groups of
investigators and shareable resources by investing in the development of
institutional and regional web portals, regional research symposia and theme
meetings to determine how synthetic biology can be leveraged to enhance and
protect agricultural and water-based resources. The network also provides travel
awards to catalyze new collaborative research among investigators, as well as
STEM workforce and entrepreneurial development planning. In all of these
network-forming activities, the participation of students, trainees, early
career individuals, and under-represented groups is a priority. Coordination of
this network is managed by an Executive Committee, composed of members from
across the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.