* 2035836
* I-Corps: Quantitative Tissue Oxygen Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Michael Cima, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
personalize therapies and improve outcomes for patients with a wide range of
diseases and ailments. Deviation from normal tissue oxygen levels can cause poor
outcomes for patients, ranging from resistance to radiation therapy for cancer
patients to amputation for a patient suffering from a crushed limb. Clinical
interventions to address these and other diseases require an oxygen sensing
method that produces actionable data and is in a format that is compatible with
current clinical care. For example, when treating cancer, understanding the
distribution and quantitative levels of tumor oxygen could enable physicians to
apply higher doses of radiation to the low oxygen regions in order to combat the
treatment resistance typically observed in these environments. This oxygen
sensor is a platform technology that can be used in a wide range of clinical and
pre-clinical applications. It overcomes the limitations of both past and current
oxygen sensing alternatives and provides minimally invasive, quantitative, and
absolute measurements of tissue oxygen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project focuses on advancing a novel oxygen sensing polymer that is measured
non-invasively using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). This material is used to
quantify oxygen by measuring the influence of molecular oxygen on the MRI
properties of the silicone. The MRI properties are a function of the
concentration of oxygen that is in the sensor at any given time. The MRI
measurements can be converted to oxygen values using a calibration curve to
provide the actionable clinical information to physicians. The sensor is made
completely of silicone which limits the ingress of water and biological
materials that could compromise measurement quality. The elastomeric nature of
the silicone sensor allows it to be customized for a wide range of clinical
applications. The sensor offers quantitative and long-term tracking of tissue
oxygen with a technique and device that is compatible with the clinical
workflow. This sensor has been evaluated in multiple pre-clinical small animal
models and is in an early feasibility clinical trial for cervical
cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.