* 2035583
* Technical Symposium for Minoritized STEM Students
* EHR,HRD
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Hongtao Yu, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 45,121.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) supports conferences and workshops that seek to increase the research and
education capacity of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
students and faculty at HBCUs. Morgan State University will organize a student
symposium held in conjunction with the 92nd National Technical Association (NTA)
Annual Conference to be held on September 23-26, 2020, hosted virtually by Clark
Atlanta University. Undergraduate students from HBCUs will virtually participate
in the one-day student symposium to present their research and build a network
of support by interacting with faculty and industry representatives, as well as
fully participate in the conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NTA, established
in 1926, promotes the involvement of undergraduate students in scientific and
technical research activities. The symposium sessions will provide a culminating
experience for approximately one hundred students to disseminate research
results to peers and professionals attending the NTA conference through oral and
poster sessions. Students will have a chance to enhance their communication
skills and receive critical feedback related to their academic work and
potential careers. A key objective is to provide undergraduate students the
opportunity to network with scientists and engineers from academia, industry,
government agencies, and the private sector. Although the COVID19 virus is a
high priority topic, preparing and growing the future STEM workforce is at the
core of the NTA mission and the agenda will also include topics in the
geosciences, as well as topics in big data, artificial intelligence, robotics,
and other emerging technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.