* 2035534
* RAPID: Soil and water biogeochemical response to COVID-19: increased stress on septic systems alters soil and water quality
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Jacob Bateman McDonald, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 99,993.00

Early in 2020 northeast Georgia had much higher rainfall than normal placing
increased stress on aging septic systems in the region. Additionally, “shelter-
in-place” and “social distancing” policies related to the COVID-19 pandemic have
increased the time residents spend at home and therefore the use of residential
septic wastewater treatment systems. This increased stress on septic systems may
change soil properties and pollutant content in septic leach fields. This
project will investigate how increased septic system use could lead to pollutant
runoff. Septic systems will be investigated inside and outside of the leach
field perimeter and the soil physical, hydrologic, and chemical properties
analyzed in the field and with laboratory methods. The results from this study
will inform land managers and local governments on pollutants that need to be
managed to protect human health, natural resources, and the environment.
Educational materials will be prepared and distributed at the annual Athens
Water Festival. One graduate student will be directly involved in the project
and will be trained in a wide selection of field and laboratory
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The object of this project is to investigate
the current period of intensive rainfall and septic system use and how it may
generate novel hotspots of biogeochemical activity in both soil and soil water.
The core hypothesis is that enhanced nutrient loading in septic leach fields
during this period of increased septic stress (COVID-19 and weather related)
will drive shifts in quantity and composition of organic matter in soil and soil
water, along with shifts in overall biogeochemical cycling. This research
project will address three objectives: 1. Estimate the impact of leach fields on
soil and soil water biogeochemistry using a comparative approach. 2. Identify
potential hotspots of change in nutrients and soil organic matter with enough
spatial and temporal resolution to generate larger-scale hotspot predictions. 3.
Estimate potential nutrient and organic matter loading being delivered to water
bodies from related stress in septic system functioning and to septic system
maintenance. By investigating the impacts of extreme weather events and
increased septic system demand, this work will provide critical insights to
shifts in soil water and related aquatic nutrient loading. Understanding these
shifts will provide local governments information related to long-term use of
septic systems, and management challenges related to future climate regimes. The
PIs anticipate working with local agencies and outreach specialists to develop
new septic educational material to be distributed at the annual Athens Water
Festival, taking advantage of an on-going collaboration with Clarke County. The
PI is a new researcher, and one graduate student will be directly involved in
the project and will be trained in a wide selection of field and laboratory
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.