* 2035007
* EAGER: MXene Sorbents for Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Yury Gogotsi, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic is a major public health crisis affecting millions of
individuals, many of whom present with a constellation of symptoms and multiple
organ system involvement. Early evidence has suggested that COVID-19 causes
direct kidney injury, which is present in approximately 30 to 40% of
hospitalized patients. COVID-19 also disproportionately afflicts people with
underlying kidney disease. When kidney injury is severe, dialysis treatments are
required to remove toxins that build up in the bloodstream. Unfortunately,
typical dialysis treatments are resource-intensive and require several hundreds
of liters of specialized fluid (dialysate) per treatment. At the height of the
pandemic in New York City, reports revealed that supplies of dialysate were
dangerously depleted, leading to rationing of dialysis care for hospitalized
patients. To address the limitations of the current state-of-the-art dialysis
treatment methods, this project will investigate and design novel toxin-removing
(sorbent) materials as a potential alternative dialysis technology. The goal is
to reduce the amount of fluid necessary for dialysis and advance progress toward
in-home or wearable dialysis therapies. The outcome of the research will
directly benefit the health and well-being of individuals requiring dialysis as
a result of COVID-19-related illness or otherwise. Postdoctoral, graduate, and
undergraduate students will participate in conducting the research, gaining
technical experience as well as developing professional skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from both the Interfacial Engineering program
of the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems in the Engineering Directorate and the Ceramics program of the Division
of Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, the
investigators will examine whether MXenes, 2D materials with unique adsorption
properties, can regenerate dialysate by removing toxins that accumulate during
kidney failure. The investigators will first test the adsorption properties of
biocompatible, titanium-based MXenes and, subsequently, determine the adsorption
mechanism and amounts of ions and biomolecules that can be removed from aqueous
solutions as a function of uremic toxin concentration. For the most promising
MXene, the volume and weight of MXenes required to clear uremic toxins and ions
at a specified flow weight will be determined. Finally, the investigators will
examine the effect of an applied electric potential on MXene
adsorption/desorption of uremic toxins. The goal of the latter objective is to
increase adsorption characteristics and regenerate the MXene for re-use, making
it an ideal material to address critical dialysate shortages during the COVID-19
pandemic and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.