* 2035359
* NSF CONVERGENCE ACCELERATOR: Improving Online Education Through Technology, Research, And Data
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Scott Crossley, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 08/31/2021
* USD 99,220.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has exponentially accelerated the growth of online
educational technology. Digital platforms are seeing a 10 fold increase in
users. Still, many current educational technologies have weak approaches to
instruction, and they do not leverage basic research on learning, have a culture
of continuous improvement, meet the needs of diverse learners, or leverage the
growing power of &lt;br/&gt;computers. This conference will provide ideas for
deliverables around potential use-cases and prototypes as well as lay the
groundwork for future collaborations across a variety of disciplines to
research, develop, and refine effective and equitable remote educational
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring together experts in
industry and fields such as education, cognitive science, and technology to
identify barriers and solutions to delivering high-quality online education.
These collaborations will inform best practices in educational technology design
and generate future development and testing. Topics such leveraging AI/ML or new
modes of platform design will be key components of the discussions that take
place at this conference, along with a look at what types deliverables can be
derived from applying these new approaches to online
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.