* 2035122
* Calcium Phosphate Mineralization of Hydrogels, their Microstructure and Mechanical Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Rosa Espinosa-Marzal, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2023
* USD 420,359.00

This grant supports research that advances knowledge of the manufacturing
process promoting both the progress of science and national health. Every year,
over half a million patients need bone defect repairs in the U.S. and advanced
manufacturing methods of materials for bone replacement and regeneration are
needed. A promising method is the use of calcium phosphate mineralization of
hydrogel materials. Calcium phosphate is the mineral component of bone and
mineralized hydrogels could yield both suitable biomimetic properties and
mechanical strength as a bone defect replacement material. Despite the
significant advance in understanding mineralization, knowledge of the relation
between the mineralization pathway, the microstructure and the mechanical
response of these hybrid materials is still lacking, which hinders advances in
manufacturing science. This grant supports fundamental research to provide that
needed knowledge for the development of mineralization processes of hydrogels
that allow control of their structure-mechanical property relation. The gained
knowledge will be applicable to advance manufacturing of biomaterials via
abiotic mineralization for bone replacement. Furthermore, the gained insight
will be also relevant to control biotic mineralization pathways, and hence, for
bone regeneration based on tissue engineering. Therefore, results from this
research will benefit the U.S. society. This research involves several
disciplines including materials science and engineering, chemistry, and
mechanics and will contribute to the development of workforce in the U.S. The
multi-disciplinary research will help broaden participation of underrepresented
groups in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research is to
comprehend, quantify and model the relation between mineralization pathways of
calcium phosphate in the presence of amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC)
precursors, the microstructure of the mineralized hydrogel and its mechanical
response. This grant supports the research that will elucidate i) how the
mineralization pathway is affected by the presence of ACC in the hydrogels, ii)
the relation between polymer properties (charge density, chemical crosslinks vs.
physical entanglements and self-assembly capability), mineralization mechanisms
and microstructure, iii) the effect of the solution chemistry on the
mineralization rate, and iv) the relation between microstructure and rheology of
mineralized hydrogels. The findings of this work will be used to develop a
conceptual framework to predict strengthening mechanisms of hydrogels via
calcium phosphate mineralization as a function of solution composition and
hydrogel properties. Experiments are designed to examine specific underlying
mechanisms and test the posed hypotheses concerning issues such as the initial
formation of a liquid-phase precursor en route to mineralization, the induced
polymer-mineral interaction strength, and the nanoparticle aggregation in the
hydrogel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.