* 2035367
* Measuring and Modeling the Impact of Dynamic Trust in Automated Vehicles on Driver Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Ranjana Mehta, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 04/30/2023
* USD 648,056.00

Motor vehicle crashes cause over 35,000 deaths and almost 3 million injuries per
year. Automated vehicle technologies have emerged as a promising mechanism to
prevent these crashes, to increase personal mobility, and to lower emissions.
Delivery on these promises has been limited by a growing public concern over the
safety of automated vehicles, particularly during transfers of control between
automated systems and human drivers. Trust between human drivers and automated
systems is a central concern during these interactions. Prior research in human-
automation trust has established that the safety and performance of human-
machine systems requires calibrated trust—a state where a human driver’s trust
in an automated system matches the system’s capabilities. Trust calibration in
automated vehicles is an elusive challenge because of limitations in trust
measurement and methods that illuminate the impact of technology design
decisions on trust and driver behavior. This project will promote the progress
of science and advance the national health by advancing an understanding of
human-automation trust. Specifically, the project will address the limitations
of existing trust measures, model trust and driver behavior, and determine how
autonomous vehicles that incorporate trust calibration models can influence
dynamic trust and driving behavior. The approach will provide guidelines and
technology design recommendations that could significantly reduce the human
lives lost and injuries associated with vehicle crashes. Broader impacts of the
work include undergraduate and graduate course development, focused research
opportunities for underrepresented undergraduates at Texas A&amp;M University,
as well as student-leg outreach activities to local high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will consist of three phases designed
to (1) develop a novel and objective measure of dynamic trust using real-time
measures of neural activation during AV interactions, (2) model driver
interactions with automated vehicles along the spectrum of dynamic trust, and
(3) validate the trust measure and driver behavior model with a trust
calibration intervention-based driving simulation experiment. The measure
development will be supported by data from human subjects studies in which
drivers in a simulated automated vehicle will encounter a series of realistic
driving scenarios designed to modulate trust in the system while physiological,
neurological, behavioral, and subjective measures are collected. Neurological
data will be analyzed with regression and connectivity analysis methods to
identify correlates with trust states validated by the physiological and
subjective measures. The correlates will be used to train and test novel process
models of driver trust and responses to automation events that extend existing
driver decision-making and control frameworks. The models and measure will be
validated in a second driving simulation study including a trust calibration
intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.