* 2035215
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: Socioresilient Infrastructure: Precision Materials, Assemblages, and Systems
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Christine Ortiz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 07/31/2021
* USD 97,067.00

This project will develop and convene a cross-sector and cross-disciplinary
workshop focused on “Socioresilient Infrastructure: Precision Materials,
Assemblages, and Systems.” Infrastructure is foundational to supporting a
healthy, inclusive, sustainable, and prosperous nation and society. There is an
urgent need for modernization, innovation, maintenance, repair, and replacement
of infrastructure, and, in addition, the development of infrastructure which
supports the ability of human communities to cope with and adapt to stresses and
shocks such as social, political, environmental, or economic change. Currently,
there is an acute amplification of new risks and vulnerabilities, and an
opportunity to consider infrastructure as a research and design process grounded
in equity to shift infrastructure from an extractive (resources and labor) to
regenerative (sustainable and equitable) modality. This workshop will involve
cross-sector engagement and will bring together leaders from academia, industry
(i.e. established and startup companies in the materials, infrastructure, and
construction industry, materials and infrastructure-focused venture capital
firms), non-profit community-based organizations, philanthropy, and government
entities (e.g. municipalities, smart cities initiatives, etc.). The merging of
ideas, new computational and manufacturing technologies, research methods,
across disparate disciplines will not only lead to innovation and
commercialization, but advances in the development of equitable, inclusive, and
sustainable innovation and commercialization of socioresilient infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop aims to advance a technical framework for
the acceleration of use-inspired convergence research in this area of national
importance by integrating exciting advances across length scales from materials
(materials science and engineering, chemistry, and mechanical engineering) to
assemblages (civil, structural, and environmental engineering, architecture, art
and design) to systems (engineering systems, computer science and engineering,
urban studies and planning including civic design and engagement). Broad
technical topic areas will include emerging approaches to socioresilient
materials design, structural engineering, and intelligent infrastructure
systems. It will also incorporate cross-cutting humanistic and socially-focused
research in material culture, social justice, community-based design at the
margins, environmental and social life cycle assessment, sociotechnical and
sociological analysis (history, social sciences, including science, technology,
and society studies). This workshop will advance transformative convergent,
inclusive, and cross-disciplinary research and education focused on
socioresilient infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.