* 2035264
* COVID-19 and the Role of the Immune System in Cardiac Function and Pathology
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Wendy Liu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 09/30/2023
* USD 563,168.00

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has become a worldwide public health
emergency in 2020. Although it primarily targets the lungs, it also affects the
heart. Indeed, COVID-19 compromises the heart’s ability to generate sufficient
force to pump oxygenated blood throughout the body. This can lead to heart
muscle abnormalities and heart failure. However, the mechanisms that cause these
complications remain unclear. One possible cause is hypoxia, which is decreased
available oxygen for the heart muscle, combined with an overstimulated immune
system. Thus, the objective of this work is to develop a novel immuno-heart chip
to elucidate the relationship between cardiac biomechanics and the combined
affliction of hypoxia and an overactive immune system. If successful, this
system will lead to a greater fundamental understanding of the reciprocal
interactions between heart and immune cells, in conjunction with their
environmental factors. The results will be applicable to healthy cardiac
function and also to the COVID-19-related cardiac complications seen clinically.
This understanding will spark conversation towards potential immune targets and
novel therapies that may preserve the heart’s mechanical function during and
after COVID-19 infection. The project will also promote interest in scientific
research among undergraduate and high-school students through outreach programs.
Specifically, these students will be engaged with the scientific study at the
interface of COVID-19 research and cardio-immune engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is known that immune cells, predominantly macrophages,
are recruited from circulation to participate in inflammation and healing during
hypoxic myocardial damage. Overactivation of macrophages by COVID-19-induced
cytokine storm adds further complexity to deciphering cardio-immune dynamics in
vivo. The research team will investigate cardiomyocyte phenotype (morphology and
architecture) and function (contractility and electrophysiology) in a variety of
culture conditions. This project will result in the first heart-chip to
incorporate an immune component and oxygen gradient generator. This
transformative platform will be able to simulate a multi-system response to
COVID-19 conditions (silent hypoxia, microvascular dysfunction induced ischemia,
and systemic hyperinflammation) and advance fundamental understanding of
cardiomyocyte-macrophage interactions and the associated cardiac mechanics in
healthy and pathological tissues. The compatibility of this platform with both
rodent and human cell lines will elucidate species differences between rodent
and human cardiac mechanics, improving our understanding of the rodent cardiac
model. The research team will quantify macrophage recruitment and migration in
response to hypoxic cardiac tissue and hyperinflammatory conditions and changes
in cardiomyocyte function in response to macrophage presence and efferocytosis
of injured cardiomyocytes. These studies will elucidate the dynamics of normal
and COVID-19-affected cardiac stress generation and provide a foundational
resource for further testing of potential mechanisms of and interventions for
COVID-19-induced induced cardiac injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.