* 2035610
* SHF: EAGER: Deep High Level Synthesis Via Simultaneous Optimization across Multiple Domains of the VLSI CAD Flow
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Shantanu Dutt, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Modern chip or Very Large Scale Integrated Circuit (VLSI) design is an
enormously complex technical endeavor, so much so, that it is done in 7-8 stages
ranging from high-level synthesis to logic synthesis to verification to
placement and routing. Each stage is performed using sophisticated computer-
aided design (CAD) software tools. Chip design entails considerations of many
metrics like power consumption, chip-area/cost, performance/speed, reliability
in terms of, say, avoiding temperature hot spots that can ruin chip
functionality, and chip yield (percentage of chips correctly functioning in the
presence of fabrication variability that can throw off specifications on metrics
like speed). Generally, one of the metrics, typically power or cost, needs to be
optimized, and specifications or constraints satisfied on the others. In current
methodology, CAD tools for different stages work in silos, considering only a
small subset of the metrics, and unaware of the possible effect of later stages
on these metrics. This results in sub-optimal or even incorrect decisions in
earlier stages with regard to some metrics. These in turn lead to final chip
designs that are significantly less optimal than what they can be or that
violate specifications. The latter requires redesign that wastes precious person
hours of highly technical work. The goal of this project is to remedy these
problems by taking various late-stage design decisions (possibly approximately)
in one of the earliest stages, high-level synthesis (HLS), so that: a) there are
reasonably accurate estimations of almost all metrics of interest for better HLS
decisions, and b) there is optimization across a richer space of simultaneously
considered multi-stage/domain design points. Such an HLS stage is called “deep
HLS”. A broader impact of this project can be the development of many thousands
of environmentally friendly electronic products that use significantly lower
power-consuming and higher quality chips designed using deep HLS tools.
Furthermore, the new optimization algorithms developed for deep HLS will be
general and sophisticated enough to tackle other complex problems in science,
technology and business applications. Students will be exposed to the practical
utilities of our work in existing graduate courses on optimization and VLSI CAD,
and via undergraduate research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides the traditional
design points of scheduling and binding in HLS, other design points from later
domains to be simultaneously acted on during HLS include floorplanning, dynamic
voltage scaling, and effective power-island formation for power-gating via idle-
time clustering in functional units. However, deep HLS is an extremely complex
discrete optimization problem (DOP) that is beyond the reach of current
approaches such as branch-and-cut and simulated annealing. To enable effective
and efficient realization of deep HLS, a recent discrete optimization technique
called "discretized network flow" (DNF) designed in the PI's lab will be
leveraged. DNF solves DOPs by iteratively executing classical min-cost network
flow (NF), a continuous and hence fast solver, augmented by some discretization
requirements that the flow needs to satisfy in order to obtain legal solutions
to DOPs. The DNF method is a good choice due to its time efficiency, and its
ability to model several design points, multiple constraints and the
optimization function in a unified network flow structure. It can thus optimize
the chosen objective under multiple constraint satisfaction by considering all
relevant design points simultaneously across the entire design. However, it will
be necessary to augment DNF for solving a highly complex problem such as deep
HLS for both better efficiency and near-optimality. This project will thus
develop: a) needed significant algorithmic advances in DNF, and b) DNF graph
models of various complex deep HLS sub-problems that can then be stitched
together to form a full deep-HLS representation. A successful completion of this
project is expected to push final chip designs to higher levels of efficacy in
multiple metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.