* 2035558
* RAPID: Mechanisms of Polymerization Catalyzed by the SARS-CoV-2 RNA Dependent RNA Polymerase
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Aaron Lucius, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The research project seeks to fill a fundamental gap in our knowledge of how RNA
dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) accurately transcribes the genome of the SARS-
CoV-2 virus that has caused the COVID-19 pandemic. The goals of the project are
to determine the mechanisms whereby the essential RdRp enzyme and several
collaborating partner proteins function in the viral life cycle. The research
outcomes will enable better understanding of how current antiviral nucleotide
analogs such as Remdesivir inhibit RdRp function, as well as development of new
therapeutic strategies against COVID-19 going forward. The project will also
support training of two Ph.D. students, both of whom are from underrepresented
groups in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transient state kinetic approaches
are planned to interrogate the nucleotide addition reaction catalyzed by SARS-
CoV-2 RdRp, nsp12, and the essential cofactors nsp7, nsp8, and nsp14. A central
hypothesis to be tested is that the nsp14 exonuclease is essential for increased
fidelity of the nsp12 polymerase. To address this hypothesis, the kinetic
mechanisms of correct and incorrect nucleotide incorporation catalyzed by
nsp12/nsp7/nsp8 complex as well as removal of incorrect nucleotides catalyzed by
nsp14 will be determined. The resulting mechanistic knowledge and methods
development will better define these proteins as targets for drug
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, using
funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES)
Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.