* 2035051
* Ferroelectric Gradient Microfoams as High-Performance Self-Powered Flexible Pressure Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Sulin Zhang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

Flexible pressure sensors hold great application potential in intelligence
robots, biomimetic prosthetics and health monitoring. To mimic human skinâ€™s
perception of pressure, it is essential that a flexible pressure sensor must be
applicable to a broad pressure range aside of its high sensitivity. However,
while various transduction mechanisms covering a broad pressure range have been
adopted in pressure detection, an unreconciled tradeoff exists between high
sensitivity and a broad working range of pressures in the current flexible
pressure sensors. This fundamental tradeoff limits the practical applications of
the flexible pressure sensors in various healthcare and wearable electronics.
This project proposes fundamental research for the development of a new class of
flexible ferroelectric sensors that will resolve the tradeoffs. Findings from
this project will pave the way toward flexible tactile sensors with high
sensitivity over a broad detection range, multi-modal detection capability, and
self-powered characteristic, together with remarkable mechanical stability and
durability. The educational goal is to foster the multidisciplinary training
environment for undergraduate and graduate students and build next-generation
workforce who will be well prepared to undertake new scientific and engineering
challenges. This project will promote the minority involvement and participation
in science and engineering research at Penn
State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectric microfoams are mechanically flexible
and highly mechanosensitive. However, the pressure sensors based on the foams
with uniform porosity lose detection sensitivity beyond the critical load at
which the microskeletons in the foam buckle. To overcome this limitation, this
research team aims to develop high-performance gradient microfoam sensors. With
gradient porosity, the detrimental buckling mode can be shielded by
simultaneously activating other deformation modes in the ferroelectric foam,
thereby enabling both high sensitivity and broad detection range. An integrated
approach, involving multiphysics modeling, materials synthesis, and
comprehensive characterization of mechanical, piezoelectric, and sensing
properties, will be adopted to fulfill the goals. The multiphysics modeling will
identify a set of key parameters that govern mechanical flexibility, detection
sensitivity and operation range, which will guide the design and optimization of
the gradient foam sensors. The proposed synthesis approach involves the
fabrication of the microfoam with gradient porosity followed by grafting of
molecular ferroelectric crystals onto the foam. The performance of the sensors
will be characterized and demonstrated at different loading regimes and loading
modes. This in-depth understanding and characterization will lead to the
processing of the gradient ferroelectric microfoam sensors with unprecedented
precision and performance. Knowledge generated within this project will also
foster transformative progress in broadening applications of molecular
ferroelectrics, a newly developed class of electroactive materials, in sensors
and other electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.