* 2035478
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Digitizing Early Cretaceous dinosaur trackways to preserve the geological heritage of central Texas
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Daniel Lehrmann, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 21,745.00

Dinosaur tracks and trackways provide invaluable information about ancient
lifeforms and are of great interest to the general public. Yet, increasing
urbanization jeopardizes their preservation. This is especially true in central
Texas where the metropolitan population grows by 1.7% yearly, and puts dinosaur
tracksites exposed in rural areas and creeks at risk. Other sources of
destruction include transient flood and weathering enhanced by climate change.
This proposal will preserve three important sites in a digital format using
advanced imagery techniques and will include analysis of collected rock samples
to provide information about the landscape where these dinosaurs lived. New data
will be integrated into the Witte Museum in San Antonio, Texas, where it can be
used for scientific research and to educate the general public on preservation
best practice and the ecology of life in central Texas about 110 million years
ago. This project will engage researchers from four institutions with a strong
track record on the topic and they will mentor non-traditional graduate and
undergraduate students to solidify their interest in the geosciences and retain
them in the major. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will inform on the
depositional environment and the conditions that promoted the preservation of
trace fossils. The digitization of each site using photogrammetric techniques
will be complemented by detailed analysis of rock samples using microscopy and
geochemistry. Results will evaluate whether dinosaur tracks are preferentially
preserved in shallow marine sediments deposited during periods of sea-level
fall, when their frequent subaerial exposure under a hot and dry climate favored
their early lithification and preservation. Alternatively, preservation may be
enhanced by rapid burial with clay-rich sediment in a hot and humid environment.
Geochemical and petrographic data also will be used to test these hypotheses.
The integration of all results in a database available to researchers and the
general public will showcase the cultural heritage of Texas and serve as a basis
for future research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.