* 2035732
* A tail of plasticity: developmental endocrinology of induced tadpole tail growth and resorption
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Daniel Buchholz, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 02/29/2024
* USD 479,887.00

Developing animals including humans respond to environmental conditions by
changing the level of hormones present in the blood, which then alters
developmental outcomes affecting health and fitness. Significantly, hormone
actions on developmental physiological processes are complex, involving multiple
hormones acting on one or more organs to achieve organismal-level responses. The
goal of this project is to reveal how, at the molecular level, specific hormones
determine which proteins are made and which development outcomes are achieved in
the process of tail growth and tail resorption during metamorphosis in frog
tadpoles. Such basic knowledge is critical for evaluating how changes in
environmental conditions, such as climate change and the presence of various
chemicals, may affect organismal morphology and physiology and may threaten
human health. By identifying novel genes and hormone interactions, this research
will open new avenues to study how and why individuals may respond differently
to changing environmental conditions. In the course of these studies, graduate
and undergraduate students will be trained in basic research with applications
relating to amphibian declines and climate change. An undergraduate laboratory
course to teach hands-on skills in gene disruption technology, and hands-on
research experiences for high school students, will be developed. These
educational activities will support the goal of creating a well-prepared,
innovative scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amphibian tadpoles respond
to the environment with life-or-death changes in growth and development mediated
by hormone signaling. A critical knowledge gap exists as to how hormones act at
the molecular level to determine physiological and developmental outcomes that
affect individual fitness. The objective of this proposal is to explain how
glucocorticoid hormones act on Xenopus tadpole tails to promote either an
increase or decrease in tail size. Towards this end, the proposed research will
identify the tissues, hormone receptors, cell changes, gene regulation, and
hormone interactions involved. The central hypothesis is that alternative tail
responses to glucocorticoids stem from receptor-specific actions on tail
tissues, as governed by thyroid hormone signaling. In the course of testing this
hypothesis, the research will: 1) identify glucocorticoid target tissues in the
tail by identifying which cells express glucocorticoid receptor(s) during tail
growth and resorption, 2) determine the requirement for glucocorticoid
receptor(s) in regulating growth and resorption, and 3) examine tissue-specific
and receptor-specific glucocorticoid-response gene regulation as influenced by
thyroid hormone signaling. These analyses will use glucocorticoid-receptor
mutant tadpoles to show receptor-specific actions regulating altered tail size.
Prior lack of basic molecular genetic tools (i.e., glucocorticoid-receptor
mutants and associated response genes) has impaired progress to explain how
stress during development affects phenotypes in frogs and other vertebrates.
Knowledge of the tissues, receptors, genes, and thyroid hormone-dependence of
glucocorticoid response gene regulation will advance the long-term goal of
explaining how the environment, via altered hormone levels, modulates
developmental processes and results in phenotypic outcomes that shape health and
fitness. The educational broader impacts of this research include training of
graduate and undergraduate research students, development of a new undergraduate
course in gene-manipulation technology, and providing hands-on activities for
local high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.