* 2035518
* Towards Ab Initio Prediction of Superconducting Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Elena Roxana Margine, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research, computation, and
education aimed to develop and employ advanced computational methods for
modeling superconducting materials at the atomic scale. Superconductivity, the
resistance-free flow of electrical current below a certain critical temperature,
is one of the most spectacular manifestations of quantum mechanics on the scale
of everyday life. This property is being exploited in technological
applications, including energy storage and distribution, medicine, electronics,
and transportation.&lt;br/&gt;Within this project, new functionalities will be
implemented in the electron-phonon Wannier (EPW) code, which is an open-source
software package distributed as an integral part of the widely used Quantum
ESPRESSO platform. The developed capabilities will enable the investigation of
trends in known superconducting materials and the identification of new
candidate superconducting materials through the use of high-performance
computing. The methods will be applied to a class of two-dimensional materials
called transition metal dichalcogenides to provide insights into the mechanism
of superconductivity in these important materials which have been the subject of
recent fundamental and application-driven research.&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports training of graduate and undergraduate students in computational
materials science and high-performance computing; this will contribute to the
development of a skilled workforce for advancing cyberinfrastructure and
computational materials research. To help attract a new generation of scientists
into the STEM disciplines, the PI’s team will take part in outreach activities
organized for elementary school students in the upstate New York area. All new
computational features will be made freely available to reach a wider community
of physicists, chemists, and materials
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNCIAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports research, computation, and education with the aim to apply
theoretical/computational methods for modeling superconductors without resorting
to adjustable parameters. Achieving quantitative agreement with experiment in
present-day theoretical studies of superconducting properties is notoriously
difficult because of electron-electron interactions, spin fluctuations,
plasmonic effects, electron-phonon vertex corrections, and other factors that
are commonly neglected or inadequately included. &lt;br/&gt;Within the proposed
project, new advanced functionalities will be introduced into the open-source
EPW code to enable predictive calculations of superconducting properties of
materials. The developed methodology will be validated by performing
calculations of the superconducting properties of bulk and two-dimensional
transition metal dichalcogenides, a family of compounds that hosts charge
density wave, superconducting, and topologically non-trivial phases. An
important unresolved question in TMDs is why the calculated critical temperature
and zero-temperature superconducting gap tend to be systematically overestimated
compared to the experimental values.&lt;br/&gt;The developed tools will be
released under the open-source GNU GPL to reach a wider community of scientists.
The PI will train graduate and undergraduate students in materials modeling and
programming, and co-organize workshops to teach the underlying theory and
optimal usage of the EPW code. Finally, in order to raise middle school
students' interest in science, the PI’s group will give demonstrations as part
of the Science Shows organized by the Binghamton University’s Physics Outreach
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.