* 2035921
* SBIR Phase I:  Organic Glass Scintillator Integration into 64-channel Pixelated Array
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Joseph Carlson, BLUESHIFT OPTICS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2022
* USD 255,788.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide government and regulatory bodies
with better information gathering tools related to identification of special
nuclear material. Due to the limitations of current radiation detection
materials, physicists tasked with developing the next generation detector
products often have no commercial supplier. This project will develop special
detectors that are low-cost, rugged, and amenable to large deployment. By
leveraging advancements in amorphous scintillator research and materials
science, this project will enable additive manufacturing of the next generation
of radiation detection tools to improve global nuclear
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project develops high-efficiency neutron discriminating scintillator arrays
capable of coupling to 64-channel detectors for the purposes of neutron event
reconstruction. The additive manufacturing of organic glasses has significant
challenges, such as bubble nucleation of dissolved gasses, stress cracking due
to differences in coefficients of thermal expansion, and destabilization of the
metastable glassy state. Any of these failure modes would lead to the loss of
optical integrity required for high fidelity neutron event reconstruction. To
fabricate segmented arrays of this type, the base formulation of organic glass
scintillator material will be altered to adjust the glass transition
temperature, and enable these materials to be cast into rigid molds. Through
this approach highly complex pixelated arrays can be rapidly produced while
maintain high performance. Development will focus on low surface energy
additives and covalent modifications of the fluorophores to prevent defects
during casting and annealing, as well as mold materials, surface preparation,
and thermal transport properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.