* 2035153
* RAPID: Time-critical Airborne Measurements to Quantify Ozone Impacts of Emissions Changes during the COVID-19 Pandemic Response in the United States
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Eric Kort, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 199,418.00

This RAPID project will investigate the atmospheric impacts of the large changes
in pollutant emissions due to the massive social and economic slowdown of
activity related to the Covid-19 pandemic in the U.S. The research includes the
conduct of systematic light aircraft flights to survey urban and industrial
emissions sources in the atmospheres of Denver CO and Houston TX to assess the
effects of the emissions changes on the production of ozone. Quantifying the
impact of such a large emissions change on urban ozone formation rates and
yields provides a rigorous and nearly unprecedented check on the models used for
U.S. regulatory and research purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will
conduct twenty 5-hour research flights surveying concentrations of ozone (O3),
nitrogen oxides (NOx), carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO2), methane
(CH4), and water vapor (H2O) in the atmosphere over the cities of Houston TX and
Denver CO. The scientists will collaborate with both academic and government
modelers to infuse the unique data from this study into a 3-D WRF-Chem research
chemical transport model (CTM) to challenge and improve the representation of
ozone chemistry, both for this acute situation and under routine emissions
scenarios. Historical, highly detailed, research-quality atmospheric data are
available for both cities, including data from recent field campaigns in Denver
and in Houston. Both cities represent tractable area sources appropriate for
study using light aircraft. Houston and the surrounding areas are home to the
majority of the U.S. gasoline refining capacity, as well as significant
petrochemical industrial capacity. Denver has a substantial number of mobile
sources and the region hosts a high level of oil and natural gas activity. This
research will provide a benchmark for chemical rates and yields in models. The
project takes advantage of this unique opportunity to assess the effects of
dramatically changed emissions on ozone production and will gather the data
needed to challenge and improve regulatory and research models in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.