* 2035297
* RAPID:NSF-BSF: Analysis of the spreading patterns and the efficiency of quarantine measures for COVID-19, based on available world-wide spatio-temporal data
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Lazaros Gallos, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2022
* USD 197,100.00

The recent COVID-19 pandemic has created an urgent need to understand the spread
of coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). The special features of this virus and the
unprecedented global response present potentially novel paths of disease
transmission that have not been observed in modern times. These paths create
continuously evolving spatial and temporal patterns of observable properties,
such as number of infections or virus-related deaths. Using tools from
statistical physics and network science, this project seeks to understand the
special features of this complex behavior and to compare these patterns in
different geographical areas. The availability of high-resolution data will
enable the construction of computational models which will attempt to explain
these patterns in terms of quarantine measures, timing of such measures, and
environmental conditions. Such an understanding could assess the efficiency of
quarantine measures implemented around the world and also identify the effects
of temperature and humidity. This project aims to make these mathematical and
computational tools be readily available at a next possible outbreak wave and to
allow immediate analysis of epidemiological data. The outcome of this research
has the potential of providing early detection of geographical areas in high
risk, informing thus the decisions of policy makers. This project also provides
significant opportunities for the training of STEM
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will focus on the scaling and
correlation behavior of epidemic characteristics between different areas. The
scaling analysis will study how the observed quantities change for different
scales of time and space, characterized by power-law exponents. Different
exponents indicate different propagation patterns which can provide information
about the effectiveness of location and timing of tests and enforcement of
quarantine measures. Similarly, the extent of spatial correlations and their
time evolution are key indicators of spreading patterns. The analysis of the
correlation lengths and correlation times can indicate how close the virus
spreading process is to criticality. This is particularly important because
critical systems are in general much more vulnerable to rapid spreading. The
data analysis will be complemented by appropriate mathematical and simulation
epidemic models to test the influence of population and environmental factors on
the empirical data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Ecology
and Evolution of Infectious Diseases Program in the Division of Environmental
Biology, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.