* 2035472
* TRTech-PGR: Maize Hub: An Open-source Simulation Platform &amp; Resources Integrating Extensive Field Trial Data, DNA Sequences, and Historical Weather Records
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2025
* Shawn Kaeppler, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Genetic-by-environment (G×E) interactions are a major source of variation in
plant phenotypes. This makes breeding for target environments exceptionally
challenging because future environmental conditions are mainly uncertain. To
achieve fast genetic gains, breeding programs need to advance genotypes with
limited years of testing. Thus, in the early stages of breeding, many cultivars
are selected without testing them under weather conditions (e.g., drought, cold,
or heat stress) that may critically affect their performance. To address the
longstanding problem of predicting cultivars' phenotypes under largely uncertain
weather conditions, this project will develop a computer simulation platform
that will integrate field trial data, DNA sequences, and historical weather
records into models that will enable researchers and breeders to predict plant
phenotypes under likely weather conditions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An
interdisciplinary team of data scientists, maize geneticists and breeders will
use reaction-norm models and Deep Learning, a methodology that has proven to be
very effective at capturing complex patterns in high-dimensional data, to learn
G×E patterns from DNA sequences, environmental covariates, and phenotype data
from the Genomes to Fields (G2F) project, the largest publicly initiated and led
G×E research initiative. The models will be used together with historical
weather data, to simulate and predict maize performances for a diverse set of
maize hybrids at many locations within the U.S. The simulated data will then be
used to uncover genetic regions underlying G×E, with findings validated using
data generated in trials with controlled weather conditions. With respect to
broader impacts, the project will provide interdisciplinary training in data
science and genomics to students and postdoctoral fellows and will leverage
existing programs to provide outreach for high school students and the general
public. All project outcomes will be accessible through a dedicated project
database and publicly available long-term repositories. All software will be
released as open-source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.