* 2035717
* FMSG: Rapidly Repurposing and Scaling Assembly Lines Through the Co-design of Tooling and Controls of Robotic Work Cells
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jeffrey Lipton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 515,997.00

This project allows re-purposing and re-scaling of manufacturing production
lines to be done quickly and affordably. A typical manufacturing assembly line
is composed of a sequence of work cells, each requiring different mechanisms to
execute different processes. Automated production in this framework is often
inflexible â€“ a change in the production requires the time-consuming re-design
and expensive reprogramming of components. As a result, an automated assembly
line production is unable to respond to rapid changes in market needs. This not
only limits the speed of product updates and response to market dynamics, but
also impedes manufacturers from reacting quickly during a national emergency
when that flexibility is essential for a national response. This project changes
how assembly lines can be rapidly updated on the factory floor, focusing on two
specific but widely-used automated tasks, making assembly lines more intelligent
and responsive to the production of changing products lines, and contributing to
the goal of "manufacturing as a service."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops an efficient approach to co-design of task-specific tooling and
control, applicable in general for manufacturing systems, uniting digital
fabrication with digital assembly. The project focuses two assembly tasks, re-
orientation and insertion, with their co-design of tooling and controls as
cyber-physical sub-systems. The project draws upon the disciplines and
technologies for robotics, controller optimization, algorithmic design, software
and hardware, material science, mechanical engineering, and manufacturing
science and engineering. The project takes a model-based data-driven approach to
object manipulation, developing families of algorithms for co-design of tooling
and controls, using techniques from artificial intelligence and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.