* 2035680
* I-Corps: A Do-it-yourself (DIY) Social Robot Platform for Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics (STEAM) Education
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Guy Hoffman, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader/commercial impacts of this I-Corps project is the development of a
robotics platform that teaches the technical and creative aspects of engineering
through play-based learning. The multifaceted construction process that combines
robotics with crafts conveys that engineering draws from humanistic fields,
empowering users from diverse backgrounds to get involved in robot-building.
Beyond the robot’s physical construction, the interactive, behavior-authoring
process allows users to create robot behaviors without requiring programming
experience, while also learning about the data-driven mechanisms underlying the
robot’s behavior model. This intuitive play-based interaction teaches the
influence of user-provided data on machine learning systems that are becoming
increasingly ubiquitous in society (e.g., recommendation systems and
advertisements). The project empowering users to become more cognizant of the
role that robotics systems play in their lives. As a whole, the accessibility of
the platform, from its do-it-yourself design to the intuitive programming of its
behaviors, allows non-expert users to learn the various skills used in robot-
building.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of an accessible robotic construction platform. The process of designing and
creating robots is intensive and time-consuming. The construction projects are
often tailored towards robotics researchers and specific use cases. The proposed
technology is an accessible and replicable robot platform that is easy to
assemble and able to be customized for different applications. The technology’s
mechanical structure is made from flat components that are easy to manufacture
and assemble and uses minimal hardware throughout its construction. Creating
robot behaviors has traditionally relied on trained roboticists to manually
design preprogrammed actions. To address the repetitiveness of these canned
responses and the difficulty for end users to author behaviors, a behavior
generation workflow was developed that enables users to develop new robot
behaviors without a programming background. Users control the robot’s movements
through a smartphone application, which allows them to build a dataset of
behaviors to train a neural network model. This model may generate new realistic
behaviors, modify emotive features of existing behaviors, and/or translate user
inputs such as facial expressions and gestures into robot movements. This
technology furthers the accessibility of the platform by enabling the users
themselves to design the robot’s appearance and
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.