* 2035112
* RAPID: Impact of the Covid-19 Pandemic on the Biomedical Research Workforce: Productivity and Progress in Academia
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Christine Wood, Northwestern University at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 06/30/2023
* USD 118,433.00

The COVID-19 pandemic disrupted the biomedical research enterprise as
institutions across the country&lt;br/&gt;implemented workplace restrictions
following public health guidelines. Scientists are expected to continue to work
and achieve professional goals and milestones, while potentially
facing&lt;br/&gt;additional domestic responsibilities. While broad projections
can be made about the status of the research enterprise, it is unclear how these
restrictions and limitations will affect individual scientists across the
biomedical research spectrum. Further, with many institutions enacting policies
such as tenure-clock adjustments, institutional policy shifts may raise
expectations for “bouncing back” from work interruption without providing
additional structural support or guidance on managing an unprecedented
situation. It is likely that these experiences will vary not only by gender and
family status, but also by institutional type and career stage. The goal of this
project is to explore how the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the biomedical
research enterprise by examining the productivity and professional progress of
academic scientists. The objectives are: 1) To assess the perceived impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic on academic scientists at multiple timepoints; 2) To
determine if the perceived impact of the COVID-19 pandemic differs based on
gender, race/ethnicity, family status, career stage, or academic institution
type; and 3) To identify the structural or systemic factors which influenced
individual productivity and progress among a stratified sample of biomedical
scientists. These findings will have significant implications related to gender
equity within the biomedical workforce and may identify strategies to broaden
participation in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a mixed-methodology
approach, the project will develop and administer a cross-
sectional&lt;br/&gt;quantitative survey and conduct qualitative interviews.
Expected outcomes of the survey-study include&lt;br/&gt;summary statistics and
analysis of demographic information, family status, career stage, and type
of&lt;br/&gt;academic institution against data on institutional response and
support, work-family timing, and other&lt;br/&gt;variables. In-depth interviews
will further probe respondents’ reactions to the work interruptions posed
by&lt;br/&gt;COVID-19; experiences with work and family responsibilities;
perceptions of universities’ responses to&lt;br/&gt;the pandemic; and
prospective insights on long term impacts. Together, this work will provide a
data driven perspective on the impact of COVID-19 on scientists which can be
used to inform decision-making critical to sustaining the biomedical enterprise
within the United States. The biomedical research enterprise is engaged in
synergistic efforts to address the COVID-19 pandemic at unprecedented speed.
Thus, it is critical to monitor the ways in which the research community
functions throughout the pandemic in order to generate data which informs
research funding, policy, and practice. As women, minorities, and other
underrepresented groups in the biomedical workforce have traditionally faced
barriers to advancement, it is important to understand if and how
COVID-19-related disruptions might differentially affect these groups. Likewise,
this work will help identify the scientists left most professionally vulnerable
by the pandemic and may assist in development of equitable strategies to support
retention and advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.