* 2035584
* Collaborative Research: Interactions of Interlayered Nanoporous Graphene with Surrounding Water Molecules
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* SungWoo Nam, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 07/31/2024
* USD 540,000.00

Coating or surface engineering is ubiquitous in various industrial applications.
Coatings can be applied to the surfaces of various electronic devices, such as
microprocessors and organic light-emitting diode (OLED) displays, to prevent
their degradation or oxidation of electronic or organic components when in
contact with water molecules present in the atmosphere. Advances in coating, in
particular the incorporation of layers of nanomaterials, could enable
breakthroughs in robustness and novel functionalities. While an ideal design of
nanomaterials-based coating would take the form of defect-free, pore-free, and
nanometer-thin layers, practical implementations may be limited due to
manufacturing challenges. Therefore, it is critical to understand the
correlations between nanolayer thickness, defect statistics, and the
permeability of the coating. This research aims to employ atomically thin
graphene layers with controlled morphology and chemistry and their interlayer
configurations to advance our understanding of the correlation between stacking
configuration, defects, and permeability. New discoveries about the graphene-
water interactions will guide the design for novel advanced coatings that
protect electronic or organic devices from water vapor environments. This
research also aims to broaden nano-engineering education by engaging students
under-represented in STEM and high school students via summer research
opportunities, field trips, and symposia. In addition, several outreach
activities, including interactive lectures and hands-on activities will be
undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the performance of surface
coatings is severely limited by attendant nanoscale defects and/or pores, there
is a significant need for the precise control of diffusion through surface
coatings. Although several previous studies have proposed a promising framework
of multi-layered stacks, there are fundamental limitations in the control of
nanoscale defects, three-dimensional tortuosity, and surface wettability. To
address these challenges, this research project aims to study diffusion
transport through a new design of three-dimensionally, interlayered nanoporous
graphene stacks. This is based on the following premises. First, nano-confined
water molecules will behave differently than bulk water molecules, negatively
impacting the diffusion process. Second, precisely manufactured nanoporous
graphene stacks will enable the improvement of overall diffusion rates by
controlling the effective tortuosity and pore morphology with surface
wettability. To attain this the PIs will employ a combination of multi-level
simulation and experimental approaches to validate the multi-layer diffusion
theory. The successful completion of this research project will build a new
understanding about the diffusion physics based on interfacial science between
graphene and surrounding water molecules. The principal investigators plan to
create virtual lab tours and sessions for high school students by presenting
virtual hands-on activities. The PIs will engage underrepresented students in
the research project through various campus level activities, including the
California Alliance for Minority Participation (CAMP)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.