* 2035573
* EAGER: Movement of microplastics within and between ecosystems: influences on zooplankton feeding behavior, primary productivity and nutrient availability in freshwater systems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Martin Berg, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/29/2024
* USD 299,939.00

Increased global demand for plastic products in recent decades has greatly
increased the amount of plastic waste entering the environment. Most plastics
are persistent and will enter the environment at the end of their life cycle if
not recycled or reused. Up to 94% of manufactured plastics end up in landfills
or in the environment. In the environment, large plastic materials can be broken
down through physical and chemical processes into small particles (0.1 to 5 mm).
These microplastics can persist in the environment for long periods of time
where they can fundamentally change how organisms interact with each other and
with their physical environment. These changes can, in turn, change how
microplastics move between ecosystems, and their fate in the environment. This
has drawn the attention of scientists and environmental managers around the
world. The goals of this project are to advance understanding of how ecosystems
and communities of organisms respond to the presence of microplastics, and to
provide information in support of better management of plastic pollution and
problems arising from it. Moreover, this project will provide undergraduate and
graduate students with research and career training in the fields of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics. This project will also provide
opportunities for talented low-income high school students to participate in
research and gain an understanding of the potential environmental impacts of
plastic pollution, thus, enhancing a sense of environmental
stewardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will employ innovative designs
and approaches developed based on observations and results of previous research
to address two main objectives and test four detailed hypotheses. Objectives
include, 1) characterize the movement of microplastics across terrestrial and
aquatic ecosystems and 2) characterize the influence of algal colonization and
biofilm development on microplastics surfaces on particle deposition rate,
zooplankton feeding behavior and selectivity, phytoplankton community structure,
primary productivity, and nutrient availability in freshwater systems.
Hypotheses include, 1) deposition rates of suspended microplastics ingested and
egested by aquatic organisms will be faster than natural abiotic depositional
processes; 2) microplastics are transferred from aquatic to terrestrial
ecosystems via emerging aquatic insects ingested by birds; 3) algal colonization
and biofilm development on microplastic surfaces will increase deposition rates
of suspended microplastics, alter phytoplankton community structure and primary
productivity, and decrease nutrient availability in freshwater ecosystems; 4) in
the presence of biofilm-covered microplastics, zooplankton will change feeding
locations to areas of high concentrations of biofilm-covered microplastics and
selectively feeding on them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.