* 2035778
* Upgrade of an Infrared Spectrometer (with Electronics Replacement) for Quantitative Analysis, Focusing on H-species and Concentrations at Temperatures
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Anne Hofmeister, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2023
* USD 69,593.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). It will provide funds to upgrade a Fourier Transform
Infrared spectrometer (DA3-FTIR). The instrument covers a wide range of light
wavelengths and has accessories for high and low temperatures as well as high
pressure which makes the instrument useful in addressing an extensive range of
problems. Examples of the breadth of supported research are collaborative
studies in medicine (bone growth) and ongoing studies in astronomy (identifying
dust ejected from old stars). However, the primary focus of the instrument has
been on problems important to the geological, planetary and materials science.
The upgraded instrument will add to the infrastructure and will help advance
fundamental issues while providing opportunities for education and training. The
instrument has been used by students at all levels plus students of other
faculty at Washington U. and at U. Missouri. The laboratory plans to continue
probing the fundamental principles that govern the interaction of heat with
matter, and to apply these findings to the Earth and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existing Fourier Transform Infrared
spectrometer (DA3-FTIR) in this laboratory has been used in diverse and numerous
research projects since its funding by NSF three decades ago. The DA3-FTIR is a
high-end research instrument, with 5 pairs of detectors and beam-splitters that
altogether cover the far-IR to the visible. Accessories include a liquid helium
cryostat, heaters, and diamond anvil cells to acquire spectra from ~10 to 700 K
or at pressure to 50 GPa. Two IR-microscopes are used for very small samples.
This instrument is no longer maintained by its manufacturer. The problems are
largely electronic. Due to its popularity and robust mechanical components, a
small company has filled the market need by offering an upgrade, electronics
replacement, and support for this instrument. The upgraded instrument will add
to the infrastructure and will help advance fundamental issues in the geological
and planetary sciences. Ongoing and planned projects use this instrument and are
important to geophysics, volcanology, petrology, and planetary science.
Acquiring quantitative spectra vs frequency and T will permit extrapolating to
unattainable conditions and will improve understanding of the thermal state and
evolution of planets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.