* 2035954
* SBIR Phase I:  Electrochemically-Mediated Highly Selective SO2 Scrubbing
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,11/30/2021
* Alexander Reath, VERDOX, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2021
* USD 250,010.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project is through a compact and
efficient means of mitigating atmospheric pollution of sulfur dioxide (SO2), a
major human health and environmental hazard. Conventional wet scrubbers for SO2
removal are expensive to install and are highly limited by their large
footprint, reducing the practicality of their implementation for mobile or
space-limited applications. The proposed approach to SO2 capture uses
electricity to directly remove the contaminant from a gas stream, providing
significant improvements in energy efficiency and eliminating the need for
caustic chemicals inherent to conventional SO2 scrubbers. The need for
innovative solutions for SO2 removal is highlighted in the maritime shipping
industry, where recent legislation on SO2 emissions has created an immediate
need for technology that can be retrofitted into existing infrastructure on
cargo vessels. This project can potentially be extended to many applications
where electrical energy is supplied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed method of SO2 removal uses a technique known as electro-swing
adsorption (ESA), which uses a polymer-composite electrode containing an
electroactive species that can capture and release a target gas through
charge/discharge cycles. This technology has been demonstrated for CO2 capture,
but there are significant challenges associated with developing novel chemistry
for capture of SO2. Phase I research will focus on gaining a molecular
understanding of the electrochemical mechanism of SO2 reactivity. The binding
constant for the target gas can be ascertained as a function of the reduction
potential of the electroactive species, providing a method of selecting
optimized candidates for SO2 capture that are highly reactive and selective over
other gases present in exhaust streams, such as CO2. The absorption capacity of
the electroactive species will also be assessed using packed-bed absorption
columns to simulate an electro-swing adsorption
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.