* 2035845
* SBIR Phase II:  Decentralized Control and Optimization Platform for Advanced Microgrids
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Francisco Morocz Bazzani, Heila Technologies Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2023
* USD 999,597.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to accelerate the widespread adoption of
clean distributed energy resources (DERs) by developing and commercializing a
decentralized control and optimization platform capable of aggregating and
managing millions of independent energy assets connected across the U.S.
electric grid. The resulting end-to-end solution will enable private and public
project developers, as well as utilities to quickly commission and cost
effectively operate DER systems composed of solar arrays, batteries, generators,
fuel cells and many other kinds of energy assets in residential, commercial, and
industrial sites with complete confidence on the reliability, seamless grid
integration, and economic performance of the systems. By making it that much
easier and cheaper to own, integrate, and operate clean energy equipment, the
resulting solution will transform the energy industry from the ground up, using
DERs as the pillars of a new clean, resilient, and equitable
grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
II project will drastically simplify the way distributed energy resources (DER)
systems are commissioned, aggregated, and operated. Such deployments are complex
due to an endemic lack of standardization, the sheer number of key variables to
control and optimize, and the lack of modularity in conventional approaches.
Properly coordinating them as they continue to rapidly increase in number on the
grid requires a decentralized approach that puts the decision-making at the DER
level. The project consists of two stages: (1) A development phase, where the
algorithms will be integrated into a best-in-class solution, which will include
all the necessary end-user facing tools, cloud infrastructure, and edge devices
to enable full automation of deployments and satisfy technical requirements of
customers in the mainstream market; and (2) a demonstration phase, where the
resulting solution will be used at two different sites and benchmarked against
critical use cases to validate its benefits and leverage the results to scale up
market penetration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.