* 2035349
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: Inauthentic Behavior in Online and Digital Systems
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Austin Wright, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Chaitanya Baru
* 02/28/2022
* USD 99,175.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. This workshop
on Inauthentic Behavior in Online and Digital Systems will help identify topic
areas for new tracks in the NSF Convergence
Accelerator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together experts in
computer science and social science, from academia and industry, to discuss
issues at the intersection of behavioral and information sciences around the
theme of “inauthentic behavior’ in online and digital systems, the limitations
of current tools and approaches in combating this issue, and the need for new
approaches and tools in this area. Topics that will be discussed include
commercial use of inauthentic behavior as a gateway to deliberate information
attacks; limitations of using social media-based techniques alone to combat
inauthentic behavior; and gaps in our understanding of how the prevalent
inauthentic behavior influences consumers of information and the limitations of
traditional tools to combat this problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Online, digital
communications platforms can expose users to a variety of risks. The increased
dependence on digital platform due to COVID-19 further increases the
vulnerability of individuals and society to information attacks. By better
understanding the converging role of behavioral and information sciences in
facilitating information attacks one can begin the process of helping
information consumers deal with the attacks. The workshop will aim for strong
participation from underrepresented groups, with the goal of broadening the
inclusion of stakeholders and reaching all segments of society that may be
impacted by inauthentic behavior campaigns. The discussions and questions raised
throughout the workshop will be collected in a report and published online. The
ultimate goal of the report, and this effort, is to inform the creation of a new
NSF Convergence Accelerator track. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant work on the
problem of coordinated inauthentic behavior campaigns has been separately
undertaken by industry groups, individual social media companies, academic
researchers, and security organizations. However, there has been limited work
towards identifying a convergent research pathway that takes into consideration
the divergent viewpoints of each organization. The proposed workshop would
provide a unique opportunity to bridge this gap between industry groups, social
media platforms, academic researchers, and security practitioners, enabling a
foundation for multidisciplinary collaboration and cooperation across
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.