* 2035235
* RAPID: Collaborative Proposal: Development of Digital Models of Minerals and Rocks for Online Geoscience Classes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Matthew Brueseke, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2022
* USD 16,864.00

The sudden shift to remote online teaching due to the COVID-19 crisis has
especially impacted laboratory classes. Petrologists and mineralogists have
created three-dimensional models of rock and mineral specimens, which are
available online. The commercial site that hosts these does not include a
searchable database. This project will create a searchable database and copy the
models to a university-hosted server. Additional specimens will be added.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Image-processing has become routine, which has made it
practical to create visually and topologically accurate representation of
geologic specimens. Teachers have been creating these images and putting them on
a commercial website for the use of the wider community. The problem is that
this collection of hundreds of virtual specimens is not searchable. The PIs will
create a searchable database with the specific metadata that will be useful to
science teachers. Moreover, the virtual specimens will also be copied to a
university-hosted server, which will assure access for years. Additional
specimens will be imaged. This virtual collection has become vital in the time
of COVID-19 and a shift to widespread online
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.