* 2035395
* The SACNAS Geo-Futures Program
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Corey Garza, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2023
* USD 99,609.00

The Society for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science
(SACNAS) Geo-Futures workshop is a conference-based program that will engage
with and provide educational resources for students interested in pursuing a
career in the geosciences. Primarily recruiting from students within NSFâ€™s
Geoscience Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) sites, the SACNAS Geo-
Futures program will provide students with pre and post-conference training that
will prepare them for understanding how to engage in a national research
conference. Pre-conference activities will provide students with an introduction
on navigating a scientific conference and networking with geoscientists in
attendance. Conference activities will provide students with an introduction to
original research being conducted in the geosciences, as well as examples of
career pathways that can be engaged in as a professional geoscientist. Beyond
providing students with guidance on how to pursue academic and professional
careers in geoscience, the SACNAS Geo-Futures program can help them understand
how their diverse talents and perspectives, which in part derive from their
unique cultural experiences, can contribute to a scientific workforce that looks
to address the emerging needs of 21st century geoscience
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SACNAS Geo-Futures program forms an alliance
among geoscience professionals within a diversity focused STEM conference to
help recruit, engage and retain underrepresented students in the geosciences
through a conference based mentoring program. The SACNAS Geo-Futures program
aims to 1) recruit 40 student participants, with an emphasis on students from
underrepresented groups and those with experience in an NSF Geoscience REU; 2)
engage students in innovative research and professional development in
geoscience; 3) provide students with high-caliber mentoring; and; 4) provide
rigorous support and training for students to ensure continued interest and
involvement in the geosciences. The social context of the program is the
demographics of the U.S, whose composition is rapidly changing, with little
reflection of this change seen in the ranks of geoscience institutions of the
U.S. A vigorous recruitment and outreach effort leverages connections with
diversity-focused programs from across the United States and the experience of
the workshop organization team in engaging with students from underrepresented
student populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.