* 2035556
* Rural Electronics Education Hub Pilot in the Upper Mississippi River Basin
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Alice Zimmer, Minnesota State College - Southeast Technical
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2023
* USD 516,513.00

Advanced Manufacturing and Engineering Technology sectors in the United States
continue to face a widening workforce skills gap and declining STEM workforce
pipelines. Up to 2.4 million unfilled jobs in these sectors are predicted by
2028. In Minnesota and the upper Mississippi River Basin, workforce surveys
identified the need for more than 1,000 electronics technology positions by
2026. As businesses transition to electromechanical equipment, and apply
automation and smart manufacturing, skillset requirements for workers shift,
creating a skills deficiency in candidate and incumbent workers. Rural
businesses have additional challenges in building a skilled workforce, including
a lack of success at attracting females, underserved/underrepresented
populations, or Native Americans into their workforce. The recent impact of a
viral pandemic has also highlighted a need to address blended and distance
instructional delivery to reach these workers of tomorrow. This project will
support the regional need for electronics technicians through a dual-credit
Introduction to Electronics Certificate that allows students to obtain high
school credit and college credit simultaneously. The Certificate will support
entry of high school students, college students, and adult workers into
electronics pathways by providing courses that meet requirements of associate
degree programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to
expand the pipeline of skilled technicians into electronics technology careers.
To do so, this project will create a replicable certificate program that bridges
the gaps between K-12 schools, post-secondary institutions of higher education,
and the manufacturing sector. The project will support: 1) a sustained pipeline
of workers through a dual enrollment Introduction to Electronics Certificate
with articulated paths to Associate of Applied Science programs; 2) mediated and
distance learning materials with simulation, blended delivery, and portable lab
modules; 3) a Culture Change Model, drawing on multiple regional influencers for
support and action research by educators, industry, vendors, and peer academic
colleges; 4) faculty professional development on training technologies and
manufacturing industry needs; 5) a diversity outreach strategy for females,
underserved/underrepresented and Native American populations into electronics;
and 6) collaborative relationships with four-year institutions to further
develop career pathways in electronics. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.