* 2035981
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Novel Biosensor to Accelerate Investigations of COVID-19 and the Gut Microbiome.
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2021
* USD 255,658.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be advanced understanding of the interaction between SARS-CoV-2,
COVID-19, and the human gut microbiome, potentially resulting in new treatment
approaches for COVID-19 patients. This project will develop a novel biosensor to
enable low-cost, highly standardized studies of links between the human gut
microbiome and COVID-19 to help evaluate the performance of different
therapeutic approaches, drugs, vaccines, and other clinical interventions.
Finally, once this project is successfully completed, there is a longer-term
opportunity to add detection capability to the technology, enabling real-time,
at-home tracking of SARS-CoV-2 prevalence in stool samples of high-risk patients
and their caretakers. This would enable the technology to become a continuous
viral detection tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance a
sensor to allow isolation and preservation of microbial RNA from stool samples.
Existing technique preserve microbial DNA but are not sensitive enough to
preserve the far less stable RNA. The project will evaluate candidate extraction
and fixative reagents based on technical performance, length of RNA stability,
reagent cost, and storage requirements. Simultaneously, the project will develop
an advanced systems architecture enabling a scalable solution for widespread
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.