* 2035837
* SBIR Phase I:  A Flexible and Efficient Manufacturing System for Radio Antenna Reflectors
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2021,03/31/2022
* Christian Davila-Peralta, PARAMIUM TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 03/31/2022
* USD 255,716.00

The broader impact of this (Small Business Innovation Research) SBIR Phase I
project includes enabling widespread affordable satellite communication. Today
there are approximately 2,000 satellites in orbit and there are not enough
dishes on earth to communicate with all of them. The number of satellites is
anticipated to grow to 16,000 in the next few years. Current manufacturing
processes are too slow and expensive to meet this rapid growth. Dishes for
satellite communication are made of metal sheets that must be curved into a bowl
shape. In the past, that shaping process has been done by flexing, stamping, or
composite processes that are expensive. Dish designers have been limited to the
few curved shapes that are mass produced. This project will develop a commercial
fabrication process to quickly shape customized curved panels for satellite
communication antennas.This project will develop a fast, flexible process to
customize new shapes enabling higher data rates to expand access.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will combine induction heating
and adjustable mold technologies to shape flat metal sheets into precise
compound curved panels. An induction coil uses high frequency and high power
electric currents to create a strong magnetic field. This magnetic field induces
eddy currents in the workpiece, heating it and enabling it to be pressed into an
adaptable mold. The reconfigurable mold can quickly change its shape to form
different sections of a parabola or other freeform shape. Using an adjustable
mold saves the cost of machining a high precision mold for each unique reflector
segment. The adjustable mold also allows for easy correction of springback, mold
wear, and other errors to achieve higher shape accuracy than other mass
production processes. The low tooling cost allows this technology to
economically produce any batch size. The project will model and test induction
heating and forming processes, ultimately designing a workstation to produce
curved panels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.