* 2035041
* EAGER: Open access resources to promote undergraduate neuroscience education
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Elizabeth Kirby, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 12/31/2023
* USD 310,589.00

Every year, hundreds of thousands of undergraduate students participate in an
Introduction to Behavioral Neuroscience course. This gateway course, offered by
Neuroscience, Psychology and Biology departments across the country, provides
students with foundational principles of nervous system structure and function,
as well as basic information about how the nervous system governs movements,
feelings, and thought. Given the high enrollments in introductory behavioral
neuroscience courses across the US, the development of a high-quality, open
access textbook could substantially reduce barriers to neuroscience education,
as well as implement a broad core curriculum that may broadly improve
educational quality. The recent shift of numerous courses to online format in
the wake of COVID19 further highlights the need for digital learning resources
that can be accessed from anywhere in the world. This project will create an
open access, online educational resource to serve as a replacement for
commercial textbooks. It will integrate multimedia presentation of material,
including videos and high quality graphics, as well as instructor-friendly
supplemental material (including sample test questions and pre-prepared lecture
slides), providing access to a faculty-created, peer-reviewed neuroscience
educational resource that is not sequestered behind a pay-wall. Wider access to
professional neuroscience learning resources is likely to translate into
improved recruitment of talented students into neuroscience. Although targeted
toward US students, the common adoption of US textbooks in international
classrooms means that this resource would also be poised to influence
international neuroscience education and
recruitment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Textbooks support and guide learning in
numerous college-level science courses. Though faculty typically create the
content of science textbooks, the books are primarily produced and sold by for-
profit publishers. Instructors then assign texts which students pay to access,
by purchasing a physical book or gaining online access. The emergence of open
educational resources offers a way to reduce financial barriers to academic
success by providing educational materials free of charge, to anyone who wishes
to learn from them. However, there are currently no high-quality open access
textbook-replacement resources for university undergraduate neuroscience
students. To address this gap, the proposed work will develop an open-access,
online textbook replacement to accompany the typical Introduction to Behavioral
Neuroscience course for first and second year college students. The proposed
content will be created, curated and peer-reviewed by a team of expert
neuroscientists who all show excellence in undergraduate instruction. Resource
production, formatting and access will be supported by a team experienced in the
dissemination of open access textbooks (OpenStax). The proposed resource will be
rooted in digital presentation, allowing written text to be interleaved with
high quality graphics and embedded videos. Slides with images and videos will
also be provided for instructors to encourage faculty adoption of the resource,
as will a test bank. Most importantly, all of these components will be free and
openly accessible to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.