* 2035095
* RAPID:  Surveying the American Public in the Time of COVID-19: Comparing Video to Face-to-Face Interviews
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Ted Brader, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jan Leighley
* 06/30/2021
* USD 74,963.00

The National Science Foundation has typically funded face-to-face survey
interviews with nationally representative samples of Americans. It has seemed
inconceivable that face-to-face interviewing might not be possible. But then in
2020, the COVID-19 (coronavirus) pandemic arrived. States issued stay-at-home
orders, required social distancing, and brought most in-person research to a
standstill. In light of these circumstances, this project develops a mixed-mode
design for surveys that will facilitate rigorous data collection in a period of
viral pandemic and public uncertainty. We conduct multiple experiments and
simulations that address the feasibility and logistics for the use of remote,
live interviewing by video conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds
on a small but powerful mode experiment that shows promising results. A previous
experiment allowed within- and between-subject experimental design features to
assess differences across modes, with randomization occurring after interviewees
have consented to participate in this survey study. While we observed only
minimal, statistically insignificant differences in the available data quality
metrics—non-differentiation, non-response, don’t know responses, and length of
response to open-ended questions—across modes, this may have resulted in part
because it was conducted in a controlled environment to maximize internal
validity, with all respondents participating in a central on-site location. The
experiments and simulations of this project extend the experimental designs to a
more externally valid field environment to further test for data quality of
video interviewing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.