* 2035238
* Identifying New Community-Driven Science Themes for National Science Foundation (NSF)’s Support of Paleo Perspectives on Climate Change (P2C2): A Workshop
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Amanda Staudt, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Soumaya Belmecheri
* 07/31/2022
* USD 214,309.00

The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine will organize a
workshop that seeks to identify potential future paleoclimate research
directions that will help advance understanding of current and potential future
change in the Earth’s climate system. Drawing upon broad community input
collected via an online questionnaire, workshop discussions will address gaps in
the current understanding of past climate variability and processes, and new
research strategies and technological capabilities that could practically be
undertaken to effectively fill these knowledge gaps. In preparation for an
update of the research themes and goals of the Paleo perspectives on Climate
Change (P2C2) annual competition, this project plans to engage the broad science
community via online questionnaire and a workshop to identify potential priority
areas for research in a possible follow-on call for proposals and beyond.
Engagement with the science community at the outset will help identify themes
with high potential to advance the field and that are feasible for NSF to
support and for the community to tackle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks
input from a broad community with efforts to achieve diversity in geographic
representation, institutional affiliation, career stage, gender, and race.
Additionally, identifying future research themes in paleoclimate has inherent
broader impact related to the scientific and socioeconomic applications of
paleoclimate research and their relevance to decision making on issues such as
water management, biodiversity, infrastructure adaptation, etc. Other broader
impacts include a report of the workshop and questionnaire activities, available
in paper (limited quantities) and free PDF, which will be disseminated to NSF
and other interested stakeholders as appropriate. The Workshop report will be
made available to the public without restriction and will be posted on the
National Academies Press website. The National Academies will conduct extensive
outreach and engagement to ensure that the results are widely disseminated. This
outreach could include briefings for agencies, briefings for Congressional
offices, continued facilitation of on-line discussion forums with the broader
community, briefings and webinars, presentations and sessions at relevant
conferences, and other related activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.