* 2035015
* EAGER: QSA: Accelerating Lattice Quantum Field Theory Calculations Via Interpolator Optimization Using NISQ-Era Quantum Computing
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Phiala Shanahan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Simulations of physical quantum systems are one of the promising and natural
potential applications of quantum computing. At the present time, significant
effort is being devoted to developing quantum algorithms for quantum physics.
Complementing exclusively quantum calculations, there is great potential for
quantum advantages to be obtained by integrating near-term quantum devices into
existing classical workflows, much as has been achieved by the integration of
graphical processing units as accelerators into high-performance computing
systems in the last decades. This project investigates one such pathway via the
acceleration of numerical quantum field theory calculations on classical
computers using quantum computing. The developed algorithms have the potential
to enable first-principles studies of the structure of matter that are
computationally intractable via classical means.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of this project is to implement a quantum algorithm to accelerate
lattice field theory calculations via the efficient identification of
representations of quantum states. The approach taken is demonstrably robust to
errors in the calculations performed on quantum devices, and enables scaling to
larger Hilbert spaces to be undertaken on classical rather than quantum devices.
Strategies to realize the algorithm are pursued and implemented on
superconducting qubit devices, as well as on realistic simulators. A key task is
to quantify the scaling and implementation costs of the approach. Success in
this development effort has the potential to address the exponential signal-to-
noise challenge in numerical studies of the quantum field theories which
describe nature. The broader impacts of this project are focused on training the
next generation of scientists whose expertise will bridge the intersection of
quantum computing and algorithms and physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.