* 2035321
* Transdisciplinary Convergence to Accelerate Strategies to Mitigate Institutional Racism in Criminal Justice, Education, and Health Systems
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* IVORY TOLDSON, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,855.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. The broader
impact and potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator conference
proposal is to address institutional racism by utilizing advanced technologies
that have the potential to disrupt institutional racism in ways that have not
been experienced previously. The disparate burden of the COVID-19 pandemic on
Black communities, the recent high profile police involved murders of Black
people in Minneapolis and Louisville, and the longstanding racial achievement
gaps in education underscore the need for the proposed project. Institutional
racism currently manifests&lt;br/&gt;heavily within criminal justice, education,
and healthcare. The project seeks to explore the use of technology in building
more socially conscious systems to mitigate institutional racism. Leading
experts in this project will leverage their talents, perspectives, and resources
to help the project document technology-infused ideas that have potential to
disrupt institutional racism in ways that have not been experienced in the past.
Ending institutional racism will only be advanced by visionaries across academic
disciplines and sectors who can see a universe of opportunity that is not
distant or unattainable. The field experts who will commit to this project have
the capacity to converge efforts to advance human technology in addressing
racial inequities in criminal justice, education, and health systems. The PIs
have plan to broadly disseminate findings included in the technical report
across sectors including academia, non-profits, government, and especially the
technology industry. Finally, this project also has the potential to broaden the
scope and influence of research by including HBCU
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance knowledge of
technologically-informed systems at the Human Technology Frontier that have the
potential to mitigate institutional racism in the criminal justice, education,
and health workforce. The virtual workshops will bring together
transdisciplinary and cross-sector thought leaders from social, behavioral and
computational sciences and industry with demonstrated capacity to propose
technological innovations that have the most potential to create the humanistic
agency necessary to advance racial equity within the criminal justice,
education, and health systems. The plan for the workshops optimizes and builds
upon prior identified cutting-edge research that will be foundational to
achieving the projectâ€™s ultimate goal of developing a technical report that
provides solutions to existing gaps affecting the Black community in criminal
justice, education, and healthcare. Our plan to distribute relevant major
studies prior to the workshops for the leaders to review and evaluate will
ensure that ensuing discussions at the workshop are informed by the current
landscape. Further, final reports from each workshop session will have the
potential to form the basis for a NSF Convergence Accelerator Track topic. The
PIs organization, Quality Education for Minorities Network (QEM) has 30 years of
experience with research and programs that have assembled technical advisors
necessary to conduct the proposed activities. The project will also
strategically use HBCU researchers for their time-honored expertise with
advancing African American progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.