* 2035682
* RAPID: Higher Order Beliefs during a Pandemic: Theory and Evidence to Test the Effects of Public Health Campaigns
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Ethan Bueno de Mesquita, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2022
* USD 198,852.00

Social distancing is critical to slowing the spread of COVID-19 pandemic, which
threatens the nation’s health, economy, and national defense. This research
project studies people’s strategic behavior in deciding to follow public health
rules or not. The project uses sophisticated economic theory and empirical
methods to study strategic considerations that may hamper or facilitate
compliance with public health guidelines to reduce the spread of COVID-19. One
person’s choice to comply with social distancing regulation influences the costs
and benefits to others doing so. As a result, individual behavior depends on
beliefs about others’ compliance and on social norms regarding compliance. This
project increases understanding of individual behavior in group settings and
highlights the conditions under which benefits of publicity in mass media
campaigns, and provides hundreds of thousands of public health mailers to
American residents may be beneficial. The results of this research project will
help public health authorities to craft more efficient public information
campaigns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project uses theory
and empirical methods based on a large data set from Cook county to investigate
how beliefs in other peoples’ response influence one’s decision to comply with
public health rules. The theory extends previous research on two strategic
considerations, conformity, and free-riding, that influence behavior by
incorporating the related phenomenon of publicity. Publicity is found to amplify
pro-social behavior only when conformity dominates free-riding; otherwise
publicity will lessen the effectiveness of an informational campaign. The
empirics analyze a vast public health campaign in Cook County, Illinois. The
campaign will provide public health best practices directly to hundreds of
thousands of Cook County households. Using a mix of public information and a
voluntary survey, we will evaluate the effectiveness of the public health
campaign in promoting behaviors identified as decreasing the risk of
transmitting COVID-19. The results of this research project will help public
health authorities to craft more efficient public information
campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.