* 2035360
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Mitigation and Suppression of Coronavirus Pandemic with Data-driven RAPID Decisions Using COVID-19 Simulator
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Turgay Ayer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2022
* USD 92,030.00

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), a global pandemic, has affected every
sector of human life. While our understanding of the spread of COVID-19 is still
evolving, policymakers need to make strategic decisions amidst this uncertainty
to mitigate the pandemic. Appropriate policy decisions can reduce morbidity,
mortality, and damage to the healthcare system. This study will estimate the
underlying prevalence of COVID-19 at the county level and project future
trajectories of COVID-19 under various sequences of non-pharmaceutical and
pharmaceutical interventions. In addition, these new estimations and projections
will be incorporated into our existing online COVID-19 Simulator
(www.covid19sim.org) to inform county-level decisions. In addition, the COVID-19
Simulator will detect early signs of community-level COVID-19 outbreaks and
predict hotspots in different jurisdictions. From a societal perspective, this
research will improve our understanding of COVID-19 transmission and inform
policies to mitigate the spread of the virus, ultimately leading to a reduction
in COVID-19 disease burden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use
epidemiological and operations research modeling approaches to simulate the
spread of COVID-19 at the county level and the effects of different
interventions on mitigation of COVID-19. In addition, causal decision tree and
mixed-integer programing-based machine learning algorithms will be used to
identify county level hotspots of transmission. The proposed research will not
only inform key decisions with important public health implications, but also
contribute to intellectual merits, including 1) linking and using various
datasets in near real-time to improve our understanding of disease epidemiology,
2) estimating the underlying prevalence of COVID-19 and projecting future
trajectories under various interventions, 3) developing innovative approaches
for real time parameter estimations, model calibrations, and projections, and
(4) detecting early signs of community-level COVID-19 outbreaks using
epidemiological, statistical and machine learning based modeling
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the Ecology and
Evolution of Infectious Diseases Program in the Division of Environmental
Biology, using funds from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security
(CARES) Act&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.