* 2035577
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: QIA: Large Scale QAOA Quantum Simulator
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Alexey Galda, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop a specialized Quantum Approximate
Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) quantum circuit simulator. QAOA is the most
studied quantum optimization algorithm and is considered to be the prime
candidate for demonstrating quantum advantage. There is a worldwide race
underway amongst top quantum information science researchers to find
combinatorial optimization problems and their instances that run efficiently and
faster on quantum devices rather than on classical computers. One of the
critical bottlenecks is to find circuit parameters faster on a classical
computer to accelerate variational quantum-classical frameworks. The expected
improvements to the developed simulator will dramatically increase the speed of
QAOA simulations by at least one order of magnitude and significantly speed up
research done on finding optimal QAOA circuit parameters. As a result, it will
help the realization of quantum advantage by US scientists in this highly
competitive field of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this
project is to carry out computational and algorithmic investigations in various
node elimination methods for tensor contraction in the development of a scalable
quantum simulator. The plan is to build upon the success of the combinatorial
scientific computing community in developing elimination algorithms for such
tasks as minimizing the error and complexity in matrix computations and
optimizing the time and space complexity in automatic differentiation, and
recent developments in treewidth optimization algorithms. Additionally, in this
project, emphasis will be placed on scaling up relevant graph algorithms to
achieve acceptable time/quality trade-off for large-scale quantum simulators.
Algorithmic and software products of this project will include a specialized
QAOA quantum circuit open-source simulator equipped with fast optimization
algorithms to accelerate tensor contraction methods. A high-quality simulator
that scales to sufficiently large circuits is one of the major bottlenecks in
discovering applications for demonstrating quantum
advantage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.