* 2035103
* Professional Development to Support an Elementary School Science and Integrated Language Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Jessaca Spybrook, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,999,877.00

The nation's diverse and rapidly changing student demographics includes the rise
of English learners, the fastest growing student population. Such demographic
shifts highlight the importance of promoting and fostering science classrooms
that support language learning for all students, including English learners. To
help address this need, this project will rigorously study the Science and
Integrated Language (SAIL) curriculum, a yearlong fifth-grade curriculum aligned
to current science curriculum standards with a focus on English learners. SAIL
is grounded in design principles that are based on current research on
children’s science learning and second language acquisition. The curriculum
includes four units that focus on central, driving questions (e.g., What happens
to our garbage? or Why do falling stars fall?) to anchor the key physical and
life science concepts of interest. The SAIL curriculum was originally developed
with a prior DRK-12 grant using iterative cycles of development, field testing,
and refinement. The project has three main objectives. First, the team will
develop a teacher professional development program to support classroom
implementation of SAIL. Second, the project will develop and validate the
instruments needed to study the intervention and its impacts on teachers and
students. Third, a quasi-experimental field trial will be conducted to assess
the SAIL intervention’s impacts on teachers and students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will spend first year refining and iteratively
developing the SAIL professional development package along with the measures to
be used in the field trial. This is followed by the quasi-experimental study,
which includes a treatment group of 15 elementary schools. A matched comparison
group of 15 elementary schools will be obtained using propensity score matching
at the school, teacher, and student levels. Fifth-grade science teachers will
participate for 2 years, while two cohorts of fifth-grade students will
participate for 1 year each. Measures will focus on student science learning
with particular attention to English learner students and observations of
teachers’ instructional practices. Data will be analyzed using multi-level
models accounting for nesting of students within teachers which, in turn, are
nested within schools. At the completion of the project the team will have
produced: (1) a fully documented professional development program to support
teacher implementation of the SAIL curriculum, (2) measures needed to rigorously
study the intervention and its impacts on teachers and students, and (3) further
evidence of the potential effects of the SAIL intervention on teachers and
students through a rigorous quasi-experimental field
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.