* 2035984
* SBIR Phase I:  Delivering living probiotic cells in topical skin application
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Michelle Lee, MINUTRI INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to extend advanced encapsulation technologies
to allow successful delivery of new biological treatments on the skin. Research
has proven the beneficial effects of applying living probiotics directly to
skin, and there are emerging needs to deliver such probiotics alive in topical
creams. However, applications of biologics are currently limited because of the
challenges associated with its inactivation/decomposition during production,
transport, storage, which often lead to low delivery efficacy and constraints in
product type. Additionally, current biologic-containing products often have
short shelf-life and high refrigeration cost. This project will create a robust
encapsulation platform tailored toward delivering living probiotics in topical
skin formulations featuring long storage capabilities, while providing critical
methods for prospective biologic-related applications. This project will enable
novel biologic therapeutic applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop solutions to prolong probiotics’
survival in complex water-oil skin formulations utilizing microencapsulation
technology. Multiple studies have validated the advantageous effect of active
probiotics for skin health; however, development of topical probiotic products
remains a great challenge as the probiotics must remain active and viable within
formulations during long storage periods. To mitigate such challenges, this
proposal will focus on integrity-enhanced microstructures that can encase,
immobilize and sustain living-probiotic cells in a highly moisturized
environment. Different types of probiotic-enriched skin moisturizer formulations
will be developed, and the viability and stability of probiotics will be studied
under accelerated storage conditions. Specifically, this project will improve
the stability and viability of probiotics in skincare formulations by carrying
out detailed analysis on: (1) the processing parameters and operating
temperatures to encase probiotics; (2) developing formulations using suitable
probiotic-friendly ingredients; (3) the stabilities of the microencapsulation
microstructures and probiotic compatibility; (4) probiotic viabilities stored
under different pH and temperature conditions; (5) probiotics’ interaction with
antimicrobial agents; and (6) the release and delivery of probiotics from the
formulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.