* 2035499
* EAGER: CAS-MNP: Laboratory Radiation Chemistry Methods to Induce Rapid Aging of Microplastics in Water to Assess Fundamental Chemical Reactivity Changes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Stephen Mezyk, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,083.00

The Division of Chemistry supports Professor Julie Peller at Valparaiso
University and Professor Stephen Mezyk at the California State University at
Long Beach with this award. They study microplastics, which are tiny fragments
of plastic waste and can be found in our oceans, lakes, and other surface waters
around the world. Since plastic materials are extremely stable, much of this
pollution has resided in the water for many decades, where it undergoes changes
very slowly. However, these changes are not well understood, and may be harmful
to ecosystems and human health. This project studies the long-term changes of
microplastics in water to determine the details of the chemical changes and the
level of hazard created from their slow breakdown. This is done in the
laboratory by using high energy radiation sources, which simulate similar
weathering changes in nature but can be done in much shorter time. The project
provides research opportunities for multiple undergraduate students at both
institutions and the results are integrated into classes. Information on this
topic is of high societal relevance and is being communicated to the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The natural decomposition of microplastic in water is very
slow, which makes it difficult to determine chemical reaction rates and
mechanisms of the reactive radicals involved. To make such studies feasible,
Professor Julie Peller and Professor Stephen Mezyk use ionizing radiation
techniques to create reactive radicals in water rapidly (in hours) and
reproducibly. This process mimics the impacts of long-term (years) natural,
radical-based reactions occurring in marine and freshwater environments and
allows the fundamental chemical reactivity of microplastics with these radicals
to be determined quantitatively. They also study the surface and adsorption
properties of transformed (aged) microplastics and compare to those of new
materials. The data lead to a better understanding of the risks of microplastics
in the natural environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.