* 2035226
* IOS: Conference Proposal: Sending and Receiving Signals - Endocrine Modulation of Social Communication
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Karen Maruska, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 11/30/2023
* USD 20,183.00

This award supports a conference symposium entitled “Sending and Receiving
Signals: Endocrine Modulation of Social Communication” scheduled to occur in
Washington D.C. at the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and
Comparative Biology (SICB). Animal communication is vital to survival,
reproduction, and species persistence, but little is known about how an
individual’s sensory and signaling abilities may change based on their internal
hormonal state. This symposium brings together diverse experts working at the
frontiers of research on this topic in various animals and sensory systems to
disseminate cutting-edge research via presentations, promote discussion, and
develop novel future research directions. The symposium will assess the current
and future state of the field and explore the potential for evolutionary
pressures to influence how animals communicate with each other in different
behavioral contexts. Outcomes of these conference presentations will be
disseminated broadly via publications, social media, and will represent seminal
educational resources for students. The award will broaden participation by
supporting and providing opportunities for underrepresented minorities and early
career researchers to present their science and help direct the future of the
research field. The collective outcomes also bear broad societal implications
relevant to biodiversity and species’ responses to global climate change, as
well as professional development opportunities for the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference symposium will explore how
sending and receiving sensory information in social contexts can be profoundly
influenced by an individual’s reproductive and hormonal state. While this is
particularly relevant in species that cycle in and out of breeding condition,
many studies on animal communication at different biological levels do not
consider potential modulatory influences on behaviors. This conference symposium
will address this major knowledge gap through the integration of approaches from
neuroscience, endocrinology, animal behavior, biomechanics, sensory ecology, and
evolution. Such integration is not only critical to making substantive advances
in this area, it is also timely. By making researchers in diverse fields aware
of this modulatory influence on communication across different animal taxa,
various sensory channels, and distinct social contexts, it will inspire new
research directions and formulation of novel scientific questions and approaches
to advance the field. Considering modulation in communication is critical to
accurate interpretations of study conclusions, making this topic crucial for
advancement of knowledge and development of future hypothesis testing. Insights
gained from these presentations and discussions on sensory plasticity have the
potential to fundamentally change current thinking about sensory function and
animal communication and will allow researchers to address more focused
comparative and evolutionary questions related to sexual selection, speciation,
signaling systems, co-evolution, and physiological mechanisms in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.