* 2035533
* Fostering Collaborative Breakthroughs in Heritage Science through Machine Learning and Data Science
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* William Seales, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2023
* USD 82,510.00

A quarter century ago, NSFâ€™s investment in the Digital Library Initiative
stimulated the digitization of cultural collections, and the development of
tools to analyze those collections in ways that were not possible before. This
conference brings together experts in heritage and computer science to examine
the state of the art in this effort and to identify specific needs and
opportunities for novel research on collections of culturally significant
artifacts using the whole range of tools and techniques from data science,
artificial intelligence, machine learning and imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference is focused on the how AI systems can be designed and implemented to
deal with critical problems for heritage collections such as dealing with
damage, extracting useful data without causing additional damage, enabling data
from disparate collections to be meaningfully compared and labeling data to
support machine learning, and developing standards for representational
frameworks to support scholarly advances. The conference organizers will produce
and disseminate a consensus report summarizing the pathways to new technical
approaches and solutions to long-standing problems within entire classes of
cultural heritage collections. The dialog and synergistic activities of the
meeting will expand the conventional thinking and the analysis framework around
imaging, artificial intelligence, and data science, which will address
fundamental challenges with the potential for rapid diffusion into cultural
heritage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.