* 2035085
* Collaborative Research: GOALI: Dynamic regulation of CHO metabolism to optimize biomanufacturing yields and quality
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Jamey Young, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/29/2024
* USD 326,013.00

Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells produce 60â€“70% of all protein therapeutics.
These are among the most expensive of all drugs to manufacture. Identifying
strategies for improving monoclonal antibody (mAb) production is the primary
objective of this project. The metabolic pathways of CHO cells will be
engineered to make this happen. Making these therapies more affordable and
available to the public will improve the health and quality of life of millions
of patients. This project will also provide the opportunity for students to
engage in collaborative research with industry scientists, including internships
at a Janssen R&amp;D facility. Such an experience will prepare them for a career
in the biotechnology industry or in a government or academic lab. Undergraduate
and high-school students will also be recruited to work collaboratively on CHO
cell engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamically balancing the metabolic
requirements for efficient growth and product biosynthesis in mammalian cell
cultures is a key biomanufacturing challenge. The overall objective is to
engineer CHO cells that dynamically regulate their central metabolism to promote
maximum yield and quality of recombinant mAbs. An industrial CHO line will be
engineered to promote mitochondrial respiration during production phase by
controlling expression of metabolic genes with inducible gene switches. Then,
the amino acid metabolism of CHO host cells will be optimized to reduce
glutamine overflow and increase energetic efficiency. Finally, IgG glycan
profiles will be assessed to determine how manipulating CHO sugar and amino acid
metabolism impacts product glycosylation. Metabolic flux analysis will be
applied to rigorously evaluate the influence of genetic alterations on host
metabolism, particularly within mitochondria and pathways that supply
nucleotide-sugar precursors for mAb glycosylation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.