* 2035681
* STTR Phase I: Nanoparticulate metal oxide electrodes for fast charging lithium ion batteries
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Sarah Tolbert, BATTERY STREAK, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop and
commercialize a fast charging battery which offers better safety with long cycle
life compared to today’s lithium (Li)-ion batteries. In traditional batteries,
fast charging can cause the battery to become dangerously hot (more than
60°C/140°F) and reduce the life of the battery to one or two charges. The
proposed batteries utilize novel electrode materials that can be charged rapidly
while generating no/little heat. Safe, fast-charging batteries have strong
economic benefits for a variety of applications. Generally speaking, for mobile
applications (cars, scooters, etc.), fast-charging batteries allows
electrification of these devices by removing the main obstacle to acceptance -
long charge times. For automated robots, power tools, and small electric
vehicles, using the new generation batteries is expected to reduce the cost of
ownership by increasing the battery life by at least a factor of 3.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project seeks to develop ultrafast
charging batteries using mesoporous electrode materials. The materials are made
into a sponge-like electrodes with the pores many times smaller than a human
hair. These sponge-like electrodes allow very close contact between the energy
storage material and energy transport liquid, the electrolyte, decreasing ion
transport distance. The project will further develop the material into
commercial fast charge batteries that allow: 1) charging in less than 10
minutes, 2) minimal heating upon fast charging, and 3) three times the cycle
life compared to traditional Li-ion batteries. Additional effort will be put on
process development to scale the materials production cost effectively. Detailed
performance studies at the better cell level will aid in understanding the
effect of mesoporosity on fast-charging and heat generation using oxide
nanostructured materials. These results will aid in the future development of
high rate oxide materials in practical and fast charge Li-ion batteries with
improved safety characteristics and minimized heat management
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.