* 2035735
* SBIR Phase I:  Using technology to increase access to prosthetic care for people with limb amputations
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Oluseeni Komolafe, OYS MOBILITY INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 11/30/2022
* USD 275,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the potential to digitize access to high-
quality custom prosthetic and orthotic devices. This will increase convenience
and reduce the cost of care for millions of people with limb loss or other
disabilities. In 2018, the leading cause of amputations was complications from
diabetes and peripheral vascular diseases, and 1.5 million new cases of diabetes
were diagnosed among U.S. adults aged 18 years or older. Despite progress in
other aspects of prosthetic limb design, inefficiencies in the design and
manufacture of the custom prosthetic socket still exist. The proposed technology
uses a computational approach to digitize the biomechanical design required to
develop high-quality, custom prosthetic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project goal is to digitize and
automate customization of wearable devices that conform to the portion of a
person’s limb remaining after an amputation. The function of this device (i.e.
prosthetic socket) is to re-distribute pressure to areas of the person’s soft
tissues that tolerate those pressures. This project will introduce new
guidelines and processes for prosthetic socket design. The objectives include:
(1) codify, modify, and implement existing design guidelines within a
biomechanics engine to manage customizations for the individual user; and (2)
implement a machine learning framework using training datasets of paired limbs
and prosthetic sockets. The techniques developed by this work can be extended to
other biomechanical processes with load/pressure transfer considerations beyond
prosthetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.