* 2035127
* I-Corps:  Perovskite solar photovoltaics and continuous flash sublimation manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Daniel Gamelin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of solar devices based on metal-halide perovskite semiconductors.
For perovskite solar modules, applications include transport (e.g., drones),
indoor devices (e.g., sensors), or high-altitude and space applications where
silicon devices are too expensive, heavy, or not efficient enough. Recent
estimates indicate the market for indoor photovoltarics could reach $1B annually
by 2024. Silicon is not cost competitive today ($50-100/m2) and cannot reach 30%
efficiency indoors, a requirement for commercial success. Satellite and high-
altitude drone applications are nascent and rapidly growing. Thin film
perovskite photovoltaics have a natural advantage over crystalline silicon
photovoltaics in drone technologies. Perovskite solar cells have demonstrated
high power-per-weight performance (23 kW/kg), a key metric for these
applications. Continuous flash sublimation is highly tunable and controllable,
enabling the materials to be optimized to enable manufacturing
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a new manufacturing method – continuous flash sublimation (CFS) – for the
mass-scale production of perovskite-based optoelectronic devices. Translating
conventional lab-scale perovskite solution-processing methods to large-scale
manufacturing is challenging due to the use of solvents. CFS is a vapor-based
process that does not use solvents. In addition, CFS is safe, fast, simple,
inexpensive, and scalable, which will allow it to be readily incorporated into
existing high-throughput commercial manufacturing lines. CFS manufacturing may
significantly lower the integration barrier associated with the production of
perovskite semiconductors for solar power production, as well as for solid state
lighting, display technology, and X-ray detection for medical
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.