* 2035093
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Alliance-Building Offshore to Achieve Resilience and Diversity (All-ABOARD)
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Sharon Cooper, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bernard Grant
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,781.00

The Alliance-Building Offshore to Achieve Resilience and Diversity (All- ABOARD)
project builds on the power of off-shore experiences and leverages the expertise
of this team of investigators into a unique professional development model that
will provide four inter-generational teams of geoscience leaders with the tools
they need to advance the goals of diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) on their
home campuses. PIs will recruit participants, in teams of four, who range in
experience from undergraduate to Dean, hail from diverse institutions, and are
emerging and established campus DEI leaders. These teams will engage in a
transformative leadership development experience that begins at home with
structured training webinars, continues with a unique workshop aboard a state-
of- the-art scientific research vessel and a port city, and continues with
intensive efforts back on their home campuses. During the All-ABOARD workshop,
these teams will explore shared challenges, ask uncomfortable questions, engage
in uncomfortable discussions in order to better understand routes to
improvement, and brainstorm a real and achievable DEI project to implement back
home. The efficacy of these projects will be supported by robust community
building before, during, and after the workshop. The PIs hypothesize that
investing focused effort on intergenerational teams in this unique context with
sustained support will lead to a crucible in which potential DEI leaders are
recruited and retained, their leadership qualities nurtured, empowered and made
resilient, institutional barriers are identified and addressed, and collective
impact is maximized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of All-ABOARD
project is to build a resilient community of transformational DEI leaders at all
levels of geoscience academia. The innovation here is to create resiliency
through a network of strong bonds across and between different levels of power
and positionality. All-ABOARD will build a community that includes those who
currently hold positions of power, e.g., chairs/deans, as well as energetic
early career faculty, graduate students and undergraduates who will fill such
positions in the future. All-ABOARD's specific goals include: 1) Creating
resilient peer and near-peer mentoring networks, 2) Cultivating transformative
leadership in DEI among individuals, 3) Recruiting intergenerational teams with
a shared goal for addressing an institution-specific DEI need and 4) Connecting
like-minded institutions and individuals to maximize impact and promote
collaboration on DEI projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.