* 2035143
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: Future of Oceans: Innovation, Exploration, and Utilization
* TIP,ITE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Fadel Adib, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jemin George
* 07/31/2022
* USD 99,506.00

This project will organize and host a workshop focused on the future of oceans.
The conference aims to bring together stakeholders from numerous disciplines and
organizations - spanning academia, industry, government, and foundations - in
order to identify and explore avenues for collaborations in ocean innovation,
exploration, and utilization. The goal is to develop a potential future topic
(track) of the NSF Convergence Accelerator, identifying the potential scope of
the topic, the potential deliverables that could result from supporting that
topic, the disciplinary expertise that could come together under a convergence
research approach, and the partnerships that could be engaged across academia,
industry, foundations, and government if the topic were supported.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ocean is a primary source of food, energy, weather and
climate stabilization, ecological diversity, and numerous other resources
important to society. By identifying convergent approaches for ocean innovation,
exploration, and utilization, this conference will have direct impact on
sustainability concerns (energy, food, climate, pollution), national security
matters (defense, risk assessment, marine technologies), and national industries
(fishing, shipping, oil, energy, tourism). Academia, industry, non-profits, and
governments have increasing interest in ocean science and technologies due to
emergent needs for ecological, defense, and industrial resources. The workshop
will focus on convergent strategies to tackle ocean problems and emerging
opportunities from three different lenses: technology, industry, and scientific
disciplines. The topic has the potential to be strongly convergent, engaging
disciplines across the physical sciences, life sciences, social sciences, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.