* 2035898
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Disinfection Method to Prevent Infection in Peritoneal Dialysis
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Sarah Lee, Relavo, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2021
* USD 255,750.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to disrupt renal replacement therapy (RRT) by
increasing access to peritoneal dialysis (PD). Over 500,000 kidney failure
patients in the United States (US) require RRT each year, with only 52,000
patients receiving PD, despite it having a lower cost of care. PD adoption has
been limited due to high rates of peritonitis, which occurs in over 30% of PD
patients each year and is linked to 1 out of 6 PD patient deaths. This project
will reduce the risk of infection in PD, providing current patients with safer
care and enabling more RRT patients to receive PD. This would save the US
healthcare system over $100 million annually in peritonitis-related
hospitalizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will evaluate the technical feasibility of delivering a
safe, easy-to-operate internal tube disinfection protocol for PD to make it more
practical in non-clinical settings. Existing efforts to prevent catheter-
associated infections largely involve education and antimicrobial hub caps.
However, education measures rely on patient compliance and antimicrobial caps
leave catheter ends vulnerable to contamination when removed for treatment. This
project aims to develop a device that demonstrates sufficient microbial
disinfection within a connected PD system using an antimicrobial solution.
Disinfection in a closed system eliminates the risk of secondary contamination
events. However, significant concerns exist with regards to exposure of the
patient’s abdomen to the antimicrobial solution. To address this, rodent animal
studies will be conducted to evaluate the acute systemic response and repeat
exposure risk of antimicrobial residue to the peritoneal cavity. This study aims
to demonstrate a sufficiently minimal toxicity risk compared to existing effects
from dialysate solution use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.