* 2035198
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: An Empirical Investigation of Risk Preferences of Transportation Construction Workforce Managers under COVID-19 Pandemic Uncertainties
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Baabak Ashuri, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 61,000.00

The objective of this Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project is to identify new
challenges and determine factors impacting workforce decision-making processes
in the transportation construction industry under COVID-19 pandemic
uncertainties. Never in the history of modern transportation infrastructure
construction, has the industry had to adapt to a nationwide threat to their
workforce and changing public health guidelines and constraints. How are
workforce managers seeking to operate, maintain, and construct lifeline
transportation infrastructure projects without risking the safety and health of
their vital resources (workers, operators, engineers, fabricators, and project
managers)? Workforce decision makers are dealing with a daunting task. The
public expects no disruptions in receiving critical infrastructure services in
these challenging times. And more importantly, the public expects limited risk
of virus infection while using these critical infrastructures. COVID-19
continues to have substantial impacts on workstyle in the transportation
construction industry. The pandemic challenges threaten the operations of
transportation infrastructure systems that are facing ever-increasing impacts of
weather-related disasters. Yet, transportation infrastructure construction and
inspection cannot be delayed. Transportation infrastructure is essential to not
only fulfill the daily needs of human beings but also combat the COVID-19
outbreak. The success of this research is contingent upon the collection of
time-bound data on the workforce managers’ thought processes during the COVID-19
pandemic. This project will not only enhance the science of decision making
under pandemic uncertainty, but also provide critical information for the
transportation construction industry regarding best practices during a pandemic
and effective strategies for adapting to the uncertainties emerging and evolving
from this unprecedented event. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Because of the exploratory
nature of this research, PIs will use a combination of methods, such as surveys
and follow-up interviews with key informants in state transportation agencies,
to identify new challenges of workforce decision-making during the COVID-19
pandemic and determine factors impacting decision-making processes. Supporting
documents will be collected from the key informants following the interviews
(e.g., collecting and analyzing their revealed choices manifested in COVID-19
actions, organizational COVID-19 daily updates, internal operations memos, and
public news) for further content analysis. The PIs will assemble a variety of
questions that enable a thorough investigation of critical factors impacting
workforce decision-making in the unique pandemic condition. These factors will
include major pandemic issues, such as essential versus non-essential
operations, construction site shutdown (planned or unplanned), project
suspension at any stage of construction (for a designate or unknown period of
time), restarting construction, project continuation, suspension, and delay,
expedited construction operations to take advantage of the declined traffic and
receive early completion incentives, and occupational safety policies (social
distancing and wearing N95 masks). Employing the ephemeral empirical evidence
rigorously collected in this RAPID project, the PIs will be able to examine and
model the risk preferences of workforce decision makers under pandemic
uncertainties. Successful identification of the factors impacting decision-
making processes will be critical for the develop of a novel multi-attribute
utility choice models that capture the risk preferences of decision makers in
the transportation construction industry under pandemic uncertainties. Revealing
factors impacting decision-making processes will pave the way to inform
workforce policies under pandemic uncertainties. The findings will be
disseminated widely through the creation of easy-to-understand and practical
educational materials that are integrated with the research components so that
they can improve each other. This project will also engage underrepresented
students from diverse backgrounds in research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.