* 2035074
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of High Efficiency Thermoelectric Materials for Sub 200K Space Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Robin Ihnfeldt, General Engineering & Research, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will advance the state-of-the-art in low
temperature thermoelectric devices for space applications enabling advanced
space travel as well as improvements to satellite wireless and worldwide mobile
internet availability. With the increased interest in space exploration from
industrial efforts, a significantly improved low temperature thermoelectric
module could capture a sizable portion of the rapidly growing thermoelectric
module market which is estimated to be ~$1 Billion by 2024. Significantly
improved low temperature thermoelectrics would also open the door for the use of
these devices in other low temperature thermal management systems, where the
poor efficiency of cooling technologies operating in the cryogenic regime have
been a major challenge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovative Research Phase I project aims to improve the efficiency (ZT) of
thermoelectric cooling modules using advanced materials and a novel module
design concept. Bismuth-antimony (BiSb)-based single crystal materials with
applied magnetic fields have long been known as the highest performance
materials for sub 100K applications but they have not yet found commercial
utility due to a variety of challenges. The research effort aims to address
these challenges and develop both p-type and n-type single crystal BiSb based
alloys with ZT &gt; 0.4 at 90 K and application of less than 1 Tesla magnetic
field, which would be a four-fold improvement in efficiency at sub 100 K
compared to current state of the art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.