* 2035669
* SusChEM: C-H Bond Electroactivation of Nonpolar Organic Substrates in Water: Enzyme-Mediated Reaction Pathways in Microemulsions
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* James Rusling, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 10/31/2024
* USD 464,923.00

Running organic reactions in water rather than organic solvents increases
sustainability by reducing the use of harmful solvents and lowering overall
cost. Unfortunately, most nonpolar organic molecules do not dissolve in water.
Most synthetic catalysts also work poorly in water, especially those aimed at
producing specialty products such as pharmaceuticals. Alternatively, enzymes are
excellent biocatalysts, even for reactions taking place in water. This project
aims to combine synthetic copper polymer catalysts with inexpensive peroxidase
enzymes to speed reactions of nonpolar organic molecules in water.
Electrosynthesis will take place in microemulsions, which are mixtures of oil,
water and low-toxicity, low-cost detergents, that feature nanoscale interfaces
of oil and water. These emulsions improve the solubility and diffusion rate of
nonpolar reactants by delivering reactants to water-rich enzyme sites for
catalysis. The findings from this project will provide practical guidelines to
next-generation sustainable synthesis of pharmaceutical and specialty chemicals.
In addition to advanced training of graduate students, the project will offer
training opportunities to undergraduate and high school students though summer
research activities. Workshops on electrochemical enzyme catalysis for chemical
synthesis will be organized through outreach activities for K-12 teachers and
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal targets the development of high-
temperature, sustainable bioelectrocatalytic materials and their applications to
electrooxidation of C-H bonds by oxygen in water. New catalytic films will be
fabricated via layer-by-layer self-assembly of synthetic Cu polymer catalysts
and peroxidase-like enzymes. Such electrocatalytic systems will be capable of
carrying out cooperative, cascade electrocatalysis of oxygen activation by Cu
catalysts through 2e- reduction to produce hydrogen peroxide which further
activates peroxidases to drive the oxidization of nonpolar organic substrates.
The hybrid film of Cu catalysts and peroxidases will also be stabilized by
chemical crosslinking to carry out high-temperature electrosynthesis (&gt; 90
degrees C). Detailed kinetic studies will be analyzed in the hybrid films and
the film composition will be fine-tuned to optimize the production rate of
hydrogen peroxide on the Cu catalysts and its consumption rate by the
peroxidases. The activity and selectivity of hybrid films will be investigated
and optimized for two types of C-H activations in naphthyls (sp2 C-H) and
alkylbenzenes (sp3 C-H) in various nanostructured microemulsions. True green
chemistry systems in microemulsions that not only resolve the solubility issue
of non-polar substrates but also provide well-defined conditions for enzymatic
catalysts similar to aqueous solutions at neutral pH will be developed.
Electrochemical kinetic and spectroscopic studies will be used to understand
diffusion kinetics and reaction pathways, as well as the thermodynamic
activation barriers for nonpolar reactants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.