* 2035912
* Florida A&amp;M GEOSCIENCE Education: Improving Undergraduate GEOSCIENCE Teacher        Preparation using the Multiplication Factor of Micro Spiral Methodology Workshop
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Edith Davis, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2022
* USD 49,996.00

This project will provide pre-service and in-service educators with strategies
toward training their undergraduate and graduate students on usage of the
multiplication factors of Micro-Spiral Methodology (MSM) to improve K-12
understanding of Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) concepts. The
workshop will provide participants with the protocol of the MSM effective
teaching method for grades K-12 to increase knowledge of future educators and
students in the STEM areas with emphasis in geosciences. The workshop will use
the Spiral Curriculum that has been used for decades in the transfer of
concepts, knowledge and skills. Training in this methodology could be beneficial
at multiple levels of an educational system that is currently in transition due
to a global pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the
Geoscience MSM is to increase Geoscience content knowledge and create Critical-
thinkers as well as lifelong learners. Specific goals include teaching
educational stakeholders like university faculty at HBCUs, teachers (in-service
and pre-service), as well as administrators about the protocol of the MSM and
the benefit of the Multiplication Factor of the MSM. Historically Black Colleges
and Universities (HBCU) Geoscience Micro-Spiral programs can deliver a
multidimensional strategic solution to professional development for teachers and
educational coordinators to improve access to the geosciences. Specific workshop
objectives include: 1) increasing the knowledge and understanding of the
geosciences so concepts can transfer to future students, 2) supporting pre-
service teacher education programs by enriching their knowledge and
understanding of geoscience content and 3) supporting in-service teachers by
increasing their knowledge in the geosciences so that they can assist in the
training of future geoscience professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.