* 2035983
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated DOAC assay to determine coagulation status in emergent care
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Mark Kunkel, FLOBIO LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial impact potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project is a diagnostic product that addresses patient
safety and clinical decision-making for physicians managing patients taking
Direct Oral Anticoagulants (DOACs). DOACs are becoming the preferred drugs to
reduce the risk of blood clots that can lead to significant adverse events, such
as stroke. However, DOACs are part of the leading class of drugs implicated in
adverse event-related emergency department visits. These adverse events place a
significant burden on the healthcare system in the form of transfusions,
exposure to blood products, platelet repletion, reversal therapies, and
additional complications (e.g. infection, sepsis, multiple organ failure)
driving longer hospitalizations, higher mortality rates, and escalating
healthcare costs. In emergency situations, the rapid detection of DOAC
anticoagulation is needed when planning for urgent care for surgery, serious
trauma, drug overdose, emergency procedures, or monitoring for drug accumulation
in cases of renal and liver failure. This project proposes a diagnostic at the
point of care. With an estimated 21 M patients globally taking DOACs, this
technology could significantly reduce the $2.5 B in costs related to treating
and correcting adverse events caused by the absence of DOAC information in
emergency care situations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I Project will demonstrate the feasibility of a point-of-
care (POC) diagnostic chip for emergency room clinicians to manage bleeding risk
and avoid overuse of drug reversal therapies, thereby improving patient outcomes
while reducing healthcare costs. Currently there is no approved rapid diagnostic
POC test that accurately identifies the type of DOAC drug a patient is using,
nor how much of the drug is in the patientâ€™s blood. An integrated microfluidic
cartridge is proposed developed to manage blood distribution within the device,
mix the blood with DOAC detection reagents, and provide an integrated assay
result that evaluates the three important clotting factors in clot formation
(fibrin/thrombin/platelets). The technology is unique in that, unlike other
coagulation tests, it re-creates the blood clotting physiology, and
characteristic blood flow, that happens within the body. With DOAC-reversing
drugs, the diagnostic can determine DOAC type (Factor Xa or Factor IIa), and the
level of DOAC in the blood, allowing emergency room physicians to make more
informed care decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.