* 2035894
* SBIR Phase I:  Multi-Step Sequential Processing of Gas Ions for Identifying Volatile Organic Compounds in Recirculated Air of Energy Efficient Buildings
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Peter Fowler, GP IONICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2023
* USD 255,400.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve human health, energy savings, and
improved environment. Increased urbanization worldwide and demand for high
quality, comfortable ambient air environments is expected to drive an existing
market for improved heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems
estimated at $12 billion nationally and $190 billion worldwide by 2026.
Respiratory disease and human illness are attributed to unregulated amounts of
these constituents in indoor air. This project will inform users about the
concentrations and identities of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in
recirculated indoor air from energy-efficient HVAC systems. &lt;br/&gt;This will
inform clinical analyses of disease, industrial process monitoring, screening of
food purity and authenticity, and commercial aviation security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will leverage discoveries in the
chemistry of ion fragmentation in strong electric fields in air at ambient
pressure and the association of these fragments with molecular identity.
Additional merit is derived from algorithms for identification of ion spectra,
dependences of fragmentation on electric field strength, and processes to handle
ions both in the initial step of ion selection and the final stage of fragment
ion analysis. This will be a novel exploration of strong electric field
fragmentation of gas ions at ambient pressure. Research objectives include tasks
to establish broad understanding of mechanisms of ion fragmentation of volatile
organic compounds as gas ions at ambient pressure and establishing autonomous
molecular identification using spectral profiles from mobility analysis. The
research is organized into three phases including the development of efficient,
advanced control of ion fragmentation, the discovery of chemical rules governing
ion fragmentation, and the integration of artificial intelligence with chemical
instrumentation developed in this project. The key technical result anticipated
in this project is a chemical analyzer for autonomous monitoring of the quality
of recirculated indoor air in green heating, ventilation, and air conditioning
systems in green buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.