* 2035185
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The grammar and use of elaborate verb morphology by elderly monolinguals
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Gladys Camacho Rios, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 18,897.00

The way bilinguals and monolingual elders speak an endangered indigenous
language is not uniform. Bilinguals are typically more dominant in one of their
two languages, in most cases not their indigenous one but the national or
dominant language in their country of origin. Monolingual speakers differ from
bilinguals in having one single, fully developed, linguistic system. This
difference can be seen in their use of words, especially complex verbs, since a
range of semantic nuances that are idiosyncratic to their speech are displayed.
The speech of elderly monolinguals in indigenous languages is vanishing as
villages decrease in population, leading to significant losses of cultural
diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this dissertation project, the doctoral
student will document naturalistic spoken monolingual speech and provide an in-
depth analysis of the grammar and the semantics of verbal morphology in a
particular monolingual variety that will allow answering questions such as: What
is the verbal morphology of elderly monolinguals like and what grammar underlies
such complex systems? What semantic information is prominently displayed through
the verbs used by monolinguals that is not present in bilingual speech? These
questions remain just loosely explored in current literature. The results of
this project will enhance understanding of the diversity of endangered
indigenous languages as it brings into the analysis monolingual systems which
are morphologically more elaborate, thus allowing researchers to evaluate
different cross-linguistic theories of morphologically complex languages. Since
the doctoral student is bilingual, data collection will include her
participation in everyday conversations. This interactive process will guarantee
gathering real speech while spontaneously interacting with elderly monolinguals.
Complementary elicited data will also be gathered to help achieve a better
understanding of the semantics of verbal morphology. The naturalistic data
corpus collected will be transcribed, annotated and analyzed, and will then be
curated and deposited in a digital archive for the use of a wide range of
stakeholders including indigenous language speakers, linguists, and other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.