* 2035963
* STTR Phase I:  Feasibility Study of Chip-Scale Iodine Vapor Cell Fabrication
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Leo Hollberg, VAPOR CELL TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2023
* USD 255,916.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to improve measurement science. Currently,
special low-pressure chambers known as "vapor cells" are made by hand in a
select number of precision glassblowing shops and suffer from poor dimensional
reproducibility, low production capacity, irregular sizes, and variable vapor
composition leading to a multifaceted limitation in the marketplace. Optical
frequency references on the market today are large, costly, and power-hungry,
but are used in a variety of commercial opportunities throughout industrial
metrology markets. This study aims to produce a repeatable recipe suitable for
high-volume production of miniature vapor cells. The results of this study will
lead to the scalable production of references that would be intrinsically
trustworthy and perform well in a continuous manner over many
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project will leverage
micromachining of glass and silicon to enable a new fabrication method for a
traditionally handmade component: a glass-blown vapor cell. The research
objective of this study is to test if such a method can yield a compact and
reproducible vapor cell. Research will employ semiconductor processing
techniques and optical frequency metrology to deduce the long-term stability and
accuracy of these vapor cells in order to assess their suitability as optical
frequency references. The anticipated technical results of this study include a
potential pathway to a mass-produced optical frequency standard suitable for
optical clocks, interferometers, and wavemeters. Such a technology would
underpin accurate measurement science in high-performance optical measurement
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.