* 2035135
* Protist Prophets – Foraminifera as Global Bioindicators for Past and Present Coral Reef Health
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sam Purkis, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 642,469.00

Half the world’s coral reefs have died in the last decades. Targeted
intervention can reverse this demise if applied to sites well-poised for
rehabilitation. The challenge is to identify which reefs will benefit from
costly intervention. If naturally depauperate reefs could be distinguished from
those which have been degraded by human-induced stress, restoration efforts
could be focused on the latter and not on the former. This distinction can
rarely be achieved via traditional coral monitoring since timeseries collected
by divers are too short. A shortcut to making this separation would therefore be
desirable in order to speed the pathway to restoration. Not meeting this need
risks squandering conservation resources at a time when the window for saving
Earth’s reefs is closing. Bioindicators are an emerging solution for
understanding reef health over meaningful timescales and foraminifera (forams)
show exceptional promise. These tiny-shelled protists accumulate abundantly in
reefal sands and, because they preserve well, can be easily identified. Despite
their excellent potential to guide reef conservation, foram bioindicators have
only been examined in a limited number of sites. Their global performance
therefore remains unknown and poses a critical knowledge gap. This project spans
NSF’s top four societal outcomes which relate to enhanced STEM education, with a
focus on women and underrepresented minorities, it answers the National Research
Council’s call to expand fundamental research using the longer time perspective
of the geologic record to test ecological theories at appropriate scales, and it
addresses the 2018 proclamation by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
that coral reefs are one of the most vulnerable
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute a markedly
improved understanding of foram bioindicators across Earth’s major reef
provinces in a single comparative study. A total of 2,500 sediment samples will
be analyzed, collected from &gt;1,000 reefs distributed on a global transect.
Three Specific Aims will be pursued, to: [1] Develop a new array of location-
specific foram indices capable of detecting historical reef stress. [2] Evolve
an epifaunal foram index tuned to identify past coral-algal phase shifts in now
healthy reef environments, and [3] Quantify the ability of the suite of foram
indices to distinguish naturally depauperate reefs from those recently impacted
by human activity. The project is creative and original because it departs from
small-scale studies of a reef bioindicator to a systematic global assessment.
The broader impact of the work will be amplified in collaboration with the
Khaled bin Sultan Living Oceans Foundation (KSLOF), a leader in coral reef K-12
education, through the creation of cross-curricular educational materials for
middle and high schoolers which will allow students to explore math and science
using data generated by this project. This curriculum will be piloted in
partnership with the Black Girls Dive Foundation, a non-profit that seeks to
inspire and empower girls and women to engage in aquatic-based STEM activities,
before being disseminated globally, at no cost, on KSLOF’s award-winning
education portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.