* 2035882
* SBIR Phase I:  A high-efficiency filter for endotoxin removal
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,06/30/2022
* David Howell, BONDWELL TECHNOLOGIES LP
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2022
* USD 235,506.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a system to improve pharmaceutical
manufacturing and sepsis treatment. A toxic substance known as endotoxin is a
common contaminant in many types of therapeutics, and it is the primary cause of
batch rejection in pharmaceutical manufacturing. The economic impact of
pharmaceutical batch failure due to contamination is high due to loss of product
and facility closure for cleaning. The endotoxin removal market within drug
manufacturing was valued at $315 million in 2018 and is expected to grow due to
the increase in biopharmaceutical products. Additionally, endotoxins are
dangerous when they enter patients’ bloodstream and can cause various medical
complications, including sepsis. The technology has the potential to remove
endotoxins from patients’ bloodstream more effectively than current solutions
This project will develop a universal high-efficiency endotoxin removal filter
that has the potential to not only improve drug manufacturing but also provide a
life-saving treatment for sepsis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a high-affinity, high-
specificity filter for endotoxin removal by using a protein that specifically
binds endotoxin and has been shown to remove 99.9% of endotoxin from protein
preparations. Traditionally, the use of proteins for product separations cause
problems with durability and protein density, stability, and activity. These
problems are overcome with unique materials that allow 100% incorporation of
active proteins via a stable fusion with substantially increased protein
stability. The binding capacity of the materials for endotoxin similar to
current solutions (5,000,000 EU/mL) would be considered successful, although the
binding capacity is expected to greatly exceed the current standard. Current
solutions are compatible with only specific types of therapeutics. A prototype
filter will be evaluated for endotoxin separation and protein recovery for three
protein therapeutics. An 80% recovery of each therapeutic is expected, with
simultaneous removal of 5,000,000 EU/mL of endotoxin. These tests will prove the
technical feasibility of the prototype filter by showing the materials have a
significantly higher binding capacity for endotoxin than current methods and
that they are compatible with multiple types of
therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.