* 2035688
* A Cross-Domain Data-driven Approach to Analyzing and Predicting the Impact of COVID-19 on the U.S. Electricity Sector
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Le Xie, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2023
* USD 335,000.00

This project aims at developing a cross-domain, data-driven approach to tracking
and measuring the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on the U.S.
electricity sector. The COVID-19 crisis has gone beyond anybody’s wildest
imagination and is turning out to be a once-in-a-century societal challenge. As
the lifeblood of civil society and a key enabling infrastructure system, the
electricity sector is quickly adjusting to the new normal, and it is crucial to
understand the severity and the resiliency of the grid in response to disruption
caused by COVID-19. This project substantiates a data-driven, science-based
approach to evaluating the impact of various policy options on the operation of
the electric energy infrastructure. Once successfully pursued, the project will
provide much needed planning decision support for the electricity sector. The
research program will be tightly coupled with an educational effort to train
future leaders in the electricity and public health sectors. The research team
has engaged female and African American students in building the preliminary
version of this data hub and to continue research on the project. The team is
also working with the industry members to provide training materials to a broad
set of industry affiliates&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop a first-of-its-kind cross-domain data hub and data-driven
analysis of the COVID’s impact on the U.S. electricity sector. The approach is
to 1) build a comprehensive open-access data hub with quality monitoring and
daily updates, 2) quantify the sensitivity of electricity consumption with
respect to social distancing and public health policies by using Ensemble
Backcast Models and Restricted Vector Autoregression (VAR), and 3) construct a
predictive model for the electricity sector considering social distancing
policies and mobility in different sectors. The contribution of this project is
four-fold. First, this is a first-of-its-kind data hub that combines otherwise
unrelated domains of data like electricity markets, public health, and mobility
data into a coherent infrastructure. A machine learning-based cleaning and pre-
processing technique is proposed. Second, a statistical approach is proposed to
quantify the unique impact of a public health crisis on the electricity sector.
This entails building and analyzing novel statistical models that encompass
societal mobility and public health data into the regression analysis of
electricity consumption in major hot spots in the U.S. Third, a novel concept of
elasticity of power consumption with respect to societal mobility is proposed
and substantiated as an effective indicator of the power consumption as a
function of social distancing policy measures. Last but not least, this project
will combine all the above three innovations to create a first-of-its-kind
predictive model of electricity sector as a function of social distancing
policies and public health data. Drawing upon expertise from biostatistics and
electric power engineering, this project will contribute to the cross-
fertilization between the public health and electric energy
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.