* 2035816
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Networking Faculty Seeds for Collective Change in the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Brian Teppen, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 10/31/2022
* USD 29,055.00

The PIs plan to create a professional development curriculum that is highly
tailorable to an individual's particular institutional context. They seek to
recruit 10 Seeding Diversity Fellows from 10 different universities who will
then bring on board another two partners to join the team. Each team of three
will then identify gatekeeping mechanisms that impede the ability of their
particular institution to recruit, retain, and include diverse faculty and
students in the geosciences. The proposed curriculum will implement and research
an innovative use of social network analysis as a tool for participants to
identify potential collaborators so that, together, they can collectively change
departmental beliefs and behaviors. The PIs will also develop and research
three, new, mixed-reality simulations that combine artificial intelligence with
human conversational intuition to teach participants how to manage conflicts
while advocating for systemic changes in university and departmental procedures.
Building off of the work from the pilot GOLD:GeoDES project, these new
simulations will extend beyond individual actions and move more toward
coordinating and leveraging social networks to effect institutional
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's proposed professional development
curriculum includes the following two innovations: 1. Helping participants to
identify and analyze their social networks to select two additional key
individuals with whom to collaborate to change collective behaviors in a
department. In the pilot GeoDES project, the PIs recognized that changing
collective behaviors of a department is a heavier lift than changing individual
behaviors and beliefs. 2. Making use of innovative mixed-reality simulations
that combine artificial intelligence with human conversational intuition to
teach participants how to manage conflicts while advocating for systemic changes
in university and departmental procedures. The project's innovation rests on the
idea that changing the behavior of many people within a department requires a
robust intervention grounded in strong theoretical foundations that have shown
promising results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.