* 2035186
* SBIR Phase I:  STELLA – SATCOM TECHNOLOGY OF ELABORATE LUNEBURG LENS ANTENNA
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Patrick Gbele, US AIR TECH, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2022
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project include a high performance, low cos, dependable,
novel antenna with high data bandwidth in 1000s of Gb (Tb) and high data rate
speeds in 1000s of Gb/s (Tb/s). The elevated performance of this antenna, the
cost effectiveness due to its 3D rapid prototype printing fabrication, and the
easy integration to existing technologies may promote proliferation of wireless
communications. The antenna may enable global connectivity and increase access
to internet/phone connectivity for previously inaccessible areas of the globe,
especially to disadvantaged and underserved communities. The high data bandwidth
and speed rates will positively impact the scientific community and technologies
based on data transfer such as remote learning, remote healthcare (remote
surgery, patient consultation), the defense industry, telework (work from home
during this COVID-19 pandemic), etc. The antenna’s technical superiority and low
cost support substantial anticipated commercial
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project addresses critical challenges in the two emerging wireless
communications systems: LEO-SATCOM (Low Earth Orbit – Satellite Communications)
and 5G mobile phone/internet. This project will develop a unique antenna
technology that will be integrated into satellite gateways, 5G ground terminals
and also satellites in orbit. The wide aperture angle of the antenna provides a
wide scanning angle capability that enables connection to highly inclined
satellites. The antenna is also capable of multi-beam analysis to enable the
simultaneous tracking of multiple satellites and to insure no down time during
handoffs. The radiation beam pattern has excellent characteristics of high gain
(Equivalent Isotropic Radiated Power), very narrow beamwidth, and low cross
polarization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.