* 2035671
* SBIR Phase I:  Self-defense wristband
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,11/30/2021
* Troy Dugo, WEARABLE DEFENSE, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project may lead to an innovative self-defense wristband so
that users will not have to remember to carry additional items. The potential
users may already be wearing a Fitbit, Apple Watch, etc. This device will
address the limitations of current devices, which include: charging a separate
device, placing a device in the current purse or grabbing it before leaving the
house, being alert when walking around, fumbling for a device if attacked,
remembering how to use a security device, pointing the device in the right
direction, or activating the device in a surprise attack. The wristband will
sense the user struggling and activate automatically. The wearable self-defense
wristband will benefit current self-defense product owners, college students,
concerned spouses and family members, people who exercise or work alone. etc..
The goal of this project is to enable self-protection for the public and achieve
swift and sustained support. It is anticipated that the wearable, threat-
protection product could deter 1 million attacks by
2030.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will develop the first Internet of Things (IoT), hands-
free, and wrist-worn self-defense device. The device will be motion-activated. A
gyro/accelerometer will be programmed to activate defense features when the
correct motion is applied. This wearable self-defense device will be easy and
quick to activate, reliable to respond, safe to use, and comfortable for the
wearer, as well as aesthetically pleasing. For the Phase I project, the features
that will be enabled in the self-defense wristband include a siren, a strobe
light, and a GPS ping to designated contacts and/or a 24/7 security firm that
will call the user back and call emergency responders, if needed. The key
technical hurdles are combining all targeted features in one compact device,
while triggering the self-defense wristband consistently and
safely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.