* 2035423
* SBIR Phase I:  Decentralized Internet Access Management System with Post-Quantum Security
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Andrey Yushkevich, Max Powers
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2021
* USD 275,886.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to stop hackers from entering networks. The proposed
approach will protect home owners from serious IT security threats posed by
improperly configured IOT devices in an average household. Cloud computing and
storage service providers, as well as regular website owners, discover new ways
to mitigate attacks, manage server control commands, and deliver media content.
Rapidly developing industries relying on a stable internet connection, such as
autonomous vehicles and commercial drones, will have the opportunity to be
protected from cyber threats with the proposed solution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to discover new
approaches to cybersecurity matters. In the traditional internet the number of
available IPs and ports is rather small, making it easy to scan one's network
and see potential vulnerabilities based on responses received. Instead of
exposing network devices to everyone on the web 2.0, users will be able to put
them behind the system proposed for development, which acts as an additional
layer on top of the traditional TCP/IP concept. With the system listening only
to the designated 32-byte long dynamically changing IPFS address the chances of
guessing the right one is 1/2256, thus making it practically impossible to
purposefully find the “entrance”. During the research and development process
the project will work on the physical product realization, modify IPFS nodes,
and design protocols responsible for decentralized VPN channels and media
content delivery on the web 3.0, because solving latency issues will create new
opportunities for the real-time communications on distributed networks. Another
goal of this research effort is to mitigate the forthcoming threats imposed by
the quantum computers, which will be achieved through the utilization of post-
quantum encryption algorithms applicable to data transmitted through the
traditional and decentralized mediums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.