* 2035038
* Ultra-high Precision Assembly of Aerospace Composite Structures: Fusing Physics-Based and Data-Driven Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Xiaowei Yue, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 12/31/2023
* USD 319,386.00

Composite structures have increasingly emerged for aerospace and other
applications because of their high strength-to-weight ratio, good resistance to
harsh environments, and great performance reliability. Because composite
structures have nonlinear, anisotropic, and compliant properties as well as
inherent manufacturing variability, conventional process modeling and quality
control methodologies for metal structure assembling are not adequate to
composite components. This award supports fundamental research that integrates
physics-guided and machine-learning models to advance ultra-high precision
assembly of aerospace composite structures. The research involves seamless
integration of physical and digital product connections, data science, advanced
statistics, and comprehensive manufacturing knowledge. The research has the
potential to minimize the material loss, decrease the production flow time and
achieve high productivity and quality control for aerospace manufacturing. The
scientific findings from this project may also be extended to other composites
demanding industries, e.g., automotive, spacecraft and solar energy, and thus,
increase the global competitiveness of the U.S. industry. The interdisciplinary
nature of this project will provide students with unique educational and
research experiences and cultivate a diverse and qualified workforce cognizant
with combined manufacturing and data analytics abilities. In addition, the
project will develop new learning modules for an undergraduate core course,
recruit and mentor underrepresented students, offer industrial short courses,
and develop open-source software for precision assembly, all potentially leading
to profound impacts to the society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
develop fundamental knowledge and transformative technologies for ultra-high
precision assembly of large complex-shaped composite structures by advancing
physics-guided machine learning. Specific research activities include: (1)
developing digital twin for ultra-high precision assembly of composite
structures, (2) conducting physics-constrained active learning with safe
exploration and efficient exploitation for experimental design and predictive
modeling, (3) studying sparse machine learning for an optimal actuating strategy
in composite structures assembly, and (4) analyzing theoretical properties of
the methodologies. The project will research small-sized key aerospace
structures as well as large-scale carbon fiber reinforced composite fuselage of
ultra-high precision, e.g., less than 0.2 mm for a diameter of about 5 m. The
methodologies will be computationally and experimentally evaluated in the
verification and validation phase. The research outcomes will (1) expand the
scientific understanding of engineering-driven data analytics and ultra-high
precision quality control theory, (2) bridge the knowledge gap between
predictive modeling, active learning, sparse learning, and composite structures
assembly, and ultimately, (3) realize the effective all-inclusive integration of
machine learning methodologies with advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.