* 2035302
* Collaborative Research: Controlling the Catalytic Properties of SSZ-39 Through Rational Synthesis: An Integrated Computational and Experimental Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Daniel Shantz, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 03/31/2024
* USD 274,488.00

The project focuses on advances in synthesis techniques for zeolites – catalytic
and molecular sieve materials used widely in the petroleum and chemical
industries, and in environmental pollution control. Specifically, the research
focuses on understanding the process by which compounds known as organic
structure directing agents (OSDAs) promote the growth of zeolite crystals that
display specific physical and catalytic properties. The investigators will
integrate experiment and theory toward this goal, where cutting-edge simulation
tools will be coupled with experimental measurements and advanced
characterization techniques. While the targeted zeolites are those used in
diesel engine emissions control, the knowledge generated in the work will be
broad-sweeping in scope. As such, the findings will have implications for
renewable energy, improved technologies for advanced material production, and
new approaches to generating intermediates/products in the pharmaceutical
industry. The project incorporates educational and workforce training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, including cross-training
of graduate students between the research groups. Outreach activities will
include interactive modules for K-12 outreach, a distance learning course
related to emerging energy technologies, and new lab safety training modules for
students. All of those can be widely disseminated, adding to options for remote
learning that will become more essential as the nation weathers the impacts of
the COVID-19 pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The push for new energy sources has
required an expansion in our understanding of fundamental chemistry. This is
particularly true with respect to catalysis, with metal exchanged zeolites being
actively utilized within industry. A significant roadblock to the further
implementation of new zeolite catalysts is the general inability to control
local structure such as active site spatial arrangement, a grand challenge
problem in zeolite science. Recent work by one of the investigators’ research
groups indicates that it is potentially possible to control the aluminum
arrangement within the framework of a small pore zeolite (known as SSZ-39) by
simply varying the relative amount of the cis and trans isomer of the organic
structure directing agent used in synthesis. The research objective of the
project is thus to guide the rational synthesis of zeolites with controlled
active site arrangement by understanding the nucleation and growth of SSZ-39
from a faujasite zeolite. The central hypothesis of the project is that the
nucleation and growth of SSZ-39, in an interconversion process from faujasite,
is controlled by the dissolution of the faujasite, with the SSZ-39 forming at
the faujasite/aqueous interface via heterogeneous nucleation off the dissolving
faujasite crystal. Research efforts will focus on ways to control the aluminum
arrangement in a system where all synthesis parameters (save the isomer ratio)
are held fixed. However, the understanding—and potential for efficient design—of
active site control in zeolites requires both experimental and computational
methodologies, as zeolite synthesis is complex and cannot be adequately
described without advances in the marriage of experimental and computational
research activities. The project thus addresses a critical need to develop
comprehensive, multi-scale models and to advance the understanding and value of
predictive tools within the STEM pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.