* 2035537
* CSBR: An inordinate fondness for beetles - expanding access to the Triplehorn collection of Coleoptera, phase 2
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Luciana Musetti, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 320,170.00

The specimens held in natural history collections are the documentation of the
world’s biodiversity, including what the species are, where they live, their
life history, and their relationships with other organisms. The specimens and
the information associated with them are a timeline that records the changes in
flora and fauna that have resulted from growing human populations, changing land
use patterns, habitat alterations, species extinctions, and the introduction of
invasive species. These specimen records are invaluable and irreplaceable, but
they are also irrelevant unless they are both secure and accessible. To be
secure, specimens must be protected from environmental hazards such as heat,
humidity, light, and pests. Accessibility encompasses equally the physical
availability the materials for researchers to study through visits and loans as
well as free and open access to the data associated with the specimens using
information technologies. The process of photographing, copying and uploading
data itself requires the ability of workers to remove and handle specimens.
Recording of data and quality control can be a prolonged and expensive process.
However, it is also a valuable opportunity to engage with the general public in
the documentation of their own biological heritage. This not only contributes to
a better understanding of the inner workings of natural history collections, but
how and why scientists explore the natural world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide the physical and virtual access needed to the hundreds of
thousands of beetle specimens housed in the Triplehorn Insect Collection at The
Ohio State University. Beetles are the most species-rich group of plants or
animals in the world, and they include many species that are serious pests of
food and forests as well as beneficial species that keep pests at low population
levels. The researchers in the collection will rehouse the specimens in new,
secure cabinets, drawers and unit trays. The work will be coordinated with
transcription of the data on the labels attached to each specimen. These data
will then go through a quality assurance check before being stored in the
collection’s electronic database. This information resource is open to the
general public, and its contents are automatically shared with iDigBio, the
national clearinghouse for biodiversity information, and the Global Biodiversity
Information Facility, the worldwide counterpart. The data associated with the
collection of tiger beetles will be the focus of a citizen science
collaboration. The specimens and labels will be photographed and uploaded to
Notes from Nature, and with the help of lay collaborators, the data will be
transcribed and then uploaded into the collection database. This work will then
ensure the maintenance and availability of specimens and their data for future
research, resources that are the results of more than a century of collecting
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.