* 2035637
* Collaborative Research: Peripheral East Antarctic Ice as a Unique Recorder of Climate Variability during the Last Interglacial
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Clay Tabor, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 289,433.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spatial extent of the West
Antarctic Ice Sheet during the last interglacial period (129,000 to 116,000
years ago) is currently unknown, yet this information is fundamental to
projections of the future stability of the ice sheet in a warming climate.
Paleoclimate records and proxy evidence such as dust can inform on past
environmental conditions and ice-sheet coverage. This project will combine new,
high-sensitivity geochemical measurements of dust from Antarctic ice collected
at Allan Hills with existing water isotope records to document climate and
environmental changes through the last interglacial period. These changes will
then be compared with Earth-system model simulations of dust and water isotopes
to determine past conditions and constrain the sensitivity of the West Antarctic
Ice Sheet to warming. The project will test the hypothesis that the
uncharacteristically volcanic dust composition observed at another peripheral
ice core site at Taylor Glacier during the last interglacial period is related
to changes in the spatial extent of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to characterize mineral dust transport
during the penultimate glacial-interglacial transition. The team will apply
high-precision geochemical techniques to the high-volume, high-resolution ice
core drilled at the Allan Hills site in combination with Earth system model
simulations to: (1) determine if the volcanic dust signature found in
interglacial ice from Taylor Glacier is also found at Allan Hills, (2) determine
the likely dust source(s) to this site during the last interglacial, and (3)
probe the atmospheric and environmental changes during the last interglacial
with a diminished West Antarctic Ice Sheet. The team will develop a suite of
measurements on previously drilled ice from Allan Hills, including isotopic
compositions of Strontium and Neodymium, trace element concentrations, dust-size
distribution, and imaging of ice-core dust to confirm the original signal
observed and provide a broader spatial reconstruction of dust transport. In
tandem, the team will conduct Earth system modeling with prognostic dust and
water-isotope capability to test the sensitivity of dust transport under several
plausible ice-sheet and freshwater-flux configurations. By comparing dust
reconstruction and model simulations, the team aims to elucidate the driving
mechanisms behind dust transport during the last interglacial
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.