* 2035770
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Linking2Source: Security of In-Vehicle Networks via Source Identification
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Alireza Mohammadi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/29/2024
* USD 524,490.00

Connected autonomous vehicles (AVs) may offer new mobility options to millions
of people. Integration of connectivity features into modern vehicles is a main
driving force behind the ever-expanding attack surface of connected AVs,
rendering them vulnerable to hacking and data theft. Key vulnerabilities arise
from the increased coupling of unsecured automotive control networks with
multimedia networks and the integration of wireless interfaces such as Bluetooth
and Wi-Fi networks. As such, developing robust and reliable solutions to
identify, localize, and mitigate cybersecurity threats to connected AVs is of
societal importance. Existing solutions, however, are limited in their ability
and scope as they are unable to reliably link the received data to the
transmitting devices. The goal of this project is to safeguard AVs against
growing attack surfaces and vectors by developing a holistic solution called the
Linking2Source framework through three seamlessly integrated layers of defense,
with each layer aiming to mitigate a specific set of attacks. The project also
has a significant educational component, consisting of a set of inquisitive
hands-on activities involving vehicle data acquisition, decoding, and data
analytics, network packet injection, and intrusion detection aimed at outreach
and broadening participation in STEM disciplines, including automotive
cybersecurity, cyber-physical system security, statistical data analysis and
digital forensics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first layer of the proposed
Linking2Source framework aims to protect in-vehicle networks by developing real-
time message authentication, intrusion detection, and localization tools based
on unclonable signal attributes for physical fingerprinting of electronic
control units (ECUs). The approach exploits uniqueness in physical signal
attributes, leverages statistical signal processing and parameter modeling
techniques for physical fingerprint estimation, and uses statistical machine
learning methods for transmitting ECU identification and localization. The
second layer aims to protect in-vehicle networks against firmware/software-level
attacks using ECU behavioral fingerprinting through data-driven statistical
graph analytics. The approach targeted by the research team here is the
transformation of sequential in-vehicle network data into a directed-graph to
leverage statistical graph analytics for ECU behavior modeling and intrusion
detection. The third layer of defense aims to protect AVs against attacks at the
sensing and actuation layer by using dynamical observers that rely on vehicle-
physics-based modeling for fault detection and isolation. The faulty signals
such as incorrect steering angle commands that are issued by the rogue ECUs and
are not in agreement with the vehicle physics could cause unsafe maneuvers such
as excessive yaw motions. The project exploits the physics-based vehicle model
for verifying the correctness of the issued ECU signals over the in-vehicle
network bus. By leveraging the Dempster-Shafer evidence theory, the decisions
from these layers of defense are optimally fused to integrate the three defense
solutions in the Linking2Source framework. A key component of this project is to
use in-vehicle network data both at the physical and datalink layers for
modeling physical, behavioral, and vehicle-state fingerprints and using them for
attack detection and localization and mitigation of the impact of malicious ECUs
using a proactive cancellation policy. The research team will prototype the
proposed solutions and evaluate them on the University of Michigan-Dearborn
shuttle, on the University of Michigan MCity Test Facility, and on commercial
tools, in addition to collecting large-scale data from a network testbed and
from a real vehicle driving and sharing it with the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.