* 2035114
* RAPID: Next phase serological testing for SARS-CoV-2 for biocultural research
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Thomas McDade, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2022
* USD 199,217.00

This RAPID project will develop methods and infrastructure for SARS-CoV-2
antibody and immunity testing that can be operationalized to examine a wide
range of social and biocultural processes as they relate to COVID-19 exposure
and outcomes. Results from a large community-based sample will be used to inform
estimates of the seroprevalence of infection in order to illuminate the
geographic spread of the virus, identify subgroups of individuals more
susceptible to infection, and investigate the development of immunity following
exposure. A minimally-invasive approach to antibody testing will facilitate
application in community-based settings and provide information on the
predictors of viral transmission that can be used to mitigate future outbreaks.
The project will also contribute to the infrastructure of science through
training opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, and
includes public outreach activities on the role of antibody testing for SARS-
CoV-2. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;During the COVID 19 pandemic, strategic testing in
community-based settings is critical for understanding the true level of
infection, tracking the virus, and for preventing transmission. Serological
testing for antibodies against the virus is an important tool for identifying
individuals who have been exposed to SARS-CoV-2, but current clinic-based
testing approaches require serum samples collected via venipuncture, which is
difficult to implement when people are being asked to stay at home. This project
combines the convenience of blood collection in the home with the analytic rigor
that can be applied in the laboratory by using a serological test for SARS-CoV-2
IgG antibodies that requires only a single drop of blood, collected on filter
paper following a simple finger stick. The investigators will deploy a web-
based, “no-contact” research platform to investigate the origins of differences
in COVID-19 infection rates across neighborhoods in Chicago. Following
recruitment, participants navigate to a home page with their smart phone or
computer where consent is obtained and a survey is administered electronically.
A kit is mailed for the collection of a finger stick dried blood spot sample,
which is returned to the lab and analyzed for IgG antibodies against the
receptor binding domain of SARS-CoV-2. Test results will be combined with survey
responses and neighborhood-based administrative data to investigate the
individual-, household-, and community-level predictors of exposure. The second
aim is to develop and validate a surrogate virus neutralization protocol for use
with dried blood spot samples. This protocol addresses an important limitation
of current antibody tests which detect the presence of binding antibodies, but
cannot quantify the presence of the neutralizing antibodies that actually
prevent the virus from entering host tissues upon re-infection. The protocol
will then be applied to samples from the first aim to investigate the factors
that predict the development of immunity to SARS-
CoV-2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.