* 2035857
* SBIR Phase I:  Quieting systemic hyper-inflammation (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Scott Larsen, FIBROSIX INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 02/28/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to alleviate the suffering caused by hyper-inflammation. Hyper-
inflammation is a mis-regulation of the immune system often brought on by viral
pneumonia. It can have severe life-threatening complications, including acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and changes in blood clotting; hyper-
inflammation has been seen in COVID-19 patients. Secondary conditions caused by
hyper-inflammation can also have severe long-term consequences to patient
health. This project will develop therapeutics that quiet the systemic mis-
regulation of the immune system and reduce patient mortality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance a treatment for hyper-
inflammation, such as that induced by COVID-19. It arises from multiple stimuli
and results in life-threatening mis-regulation of the immune system. With a
novel molecular target, a new class of anti-fibrotic compounds have the
potential to reduce cytokine levels and pro-coagulation factors, acting broadly
to address the heterogeneity of inflammation responses. As information becomes
available regarding the cytokine storm induced by COVID-19, relevant biomarkers
have been proposed. To demonstrate robust actions on inflammation this project
will evaluate the effects of the therapeutic on 1) pro-inflammatory cytokine
release, 2) activation of the innate immune system, and 3) systemic
concentrations of cytokines and pro-coagulation factors after initiation of
inflammation. Biomarkers will be established to track the efficacy of the
therapeutic at early and late stages of inflammation, providing a strong
rationale for testing the efficacy of this class of compounds in animal models
of inflammation. Importantly, with the successful completion of this project,
this class of therapeutics will have demonstrated potential to treat hyper-
inflammation, coupled with a demonstrated ability to prevent pulmonary fibrosis,
a potentially fatal complication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.