* 2035523
* 2020 Device Research Conference (DRC), To Be Held Virtually June 21-24, 2020.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Rebecca Peterson, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 10,000.00

The proposed project seeks financial support to increase student participation
and enhance technical training at the 78th Device Research Conference (DRC).
This is a virtual conference, held from June 21 to 24, 2020, and all
participants will join remotely. The conference will focus on a fabrication,
characterization, modeling, and simulation of devices. The conference will
include presentations on devices based on emerging materials systems such as
organic and hybrid semiconductors, low-dimensional materials, and ultrawidegap
semiconductors. A variety of device applications will be discussed, including
biological devices, energy scavenging devices, spintronic and magnetic devices,
memory devices, nanoelectronics, optoelectronic and photonic devices, power
devices, and quantum devices. The Conference will host world-renowned
researchers in advanced devices as invited speakers, whose expertise range from
design, to fabrication characterization and applications. In addition to
technical talks, a short course on a highly relevant topic presented by renowned
world experts will greatly enhance the usefulness of the conference to
attendees. The technical program will provide student participants with the
opportunity to gain exposure to new materials and devices, their basic physics,
and their engineering applications. Exposing the next generation of researchers
to these important disciplines is critical to maintain the supply of STEM
workers with the skillsets necessary to address emerging commercial trends. The
information will be disseminated through online video presentations,
downloadable posters and the conference proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.