* 2035375
* Catalyzing Systemic Change in Undergraduate Mathematics: A Convening of Mathematics Leaders
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Chris Rasmussen, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 12/31/2021
* USD 49,135.00

Mathematics serves as a gateway to most STEM majors. As a result, improving
college mathematics contributes to preparation of the future STEM workforce.
Based on research results, student outcomes in mathematics could be improved by
using approaches such as interactive pedagogies, co-requisite courses, and
enrichment and support programs. However, entrenched practices and systemic
challenges currently limit widespread adoption of these and other promising
approaches. This multi-day virtual workshop will develop a comprehensive account
of these challenges and begin exploring productive ways to move forward. Leaders
and researchers from a broad group of institutions and professional societies
will discuss challenges to expanding the reach of high-impact programs. They
will share positive outcomes, strategies, and lessons learned and brainstorm how
these results can be used to promote equity in the mathematical sciences. A
major outcome of the workshop will be a public report detailing the challenges
that were identified within the mathematics higher education community. The
report will also discuss how addressing those challenges might lead to more
positive and equitable student outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This four-day
virtual convening will bring together professional organization and community
leaders to share their successes and challenges to achieve three main goals: (1)
Sharing successful departmental, institutional, and professional society
strategies and programs as a means for improving existing programs; (2)
Identifying institutional and individual issues that limit the broader impact of
existing strategies and programs; and (3) Formulating recommendations for how to
move forward on the institutional and cultural change needed to address the
identified issues. Each of the four workshop days will be approximately two to
four weeks apart, allowing participants to engage in interim discussions and
other work. The first session of the first workshop day will focus on detailing
successful departmental, institutional, and professional society strategies and
programs, including how equity issues are being addressed. Participants will
also discuss approaches to evaluate the reach of programs and benchmarks for
moving forward. The remainder of the first day will focus on challenges to
scaling programs and identifying forces that keep promising strategies and
programs from having a broader impact. The second workshop day will have two
working group sessions on systemic barriers, one structured by program type and
the second structured across program type. The first session of the third day
will focus on models of change that might be effective in different settings and
discuss strategies that different participant groups might use to overcome
specific challenges. The second session will focus on how the recommendations
presented in the workshop report might address the identified challenges across
different program types. The final day of the workshop, approximately one month
after the third day, will allow participants to discuss and suggest improvements
to a draft of the public report. This award is funded through the NSF IUSE: EHR
Program, which supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.