* 2035354
* RAPID: Illuminating the effects of a COVID-19 elimination of diver disturbance on reef fish behavior, distribution and ecosystem functioning in the Galapagos Marine Reserve
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Jon Witman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Large-scale changes in the magnitude of human influence on the biosphere have
occurred due to travel restrictions and quarantines to contain the COVID-19
pandemic. The reduction in the number of visits to natural areas is providing an
unprecedented opportunity to study the effects of people on wildlife and
ecosystems. Previous studies indicate that humans can impact the entire
ecosystem by frightening animals and altering their behaviors. The COVID-19
quarantine has created a "natural experiment" in the ocean at scuba-diving
destinations worldwide by suspending dive tourism and temporarily eliminating
the effects of diver-induced fear in reef fish communities. In the Galapagos
Islands, the number of scuba divers dropped from 18,000 divers a year to zero in
March 2020 when the government of Ecuador halted dive tourism. This study is
measuring the changes reef fish behavior, populations and ecological
interactions between species to gain an understanding of how dive activity
affects the functioning of this marine ecosystem. The effects of changes in
diver disturbance are being determined by comparing reef fish communities during
and after the quarantine to those from a long-term pre-COVID-19 baseline study.
Broader impacts include training opportunities for undergraduate students
through participation in field research and senior thesis projects. Public
outreach is focused on presentations to the general public and high school
students in the US and in the Galapagos. A YouTube video on the ecological
effects of diving activity in the Galapagos Marine Reserve is being produced and
made publicly available. Insights from this project is increasing awareness of
how humans impact subtidal marine ecosystems, which is aiding marine
conservation efforts of marine protected areas in the Galapagos and
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual contribution of the research
lies in its ability to test hypotheses about the role of humans in influencing
consumptive and non-consumptive interactions in shaping the structure,
complexity and functioning of marine ecosystems. While it is known that reef
fish react to humans as potential predators, less is known about how the fear of
predation, a major type of non-consumptive interaction, affects subtidal marine
communities, particularly on large spatial scales relevant to conservation. An
integrated, observational - experimental research program is addressing this
knowledge gap in the Galapagos Marine Reserve by comparing current conditions
with existing pre-COVID-19 data. Four hypotheses or predictions related to
pandemic spillover effects are being tested: 1) diver disturbance results in
behavioral shifts in reef fishes; 2) divers decrease the abundance and diversity
of reef fishes and this effect is currently reduced; 3) emergence or increased
abundance of previously wary herbivorous and /or predatory fish results in
greater consumption of benthic organisms during and immediately after the
COVID-19 period; and 4) decreased diver disturbance associated with the pandemic
changes the complexity of behavioral networks (aggressive and positive
interactions) among reef fish, sharks and sea lions. The hypotheses are being
tested at 14 sites over the course of three research trips using underwater
observations and experiments involving fish counts, video camera deployments to
record fish behaviors, feeding rates, interactions between species and
underwater boat noise from dive tour boats. This project has implications for
understanding how fish communities in the Galapagos Marine Reserve ecosystem
will respond to future perturbations, while also providing unique insight into
the ecological ramifications of a human pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.