* 2035239
* Collaborative Research: RUI: From Molecules to Mating: An Integrative Approach to Understanding Chemical Signal Evolution in Fireflies
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Gregory Pask, Middlebury College
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/28/2026
* USD 190,039.00

Communication among individual animals is essential for survival and
reproduction. Across animals, communication signals are incredibly diverse and
employ a variety of senses, ranging from vision to smell. This project seeks to
determine how and why signals differ among species in the charismatic insect
group, the fireflies. While the public is most familiar with their flashing
signals on warm summer nights, used to find and locate mates, a number of
firefly species have lost the ability to produce light as adults. Unlike their
lighted counterparts, these “unlighted” adult fireflies are day-active, and
studies suggest that they use smell to detect the chemical signals (pheromones)
of potential mates. By comparing North American firefly species that use light
versus pheromone signals, there is the potential to identify common patterns in
the chemical, genetic, and behavioral changes associated with switching signal
modes. The resources produced during this project will dramatically expand
genomic tools for fireflies, enabling substantial advances in evolutionary,
natural products, and conservation studies. The pheromones identified can open
up new possibilities for surveillance of threatened unlighted firefly
populations that are otherwise relatively difficult to census. Fireflies also
offer an ideal opportunity for public outreach, as they are charismatic insects
that draw public interest. Development of educational modules in insect biology
and conservation during the Pennsylvania Firefly Festival and interdisciplinary
community programming on fireflies in art and culture will bring the science and
impact of insects to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In nature, mating signals
are diverse and even closely-related species can employ strikingly different
signaling strategies. To understand what generates this diversity, we must
understand the fundamental mechanisms and evolutionary processes that govern
signal mode change across taxa. Fireflies, in the beetle family Lampyridae, are
renowned for their nocturnal light signals that function primarily in mate
recognition and choice. While the larvae of all firefly species emit light, only
some species emit light as adults. These “unlighted” adult fireflies are diurnal
and likely use long- and short-distance pheromones to find mates. In North
American taxa, the loss of lighted communication and secondary gain of chemical
signals appears to have occurred independently several times. These natural
replicates facilitate the exploration of the molecular and behavioral changes
that accompany an evolutionary switch in primary mating signal mode. (i)
Characterization of volatile and cuticular signaling compounds from pairs of
closely related species with contrasting signal modes will test whether chemical
repertoires diversify in unlighted taxa. (ii) Next generation sequencing will
enable examinations of whether chemical repertoire diversification is
accompanied by corresponding diversification of chemosensory receptors, and
identify convergent pathways for signal mode switching among firefly clades.
(iii) Functional characterization studies will directly link chemosensory
receptor genes to specific mating pheromone components. Investigating
evolutionary signal mode switches in an organismal system with extreme
differences in unimodal signals offers a unique opportunity to develop patterns
and predictions that advance the study of more complex multimodal
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.