* 2035890
* RAPID: Learning about Coronavirus Genome Replication by Interfering with It
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* William Gelbart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Due to the global pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2, there is an urgent need to
understand how the virus reproduces. After the virus infects a cell, the viral
replicase enzyme makes thousands of copies of the viral genome. This project
will determine the molecular features of the SARS-CoV-2 RNA genome that enable
it to be copied by the coronavirus replicase complex. Having determined those
features, the PIs will use that knowledge to design genome-like molecules that
may interfere with replication of normal genomes and thus have potential as
novel therapeutic agents. The PIs will evaluate the effectiveness of the genome-
like molecules at blocking virus replication in cells and in more complicated
tissue culture that includes a variety of different cell types meant to mimic
the conditions in the human lung. Additionally, the project will broaden
participation in STEM by funding a Latina post-doctoral scholar to perform most
of the experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will use a combination of
biochemistry and culture to determine the minimal features of a SARS-CoV-2
replicon that enable it to be replicated. Next, the PIs will apply that
knowledge to design defective-interfering RNA that can be replicated very
efficiently yet does not encode infectious virus particles. Extending from
natural defective-interfering particles in other viruses, this RNA will likely
serve as a template for the coronavirus replicase. When an intact virus
penetrates a cell that contains defective-interfering RNA, the defective
interfering RNA will serve as a template for the virus replicase. Doing so will
interfere with viral replication by occupying the replicase and consuming
nucleotides that could otherwise be incorporated into new intact virus genomes.
The interfering RNAs will be delivered using a virus-like particle system
designed to enter cells expressing the SARS-CoV-2 receptor and the protease
necessary for SARS-CoV-2 entry. The PIs will determine the extent to which
defective-interfering particles block replication in simple tissue culture or in
human airway epithelial organoids, which have multiple differentiated cell types
iorganized similarly to those found in explanted tissue. The epithelial
organoids are derived from healthy human tissue donors and represent some of the
genetic diversity in human populations. Broader impacts include the potential
for basic understanding of the interfering particles to contribute to developing
similar particles to treat or prevent COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID
award is made by the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences to respond to the COVID-19
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.