* 2035385
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: Workshop on technological and societal hurdles facing carbon capture
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Jacob Walter, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 02/28/2021
* USD 97,484.00

This project will organize and host a workshop to expand collaboration among
stakeholders in academia, industry, state and federal government, and community
sectors to develop carbon capture and sequestration as a potential topic for a
future topic (track) of the NSF Convergence Accelerator. Carbon capture and
sequestration has the potential to be an impactful part of efforts to remove CO2
from the atmosphere. Substantial reduction of atmospheric CO2 levels has the
potential to slow climate impacts, providing benefits to U.S. society and global
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the technical hurdles to carbon
capture and sequestration (CCS) have been surmounted or discussed in other
events. The key value of this event is engaging a range of stakeholders to
develop a potential Convergence Accelerator topic that considers the risks,
challenges, and opportunities of CSS. The stakeholders who will be engaged
include researchers in the geosciences, engineering, and economics,
representatives from the petroleum industry and environmental stewardship
organizations, policymakers, community organizations including Tribal groups,
and also state and federal agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will
help define how technological, economic, legal, political, and community
challenges related to CCS can be assessed and addressed in a Convergence
Accelerator track. If that track were to be selected, it could allow
multidisciplinary and multi-stakeholder teams to expand pilot projects in ways
that appropriately address risk, address community concerns, provide strong
economic benefits through development of sequestration infrastructure, and have
a measurable effect on atmospheric CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.