* 2035835
* SBIR Phase II:  A novel 3D bioprinting system for rapid high-throughput tissue fabrication
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Wei Zhu, Allegro 3D, Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 04/30/2023
* USD 997,692.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to provide a high-throughput biofabrication platform that can create
physiologically relevant in vitro tissue models for diverse applications
including drug testing, assay development, therapeutics, and biomedical
research. The current drug development process is lengthy, inefficient, and
expensive. It costs about $1.8 billion and takes 12-15 years to launch a single
drug. Approximately 92% of the drugs that passed preclinical testing failed in
subsequent human trials, highlighting the lack of adequate preclinical testing
tools to generate predictive data. Failure to detect the drug-induced toxicity
to the vital human organs in clinical trials often leads to market withdrawal of
the drug after launch, which causes enormous financial losses to the drug
manufacturer and also negative physical and mental effects for patients. The
proposed technology will significantly improve drug safety, increase the
efficiency and lower the cost of drug development by providing more reliable and
clinically relevant drug testing results in a high-throughput fashion. This
technology can also provide patient-specific tissues for critical biomedical
research (e.g. disease modeling) and in vivo therapeutic applications, providing
a viable solution to diseases without no cures or effective treatment
yet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
II project will support the development of a high-throughput biofabrication
platform that is compatible with the high-throughput screening (HTS) systems
widely used for drug screening and assay development. Currently, the key
bottleneck for traditional microfabrication strategies and mainstream nozzle-
based bioprinters is the lack of scalability and throughput to accommodate
scalable manufacturing necessary in HTS systems. With the growing adoption of 3D
biomimetic human tissue models in the pharmaceutical industry, there is a
critical need for advanced manufacturing systems that enable rapid and
streamlined tissue fabrication methods that are compatible with already
established HTS platforms for preclinical toxicity testing of potential drug
candidates. The proposed project will develop a parallel optical projection-
based 3D bioprinting platform for direct manufacturing of 3D tissues within
multiwell plates commonly used in the HTS systems. Implementation of the
proposed 3D bioprinting system will permit subsequent in situ drug screening or
assay testing directly within the wells and drastically improve biofabrication
workflow efficiencies for the pharmaceutical industry and biomedical research
community. This bioprinter will serve as a powerful instrument for the mass
production of 3D tissue models at the industrial scale to advance drug discovery
and assay development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.