* 2035203
* MsRI-EW: Planning the Infrastructural Needs to Meet National Research Demand and Support the United Statesâ€™ Leadership in Biomanufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Carolyn Yeago, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2021
* USD 49,989.00

The recent global pandemic has highlighted some critical areas for improvement
in delivering safe and effective therapeutics. An infrastructure that enables
rapid, on-demand manufacturing of emerging therapies is critical to maintaining
the health of the American people. This conference will bring together
representatives from the public and private sectors. The conference will
investigate all major aspects of vaccine and therapeutic development and
production. The objective is to develop a roadmap to drive innovative
biomanufacturing research and development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Issues to be
addressed include infrastructure to characterize products for clinical trials
and regulatory approval; cyberinfrastructure to provide secure communication and
storage of research data; artificial intelligence and machine learning tools to
accelerate research progress; and automation technologies to enable new,
disruptive manufacturing technologies for vaccines and therapeutics. The
conference will have virtual sessions covering (1) cell/gene manufacturing, (2)
emerging vaccine manufacturing, and (3) data integration, analytics, security,
and management. Experts within each session will represent clinical research and
application, academia, governmental agencies, and the industrial value chain.
Cross-cutting topics will be discussed in terms of needed infrastructure to
support accelerated and expanded research efforts. These cross-cutting topics
include Scale-up, Automation, Supply Chain, and Education and
Workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.