* 2035326
* EAGER: Broadening the Pathway: A case study analysis of the implications of math and science on computer science graduates' employability
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Kathleen Quardokus Fisher, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This proposal is designed to understand the salary potential and employability
of students who graduate with a Bachelor of Arts in Computer Science (BACS) –
primarily distinguished by the removal of calculus and physics requirements from
the traditional computer science curriculum. Given the numerous studies that
identify gateway courses like calculus and physics as impediments to students’
persistence in engineering and computer science AND their particular impact on
women, Black and Hispanic students, the removal of this barrier has incredible
potential for broadening participation in computing. This critical instance case
study was designed to explore the student and administrative motivations for
pursuing this alternative pathway and compare student employment and salary
information to their Bachelor of Science in Computer Science peers. The study
will consist of the following data elements: curriculum analysis and comparison,
interviews with administrators that advocated for the new degree, interviews
with administrators that did not advocate for the new degree, interviews with
students that completed the BACS – prior to graduation and 6 months after
starting their new job (or post-graduation). Likewise, a survey of all graduates
from both degrees will capture data such as degree awarded, employment status,
and self-reported starting salary information. The guiding theoretical
frameworks will be cultural-historical activity theory, social identity theory
and anti-deficit achievement frameworks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this work could either serve as a cautionary tale for institutions considering
similar programs OR it could serve as the basis for a deeper, more critical
review of the requirements currently in place in BSCS programs. Are calculus and
physics courses required for prosperity in computing or are they simply a
barrier to equity? Furthermore, this inquiry aligns with the exploration
prompted by the National Science Foundation’s Computing in Undergraduate
Education (CUE) solicitation that inspires questions related to expanding
computing beyond the boundaries of traditional Computer Science programs,
increasing diverse population participation, and scaling interventions for
broader impact. The risk and reward associated with this work is contingent on
the fact that underrepresentation in computing is such a prolific problem that
potentially unmasking a long-standing barrier could have immense implications
for how we design curriculum moving forward. Results from this study are high
reward because computer science is an area of critical national need and
national data suggest that broadening participation is paramount in the
continued success and preeminence of the nation on the global technology
stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.