* 2035876
* EAGER‐QAC‐QSA: Quantum Chemistry with Mean-field Cost from Semidefinite Programming on Quantum Computing Devices
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* David Mazziotti, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

David A. Mazziotti of The University of Chicago is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory program in the Division
of Materials Research to harness the potential of quantum computing to study
problems in chemistry and materials science. The proposal was submitted in
response to the Quantum Algorithm Challenge Dear Colleague Letter, NSF 20-056.
Many new molecules and materials that are critically important to improving
society are so complex that they are difficult to study on conventional
computers. Mazziotti and his research group are pursuing novel quantum chemistry
algorithms that exploit the advantages of quantum computers to predict the
energies and other properties of molecules and materials at a much lower
computational cost. The work has the potential to be transformative in that it
aims to enable applications to much larger molecules with larger numbers of
electrons, opening new vistas for quantum computing in chemistry and materials.
Mazziotti and his group are also driving educational and outreach activities
including a quantum computing curricula for chemistry at the University of
Chicago as well as an interactive Zoom classroom series for teaching quantum
chemistry, information, and computing to undergraduate and high school students
beyond the University of Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though remarkable
strides have been made in hardware and algorithms, a quantum advantage of
quantum computers over classical computers has not been demonstrated in
molecular simulations. Noise on current and near-term devices has limited the
sizes of the molecules and the numbers of electrons that are treatable to below
the classical limit. Mazziotti and his research group are pursuing a new
paradigm for quantum computing in which the two-electron reduced density matrix
(2-RDM) is computed directly on the quantum computer. This approach represents a
dramatic departure from all existing algorithms that prepare the wave function
and subsequently perform measurements of target observables. Direct preparation
of the 2-RDM, constrained by suitable conditions to enforce its representation
of at least one N-electron density matrix, does not encounter the traditional
bottlenecks of wave function simulations such as deep circuits or non-trivial
high-dimensional classical optimization. Specifically, we propose a quantum
semidefinite programming (SDP) algorithm for the direct variational computation
of the 2-RDM on quantum computers. The quantum solution of semidefinite programs
has the potential to reduce the computational cost of treating strong electron
correlation to that of a mean-field calculation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.