* 2035064
* RAPID: Natural experiments with online games: Support, impact and mitigation during the Covid-19 Pandemic
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Dmitri Williams, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2022
* USD 196,800.00

This research examines whether the surge of participation in online games
triggered by the social distancing response to the COVID-19 pandemic is
mitigating or magnifying the harm caused on the wellbeing of those kept away
from their fundamental sources of social support, stimulation, and affection.
The world is facing an unprecedented crisis as people have suddenly and
dramatically moved away from physical contact and into mediated spaces, with
largely unknown costs and benefits. The objective of this research is to
discover mitigation strategies by leveraging existing and ongoing large data
sets from multi-player games to provide a longitudinal window on the net effect
of these changes on socialization, support, community, physical and mental
health. Are those changes different as new cohorts come online, and how do the
dynamics also shift as these new groups mix with the previous ones? Are online
games a balm against this growing crisis, or part of the problem? Answers will
have broad and potentially immediate impact on the social and psychological
health of the very large numbers of people for whom such games are a major
platform for friendship and socialization, both veteran players whose real-life
situations have changed and new cohorts of players who may bring new needs and
behavioral problems to this very significant social medium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior to the pandemic the research team had already begun
to collect very extensive anonymized data through collaboration with the
corporation managing a highly popular team-based game, thus having good
comparison statistics to analyze the effect of the pandemic over time through
constant collection of new data. Geographic location measures are included, so
it will be possible to integrate official statistics on the spread and intensity
of the pandemic, and investigate probable cause and effect relationships.
Understanding of the deeper meaning of the pandemic will be derived from a
questionnaire and interviews administered to representative samples of players,
and also through analysis of the in-game text chat. This research is
sufficiently innovative that unexpected new discoveries are likely, but the
three main research questions serve the development of processes and actions to
address the global challenge of the COVID-19 pandemic: (1) In what ways are
existing and new players acquiring social support across different game
environments, mitigating the harmful effects of social distancing? (2) In what
ways are existing and new players experiencing social harms, increasing declines
in overall wellbeing? (3) What are the new and emerging patterns of social
interactions that are positive, and can be used by game designers to improve
their platforms?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.