* 2035273
* Building Bridges: The Power of the Sisterhood
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Laura Bottomley, URU THE RIGHT TO BE INC
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 09/30/2021
* USD 48,835.00

National data indicates that women from varied racial backgrounds desist from
pursuing STEM careers at a higher rate than white women. Because diversity
categorization often separates individuals by race and gender, women of color
bear an additional discriminatory burden of this divisive effect in ways men and
white women do not. Consequently, women of color face a double ration of
exclusion. This project seeks to build stronger bonds between women of color and
white women by addressing the elephant in the room: the lack of trust. By
addressing the historical mistrust between women of different racial and ethnic
backgrounds, we can develop a safe space to build trust. Mutually understood
trust can then facilitate collaboration, alliances, and advocacy to come
together and can translate into a critical mass of women in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support two remote conferences on
fostering dialogue between white women and women of color in engineering with
the ultimate goal of increased retention of women in engineering. Groups of
women from regions across the US will be convened for candid and open
discussions about race, gender, and other social categories and how belonging to
those categories shapes their experiences. Rather than focusing on best
practices or tips and tricks, this project aims to deconstruct and reimagine
these kinds of workshops to push participants to confront their own biases and
ignorances. This project will bring together an unprecedented mix of
participants to define research questions that can be further pursued and
eventually lead to deeper understanding of how women in engineering, and then
STEM, can become better allies to one another and make advancement toward their
own representation. As the participants in this project return to their home
institutions and offices, they will be able to share key takeaways with their
circles and further increase the reach of this project. The results of the
Building Bridges: Power of the Sisterhood pilot program have been shared in
conference papers. Scaling the project will provide a greater opportunity to
share knowledge via personal interactions, future conference proceedings, and
publications for greater dissemination of critical
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.