* 2035962
* STTR Phase I:  Room Temperature Implementation of Quantum Algorithms using Spintronics Technology
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Supriyo Datta, QCML LABS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2022
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project will be to enable cheaper, faster, and more energy-efficient
semiconductor chips dedicated to solving challenges with many possible outcomes
and inherent uncertainty. Such problems are encountered in decision-making, risk
management, chip design, drug design, business analytics, machine learning,
computing failure rates of manufactured products, pricing complex financial
derivatives, resource allocation in 5G networks and financial portfolios.
Current methods for addressing these problems are intensive, time-consuming, and
expensive. The proposed chips would quantify the uncertainty and find suitable
solutions to many real-world challenges with faster, cheaper, and more energy-
efficient methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project focuses on advancing probabilistic computers for
probabilistic computing. Decision-making, econometrics, risk management, chip
design, and drug development are not deterministic. By leveraging the natural
stochasticity of specific devices, it is possible to dramatically reduce the
number of devices otherwise used for the same computational tasks. The proposed
computational architecture and pipelining enables improved computational speed,
power consumption, and chip manufacturing costs. The goals of this project are
two-fold. The first is to deliver 10-1000x improvement in computation speed
compared to CPUs and GPUs using the emulation of probabilistic computers on
Field Programmable Gate Arrays. The same task will make projections about the
performance of the actual probabilistic computer. The second is to quantify how
well the probabilistic computer can accommodate semiconductor manufacturing
process variations. Controlling such variations is a significant factor in
semiconductor manufacturing costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.