* 2035620
* SBIR Phase I:  Experimental validation of an innovative lift-generating mechanism for use in future VTOL Aircraft.
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Essam Marcus, NOVO AERO TECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2021
* USD 230,311.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research SBIR Phase I
project is that it will answer the quest for developing a new type of vertical
take-off and landing (VTOL) aircraft combining the competitive advantages of
winged aircraft with those of helicopters. Accordingly, this project will enable
the production of a new type of VTOL aircraft that will be able to cruise at 640
mph; to operate at altitudes up to 35,000 feet; will be cheaper to build and
maintain, easier to fly and less prone to accidents; and will provide the
comfort and low noise level winged aircraft enjoy. These competitive advantages
will make this new type of VTOL aircraft more attractive to Helicopter and
Business Aircraft manufacturers and customers, which will boost the $55
Billion/year helicopter and business aircraft Industry. In addition, this
project will enable the production of small/medium-sized, electric, VTOL
Aircraft for use in metropolitan areas, which will provide U.S. communities with
a fast, convenient, low-noise means of transportation for use in metropolitan
areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current SBIR Phase I project aims at confirming
the feasibility of an innovative lift-generating mechanism to enable the
production of a new type of VTOL Aircraft. The lift-generating mechanism employs
two novel components, a compound propeller having a cascade of specially-
designed low angle-of-attack blades positioned in close proximity to one
another, and an airflow pattern modifier. The feasibility of these two
components was suggested with a multi-element airfoil CFD analysis tool,
motivating the prototype proposed here. This project will broaden our
understanding of blades operating at low angle-of-attack and positioned in close
proximity to one another. The main objectives of this project are to assess the
performance of the compound propeller and the effect of using the airflow
pattern modifiers on the performance; and to estimate the overall disc loading
and hover lift efficiency of this proposed lift-generating
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.