* 2035792
* SBIR Phase II:  Intelligent modular vertical farming system
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Graham Smith, BABYLON MICRO-FARMS INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,499,004.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve vertical farms. The global threat
to food security and the need to deal with unpredictable climate conditions have
opened the doors to advanced precision agriculture and vertical urban farming.
Rapidly growing global populations, demand for higher agricultural yields with
limited arable farmland drive demand for vertical farming and new technologies
to expand access to this method of sustainable crop cultivation. The proposed
system will reduce the burden on the environment by decreasing water,
fertilizers and pesticides required to grow crops. These micro-farms will boost
agricultural profitability by providing a reliable, sustainable food system with
fresh, healthy, and eco-friendly produce. This reduces food waste and the
environmental impact of the food supply chain while improving yields and
nutritional density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project advances a
system with integrated environmental control, consumables management, alerting,
and scheduling. Furthermore, the automated controls are continuously improved by
using camera vision to estimate yield and machine learning to forecast yield and
optimize the environmental variables. To make the system cost-effective, a novel
multispectral camera will be developed to collect agricultural data. Using
machine learning, the images collected will be correlated to the environmental
variables, such as pH and nutrient concentration, so that those variables can be
optimized to increase yields. In order to improve scheduling and logistics, the
platform will track inputs such as seeds, nutrients, and pH solution, using
sensors and QR codes to automate consumable replacement. Sensors and software
checks will determine when component or human failure have occurred, before they
lead to crop failure, leading to just-in-time component replacement and
maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.