* 2035933
* SBIR Phase I:  Anatomy Reimagined in an Educational Tool with Gaming and 3D Models
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,11/30/2021
* Elizabeth Carter, DISSECT 360 LLC
* Standard Grant
* Diane Hickey
* 11/30/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will lead to new educational software for learning human anatomy. The
software will serve 54,000 healthcare professional students studying anatomy
each year in the U.S., as well as 450,000 undergraduate students. Anatomy is the
cornerstone of medical education with cadaver dissection serving as the gold
standard teaching method. However, many students have limited or no access to
cadavers during their academic experience. Learning resources in human anatomy
(textbooks, models, apps) are generally color-coded, computer-generated images
that lack the complexities and appearance of cadavers. These learning materials
do not match dissected specimens, making knowledge transfer more difficult. To
overcome these challenges, the proposed software will marry digital cadaveric
models with captivating educational gaming strategies. The software will bring
high-quality anatomy education to low resource settings in the U.S. and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will incorporate principles of
educational psychology and learning science to develop a gaming platform for
healthcare professional students (e.g. medical, physical therapy, dental,
physician assistant) to learn human anatomy. The games will be built on a
virtual atlas of human anatomy created from high-resolution images of dissected
human cadavers. For this proof-of-feasibility project, we will focus on the
human heart. Technical hurdles to this project include incorporating learning
principles into the games and converting anatomy images into a software package
that can run on devices, such as iPads and smartphones, while maintaining
resolution and usability features. During this project, we will capture images
of the human heart, transfer them into the appropriate software development
platform, and then add education features and games in an iterative
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.