* 2035927
* SBIR Phase I:  Capsule Pipeline for Reservoir De-silting and for Mining
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Abulnaga Abulnaga, Mazdak International Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2022
* USD 237,108.00

The broader impacts of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to support reservoir de-silting. The nation has a number of dams and
reservoirs to produce low cost-electricity. However, sediments transported every
year by floods consume the storage capacity of dams and must be removed. For
example, the Hoover Dam is full to a depth of only 90 ft. Similarly, some 1430
dams are at risk of collapsing or overflowing from floods, such as the Prado Dam
and Mojave Dam in California, and two dams collapsed in Michigan in 2020,
flooding towns and displacing thousands of residents. Traditional dredging costs
$20-70 per cubic yard and poses a major barrier to restoring the storage
capacities of those dams. This project will reduce the cost to $8 per cubic yard
by switching from a slurry to a capsule technology. The payback would be in the
1% power capacity restored from lower sediment accumulation. This could also
protect turbines from erosion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
advances translation of a system to address sediment accumulation. The proposed
project represents an extension of technologies to move pressed coal logs. The
sediments are first pumped to shore from a depth of 50-200 ft. They are
dewatered in settling ponds and excess water is returned to the reservoir. The
dewatered sediments are then packed into large plastic capsules and sent to a
dedicated pipeline some 30 miles away from the dam. Since the capsule is
streamlined, it needs little water to be supported in the pipeline by
hydrodynamic forces. For this purpose, a new natural gas fired capsule pump is
developed; this liquid piston pump engine can pump up to 60 million gallons per
day; it is also compact and does not need a complex system of locks and pump
bypasses. It can be easily relocated to a new site and operates on low-cost
natural gas. This transition from slurry to capsule pipeline technology
represents a cost-effective method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.