* 2035002
* Collaborative Research: Effective Face Masks to Mitigate COVID-19 Transmission: Insights from Multimodal Quantitative Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2023
* Kenneth Breuer, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 10/31/2023
* USD 369,000.00

The years ahead will likely see face masks become a critical and widely used
“medical appliance.” Understanding the physics that underpins the effectiveness
of face masks as a defense against airborne pathogens is therefore more
important than ever. The protection afforded by face masks has emerged as a
particularly important issue in the COVID-19 pandemic, but the flow physics of
face masks is complex and is not well-studied. The increased pressure inside the
mask during expiration pushes the face mask outwards, resulting in increased
perimeter leakage. This fluid-structure interaction problem is mediated by the
structural design and the permeability of the mask, as well as the fit on the
face. Spasmodic events such as coughing and sneezing generate high transient
expulsion velocities and significantly diminish the outward protection of face
masks. However, in a conceivable future where people will wear face masks while
engaged in their daily routines, outward protection during normal activities
such as breathing and talking, might be equally important. The objectives of
this project are (i) to develop improved computational and experimental tools
necessary to characterize the performance of face masks, (ii) to employ these
tools to perform a detailed characterization of mask performance under a variety
of conditions and (iii) to generate, in a timely manner, data that can be used
for improved facemask design and to guide more effective public health
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a set of innovative,
powerful and accurate computational and experimental tools, rooted in flow
physics and mechanics that can be used for the quantitative analysis of the
protective performance of face masks. Computational tools will couple fluid
flows with the motion of elastic structures in complex geometries defined by a
wide range of facial geometries. Experimental tools will include simultaneous
measurements of mask motion and the aerosol cloud, using Digital Image
Correlation and Particle Image Velocimetry, respectively. Visible and X-ray
techniques will be used to take measurements outside and inside the mask. The
combined results of the simulations and experiments are expected to yield
critical insights regarding the features that contribute to the protective
performance of masks, and to provide timely guidance for improved mask design
and effective public health policies. The project will promote the
multidisciplinary education of students in Science and Engineering, and increase
public knowledge about the fluid dynamics principles of effective
facemasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.