* 2035240
* EAGER: Stable and efficient perovskite solar cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Vikram Dalal, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 01/31/2023
* USD 125,829.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key challenge in reducing the cost of
solar power lies in increasing the conversion efficiency of solar panels. Tandem
solar cells are made from sub-cells that respond to different wavelengths of
light and could double the efficiency of solar panels. Their deployment,
however, has been limited by high fabrication costs. Perovskite solar cells hold
promise for use in low-cost tandem solar cells due to ease of processing and
chemical tuning of their absorption. Most perovskite solar cells are made from
hybrid organic-inorganic materials which decompose at temperatures above 100°C
and degrade in the presence of moisture. The aim of this project is to develop a
perovskite device that is thermally stable to 300℃, and is relatively
insensitive to moisture. The cell will be an all-inorganic structure, thereby
potentially improving its stability against photo-induced degradation. The new
device is likely to be useful for making tandem junction cells with silicon
acting as the bottom cell in a tandem junction arrangement. The technology is
likely to increase the efficiency of solar energy conversion and reduce its
overall cost. The project will offer a significant opportunity for research to
both graduate and undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented
groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop photovoltaic devices based on a new inorganic perovskite—a
bromide based inorganic perovskite alloy, Cs(Pb,Sn)Br3. Bandgap engineering will
enable the fabrication of an optimized tandem structure. The bandgap of the
CsPbBr3 can be reduced from 2.3 eV to 1.9 eV by incorporating tin, with further
reductions possible by mixing cesium and rubidium. Inorganic heterojunction
layers will be used to fabricate the devices. The material will be deposited
using vacuum deposition processes which are easily scalable. Detailed structural
and electronic characterization of the material and the device will be
undertaken to understand the photovoltaic performance of the device. The devices
will be tested for their stability against moisture and heat and against
photoinduced degradation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.