* 2035710
* Connecting Solar Physics Past to Its Machine Learning Future
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* David Webb, Orion Space Solutions (OSS), LLC
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 03/31/2024
* USD 525,490.00

People have been studying the Sun for hundreds of years and drawing maps of what
they see, the earliest dating back almost 900 years. These hand-drawn maps of
the solar surface have been invaluable for modern-day physicists to understand
how the Sun changes over the decades. Between 1964 and 2009, Dr. Patrick
McIntosh made his own carefully constructed maps of the Sun, documenting many
interesting solar features and magnetic fields. However, since the last maps
were made in 2009, McIntosh’s archive has languished and has not been updated.
The purpose of this 3-year project is to use the latest space- and ground-based
images of the Sun to reproduce the McIntosh’s techniques, update the archive
through today, and develop tools for current machine learning algorithms to
produce these maps going into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All solar
magnetic fields are fundamentally driven by an internal dynamo. To study this
pervasive magnetic field, scientists rely on indirect measurements of visible
plasma features at the surface that are produced by the evolving magnetic field.
Large-scale atmospheric features, such as filaments, active regions, sunspots,
polarity boundaries, and coronal holes are distinct signatures of the ever-
changing dynamo. These visible features were captured by Dr. Patrick McIntosh
from 1964 through 2009 in hand-drawn maps of the Sun. This 3-year project aims
to preserve multiple decades of accumulated specialized knowledge of the Sun,
thus opening up new avenues for studies of the solar cycle by linking the
McIntosh-identified solar features to modern images of the Sun through
reproducing his techniques with digital tools. The result of this effort is a
new archive of solar maps to effectively extend the existing catalogue to cover
solar cycle 24. The catalogue will be open for public download and well
documented for supervised machine learning tools to take advantage of this
unique labeled data representing over 55 years of solar measurements. The
research and EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS
Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.