* 2035346
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: Workshop for the Development of Infrastructure for Distributed Bio-Manufacturing and Bio-Readiness
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Douglas Densmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 07/31/2021
* USD 33,561.00

Our ability to rapidly manufacture bio-based solutions like therapeutics,
materials, and bio-energy is crucial to our national economic advantage and
national security. An agile national infrastructure to distribute the
manufacturing of biological materials as well as provide the nation with a level
of “bio-readiness” to address global pandemics and bio-threats is crucial in the
21st century. This research area will produce a distributed network of
facilities, equipment, software, protocols, techniques, and personnel to develop
applications and technology as well as to respond to bio-threats such as global
warming and international pandemics. Sharing resources, software, training,
personnel, and expertise will allow new centers to be created quickly in the
face of national threats or economic needs. This effort will be inherently
interdisciplinary and require computer scientists, material scientists,
molecular biologists, government officials, legal expertise, and business
leaders. It will include academic, government, and commercial partners at all
scales. It will be a truly unique effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is
to organize a six-session virtual workshop series to develop a coherent set of
Needs, Opportunities, and Challenges for Bio-Manufacturing and Bio-Readiness.
This workshop series will result in a set of interdisciplinary reports that will
be communicated to the National Science Foundation for consideration as a
“Convergence Accelerator” Future Topic. The ideas generated during this workshop
series will impact commercial as well as academic developments and research in
bio-manufacturing, bio-security, and bio-readiness. Workforce development will
require new training and create new personnel positions as a response. Models of
collaboration between academic research and commercial business will be altered
along with the legal and government agencies required to make these connections
happen. If successful, this effort will change how the United States views its
national manufacturing abilities as well as how it responds to potential global
threats in the future. As a result, a well-defined, accessible, and continuously
evolving set of tools, techniques, software, hardware, and personnel will be
available to the United States and, as appropriate,
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.