* 2035934
* SBIR Phase I: Gentle:  A Smart, Affordable, Soft Gripper for Robotic Food Picking and Packaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Tugba Efendigil, UBIROS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the improvement in throughput of fresh fruit,
vegetable, baked item picking and packing, agriculture, and tasks that require
physically handling or grasping a wide range of delicate objects. The
electrically-actuated soft robotic gripper technology is inherently safe to work
in human-occupied environments and collaborate with human workers since its soft
fingers can deform and absorb impacts in case of a collision. In addition, with
the data generated from the research and development, new use cases will be
opened for robotic hands in the long term such as helping farmers pick fruits
from trees. Working in the robotics technology area and targeting items that are
difficult to pick up by traditional robotic grippers and algorithms, the
research will help automate and increase the efficiency of traditionally manual
processes that suffer from a lack of enough workers to ultimately support
American manufacturing. This research also has longer-term benefits to expand
into other sectors such as collaborative robotics, healthcare, and assistive
robotics areas because of the inherent safety and adaptability of soft robotics
in human interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on technical research and development of
electrically actuated soft grippers with a modular approach, sensory
integration, and feedback control, as well as the study of new algorithms and
user interfaces to endow these systems with intelligence for improved
performance. When there is variation in object size, weight, shape, and
fragility, robotic system integrators find it difficult to use traditional rigid
and expensive grippers to automate mundane, low-value tasks. Soft grippers can
provide a solution, adapting to variations in objects and other conditions.
Enabling electrical operation of soft fingers enables direct integration with
robotic arms eliminating complex infrastructure requirements and reducing cost,
which will help improve the return on investment and reduce barriers of entry
for small businesses to utilize this latest technology. The research will
undertake testing and validation under common, realistic conditions encountered
in fresh produce picking and packing and e-commerce order fulfillment
applications. The research goals are to: optimize the design and fabrication
techniques and quantify grasping behavior for improved adaptability, provide
feedback control, and integrate intelligence to the grippers by incorporating
data and user input to determine optimal grasp
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.