* 2035404
* RAPID: Mobilization of Rural Alaska Cultural and Community Resources during the COVID-19 Pandemic
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Sveta Yamin-Pasternak, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,993.00

This project will identify the sources of Indigenous community strength and
resilience amidst the COVID-19 pandemic at two sites in Alaska: the village of
Gambell, St. Lawrence Island, and Galena, in interior Alaska. Working
collaboratively with their community-based partners, researchers will document
and evaluate local pandemic responses in three areas: safety (preventing
exposure to COVID-19); security (ensuring access to food, water, healthcare);
and vitality (maintaining social life, relationships, and wellness practices).
Gambell and Galena are geographically, culturally, and linguistically distinct
communities. This research will identify which strengths and resiliencies are
shared between these communities and which are specific to each site. This
research furthers efforts to understand how COVID-19 affects communities across
the United States and identify pandemic responses that benefit the health and
welfare of its citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be collected through
informal phone and video chat interviews with Indigenous collaborators in two
rural Alaska communities. Interviews will focus on daily activities (foodways,
expressive culture, family and community life) within the context of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Specific issues to be addressed include community-level
vulnerabilities such as housing, lack of running water, and sewage treatment;
availability of groceries and healthcare services; and effects on
elders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.