* 2035711
* SBIR Phase I:  Liquid Metal-Elastomer Composite for Electromagnetic Shielding
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Navid Kazem, Arieca Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2022
* USD 255,986.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide new methods and materials to
improve electromagnetic interference (EMI) and radio frequency (RF) shielding.
EMI/RF shielding are critical for protecting electronic devices from
electromagnetic disruption, interference, or data theft. The uninterrupted
operation of these electronic devices is essential in a wide range of existing
and emerging products and applications, from mobile technologies and personal
computing to internet of things, smart textiles, and wearable electronics.
However, poor mechanical contact and issues with reliable sealing are critical
pain points for EMI/RF shielding applications related to these applications.
Improved performance depends on materials that are highly deformable and can
maintain a low "lack of conformity" between mating surfaces, an acute challenge
that has driven commercial demand for softer and more deformable EMI/RF
shielding materials. This project will advance the development of a new
material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop a materials technology that combines high
performance electromagnetic interference (EMI) with extreme elasticity,
mechanical compliance, and toughness. This technology is based on a liquid metal
embedded elastomer (LMEE) architecture in which droplets of liquid metal are
suspended within a soft elastomer matrix. These composites have a unique
combination of properties not possible with other elastomers: (i) high
electrical conductivity, (ii) high strain limit, (iii) low elastic modulus, and
(iv) high fracture toughness. Because of its high electrical conductivity, LMEEs
are effective in disrupting electromagnetic waves and RF signals. Furthermore,
because of its high elasticity and tear resistance, LMEE can be used for EMI
shielding within tubing, hoses, seals, gaskets, and rubber-based packaging as
well as in bags, clothing, and other textiles. This project will result in an
LMEE composite with adequate conductivity to shield electronic devices from
interference over a wide range of frequencies. Moreover, it will be mechanically
robust and resistance to the leakage of liquid metal when torn or
punctured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.