* 2035515
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Integrative analysis and Visualisation of Fly Cell Atlas datasets to enable cross-species comparisons
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Norbert Perrimon, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 629,016.00

The fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, has for the last century been
fundamental to the study of genetics. It is used in many areas of research as
the model organism of choice, as it provides the ability to study genetics in
the laboratory and apply findings to human genetics. Its use as a model is due
to two factors: First, its genetic code can be relatively easily manipulated in
the laboratory and this coupled with a short life cycle, provides a means by
which a gene or pathway function can be rapidly studied. Secondly, the vast
majority of the fundamental biochemical mechanisms and pathways are conserved
between fly and humans. Indeed, 75% of the genes that cause human disease are
found in fly and, thus, the data collected in the fly can be used to provide
insights into the same processes within humans. The emergence of a new
technology, single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), has provided information as
to which genes are switched on or most active from a single cell. Within the fly
community this provides the ability to quickly map clusters of cells and cell
types to the whole anatomy and link this to both phenotype and function. The
increasing number of scRNA-seq datasets from different species has resulted in
the development of the Single Cell Expression Atlas (scEA). This is a web portal
which enables users to more easily visualize and interpret this data. It is
anticipated that the level of fly single cell data will increase from 10
datasets to ~100 in 2020 and further two-fold increase in 2021. Key to the
scientific exploitation of this data will be the ability of users to not only
effectively analyze the fly data but also to examine the interconnections
between fly data and human or mouse datasets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will provide the means by which fly datasets can be easily interpreted and also
linked to mouse and human datasets via scEA. The scEA currently hosts scRNA-seq
data for over 500K assays and this includes data for the Human Cell Atlas (HCA)
and Mouse Cell Atlas (MCA), amongst others. Analysis pipelines will be developed
to combine the available and emerging datasets, alongside the necessary
computational infrastructure to host the Fly Cell Atlas (FCA) datasets. ScEA
will provide users with an easy to navigate web service with exploratory
querying capability, in addition to data download capabilities for further data
analysis. The service will be fully integrated with the established fly
resources, Flybase, Virtual Fly Brain and the Drosophila Resources at Harvard
University. This project will also develop a process for annotation of the
datasets. This annotation step adds additional scientific information to the
data which provides the user with a greater level of biological understanding
and so aids the interpretation and analysis. This annotation will expand on the
existing FlyBase anatomy ontology which is a structure of controlled
vocabularies used to describe the anatomy of the fly this will ensure that there
is full compatibility across new and existing resources. The scEA will develop
and provide the means by which the data can be easily visualized and mined for
cell types, while also providing the fly community with the ability to
contribute their scientific expertise to the annotation. The scEA user interface
will be further developed to provide a greater level of cross species query
ability as the resulting FCA will be linked within scEA to the HCA, MCA and any
further datasets enabling cross species comparisons which will aid in the
discovery of novel biological insights. This project aims to provide the fly
community with practical solutions for connecting, re-using and reanalyzing
datasets and so will close the gap in translating biological discoveries in
model organisms, such as the fruit fly, to humans and vice versa. This project
will make the results of this comparative analysis rapidly available to the
growing user community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.