* 2035736
* SBIR Phase I:  Dynamic Night Splint
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Eric Kolb, KENAI DESIGN, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/28/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is improved care for plantar fasciitis (PF), an
inflammation of the fibrous tissue (plantar fascia) along the bottom of the foot
connecting the heel bone to the toes. This progressive degenerative condition
results in stabbing, sometimes debilitating, pain. Plantar fasciitis is most
common in athletes, but it also occurs in sedentary people, particularly
overweight individuals, and is the most common cause of heel pain in adults,
with an estimated lifetime risk of 10%. In the US, approximately 2-3 million
patients are treated for PF every year and it is the leading reason to visit a
podiatrist. Conservative treatments of PF are moderately successful, but 20% to
30% of patients progress to a chronic condition that can last years and is
difficult to treat. The proposed dynamic night splint is intended to accelerate
healing relative to conventional splinting technologies and to improve patient
compliance and prognosis. This can potentially be used for other medical
conditions where controlled motion is better than a static
constraint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project integrates miniature electromechanical components, “internet-of-
things” technology, and a patient-centric approach to medical device design to
achieve a re-imagined night splint. The concept enables a shift from rigid
constraint of the injured tissue to actively manipulating the tissue to
accelerate recovery. To achieve a clinically viable solution this will address
competing requirements, including incorporation of dynamic components, a control
and power system, an intuitive user interface, and reliable safety features,
while minimizing the form factor and maximizing patient comfort. This Phase 1
project designs and fabricates the night splint with the necessary elements (a
leg engaging flexible “boot” structure, an electromechanical drive system, and a
mobile app user interface) to validate the design through bench testing and user
assessments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.