* 2035582
* RUI: Regulation of the plant endocycle by F-BOX STRESS INDUCED 1
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2024
* Bryan Thines, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 12/31/2024
* USD 545,484.00

A defining, and perpetually intriguing, feature of plants is their ability to
thrive in highly dynamic and oftentimes stressful environments. However, many
molecular mechanisms used by plants to increase resiliency under challenging
conditions are unknown. This work investigates how the cell cycle and co-
regulated nuclear processes are directly altered in response to external cues so
that growth is optimized. Knowledge generated by this work can be applied to
future crop development in a world impacted by climate change. This project will
provide training opportunities and support for undergraduate students carrying
out independent research projects. Funds will also support development of
course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs), which will offer
students in classes the opportunity to meaningfully engage with authentic
research experiences. Students participating in CUREs tend to: 1) be more highly
engaged and have positive views of science and lab work, 2) have a deeper
understanding of the scientific process, and 3) have higher retention rates in
the sciences. Importantly, CUREs make classes more inclusive and increase
success by multiple measures for students of historically underrepresented
groups. These authentic research experiences will be integrated into the lab
portion Genetics classes at the University of Puget Sound and Survey of Biology
classes taught at the Washington Corrections Center for Women as part of the
Freedom Education Project Puget Sound (FEPPS), a college degree-granting prison
education program. College-level prison education reduces recidivism by 43% and
provides pathways to employment and/or further education after
release.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The endocycle, an alternative cell cycle where the
nuclear genome replicates but the cell does not divide, increases plant fitness
under stress and can be triggered by the environment. Little is known about
mechanisms used by plants for stress-triggered endocycle entry, although the
anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) promotes this switch. This work
investigates endocycle entry by action of F-BOX STRESS INDUCED 1 (FBS1), a
stress-inducible substrate adaptor in the ubiquitin 26S proteasome system (UPS)
that selects protein targets for degradation. Preliminary data show that FBS1
interacts with multiple putative targets: 1) APC8, a core subunit of the APC/C,
and 2) two WD40 repeat-like family proteins, which have been named FBS1
INTERACTING PROTEINs (FBIPs). This work investigates the hypothesis that FBS1
coordinates a stress-response by targeting APC8 (possibly a post-translationally
modified form) and FBIPs for degradation. Molecular genetic approaches will lead
to understanding of how FBS1 affects the cell cycle and plants under stress, and
it will establish the biological roles of FBIPs. This work will establish in
vivo protein interaction dynamics between FBS1 and its partners, and it will
establish whether APC8 and FBIPs are true ubiquitylation targets in stress
responses. Collectively, this project will lead to greater understanding of how
plants use the UPS to induce plasticity in the cell cycle and co-occurring
processes to match cellular processes with environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.