* 2035231
* Selectivity in Froth Flotation
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Gretar Tryggvason, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 12/31/2023
* USD 405,809.00

Separating different materials is important in mineral processing, recycling and
many other processing applications. Froth flotation is a separation process in
which heterogeneous material is ground up into small grains, so that each grain
consists mostly of one constituent. The grains are then suspended in a liquid
bath, and gas bubbles rising through the slurry selectively carry (or float) the
particles consisting of the desired material to the top. Various chemicals are
added to guarantee that only the desired particles stick to the rising bubbles.
While some of the individual steps of this process are well understood, their
complex interactions make it very difficult to predict the selectivity and
effectiveness of the separation. This project will use numerical simulations
based on mathematical models of the various process steps to reproduce the
dynamics of froth floatation. The modeling allows each step of the process to be
modified separately or turned on and off, assessing exactly how the various
processes interact and collectively to set the selectivity for different
operating conditions. This project is made possible by major advances in direct
numerical simulations of multiphase flows over the last two decades, but up to
now such simulations have focused on systems with relatively simple physics. The
project will develop advanced multiscale strategies to correctly account for
several simultaneous physical processes and to quantify the influence of the
various control variables. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary intellectual merit
of this project is the development of computational strategies to model complex
multiphase, multiphysics and multiscale processes and their use to determine how
selectivity in froth flotation depends on the specific configuration and
operating conditions. The development is built on a hybrid finite-volume/front-
tracking numerical approach, where the governing equations are solved on a fixed
structured grid, but the interface between the different fluids and phases is
tracked using connected marker particles that form an unstructured moving grid.
In addition to accurately track moving fluid interfaces and phase boundaries,
the moving interface grid allows wettability to be included in a relatively
straightforward way and greatly facilitates the inclusion of multiscale models
for small scale interfacial processes, such as mass transfer and draining of
thin films. The broader impact of the project include developments of modeling
strategies applicable to a wide range of coupled multiscale processes and the
education of people in the development and applications of numerical models for
complex processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.