* 2035154
* New Etching Methodologies for Atomic Level Precision in Manufacturing Processes at the Micro-to-Nanoscale
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* John Xiao, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 11/30/2023
* USD 541,242.00

This grant develops new etching methods to meet the increasingly demanding needs
in fabricating nanoscale devices within the semiconductor industry. The
fabrication of novel and advanced devices requires atomically precise removal of
materials in a stack of complex thin films, each of several nanometers thick,
while maintaining surface smoothness and material properties. The atomic layer
etching (ALE) has emerged as the most reliable method to remove materials one
atomic layer at a time. This overall novel strategy has been relatively well
understood for single element materials; however, the major challenge in
practical applications, such as memory, logic devices, processing and
information transfer, requires etching of alloys and heterostructures. This
grant seeks the fundamental knowledge needed to extend the ALE technology to
process alloys and heterostructures with atomic precision. The studies may also
solve a number of hurdles to pushing the boundary of advanced manufacturing
beyond silicon electronics. The multidisciplinary approach required to tackle
these problems will offer advanced training opportunities in crossing fields of
physics, chemistry, materials science, and engineering, and will advance the
participation of underrepresented groups in science and technology disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this grant will combine thermal
chemical etching, materials physics, and device design to overcome the
limitations of current technologies in (1) selective etching of complex alloy
materials consisting of two or more metals and light elements, (2) self-
termination at target oxide layers, and (3) precision etching of thick oxide
layers to achieve non-tapered vertical edges. The research team will use
analytical spectroscopy and microscopy methods together with computer modeling
to determine kinetic and thermodynamic factors responsible for the etching rates
of specific elements and combine them to define the strategy for atomic
precision etching of complex materials. This strategy is based on selecting
appropriate chemical ligands that bind to each element of the films selectively
and determining the parameters for designing etching cycles that can remove the
materials layer-by-layer without altering the concentration of the elements and
morphology of the surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.