* 2035541
* Understanding Role-differentiated Privacy During COVID-19 Test-Trace-Isolate
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Lilly Irani, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2023
* USD 199,948.00

In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, colleges and universities are running
test-trace-isolate programs to safely reopen campuses. Individuals’ health gets
documented with temperature checks, surveys about recent contacts, and COVID-19
tests. This requires people to feel safe sharing information about themselves.
However, people may not feel safe sharing their information in workplaces and
educational settings. Individuals occupying different social roles—such as
temporary faculty, graduate research assistants, undergraduate students, and
staff—are likely to have different sensitivities, needs, healthcare access, use
of social services, and job security. Who will their information be shared with?
How long will it be kept? How is this communicated? How these concerns are
addressed will shape how people are willing to participate in health monitoring,
which has implications for the success and safety of reopening programs, and
further, for American values of freedom and privacy. This project examines how
individuals occupying different social roles experience their privacy and
interact with health monitoring systems. Researchers will produce
recommendations for technology and program design strategies that take into
consideration heterogeneous needs, vulnerabilities, and privacy expectations.
The recommendations will be broadly disseminated through a toolkit and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how to meet people’s
varied privacy needs—so they will feel safe participating in test-trace-isolate
programs—by addressing two key research questions: (1) What different social
roles impact privacy experiences? (2) What do differences in privacy experiences
indicate about the design requirements (e.g. technology, interaction, and
communication) of programs and systems? The project will contribute an
alternative to universalizing analyses of privacy. Instead, it will develop a
role-differentiated framework for understanding privacy needs and values,
affected by people’s roles at home, in the workplace, and in society. The
research questions will be investigated through a qualitative research
methodology —involving workshops and interviews with diverse campus
stakeholders—at a single, large college campus: the University of California,
San Diego. UCSD’s health monitoring program has already brought many students
and workers back to campus. It affects how people get health care, work, and
study. Results of this research will include a new theory of privacy that
respects people’s needs according to social roles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.