* 2035535
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Glacial-Geomorphic-Climatic Changes in the Arid Andes: Cordillera Oriental as a Case Study
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Summer Rupper, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 01/31/2024
* USD 129,096.00

The project seeks to address the fundamental issue of how two competing
processes shape mountain belts: collisions between tectonic plates, which push
land to high elevations, and erosion that wears mountains away. Climate strongly
influences erosion, in part because it determines where glaciers can form and,
subsequently, erode the landscape. The overarching aim is to understand how
climate changes and glaciers influences mountain development, specifically
through erosion. The investigators will focus on a part of the central Andes
that provides a natural laboratory for such investigation. The researchers will
use a model to estimate past temperature and precipitation ranges based on their
observations, which will also improve understanding of former natural climate
variability and how it may influence the growth of mountains. The researchers
will integrate a range of interdisciplinary expertise at different institutions
to accomplish the goals, including scientists in the U.S. and Argentina. The
project fosters early and middle-career development for at least a postdoctoral
researcher and a graduate student. The researchers will carry out outreach, such
as, by engaging with K-12 science teachers, in a museum science-themed exhibit,
and at their institution's open house. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climatic and
tectonic forces interact with one another in the growth of mountains,
particularly through their shared influence on erosion patterns. Yet,
distinguishing the influence or signature of one force from another can be
difficult. The researchers propose to explore glacier and climatic imprints on
the development of landscapes in an environment where such effects appear to be
eminently discernible, in the arid Andes. Neighboring catchments experienced a
range of glacial geomorphic conditions, from extensively glaciated to marginally
glaciated to not glaciated. The study focuses on two overarching hypotheses: (1)
In the arid Andes, the last Ice Age brought the coldest conditions, but not
necessarily the largest glaciers and precipitation impacts to landscape
processes. The researchers will (i) date glacial deposits of unknown age, which
will constrain when climate changes occurred, and (ii) carry out glacier-climate
modeling, which will improve their understanding of, for example, the magnitude
of past temperature and precipitation changes; (2) Ice Age climates impact
landscape development directly through glacial erosion and indirectly through
fluvial network change. The researchers will assess potential patterns of
glacially-modulated erosion using detrital 10-Be measurements (short timescale)
and low-temperature thermochronology (longer timescales), and geomorphic metrics
that are known to record tectonic and climatic
perturbations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.