* 2035881
* I-Corps: Handheld fluorescence reader that provides quantitative, multiplexed detection of fluorescence signals
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2021
* Jennifer Blain Christen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is an
improvement in care for heart failure patients after hospitalization. Heart
failure (HF) is a significant cause of medical morbidity, mortality, and high
health care costs. In 2012, 1 million hospital stays were for heart failure in
the United States. Approximately twenty-five percent of recently discharged
heart failure patients are readmitted within 30 days, resulting in an additional
healthcare cost burden of $2.7B per year. The proposed technology would provide
an early pre-symptomatic alert of a worsening condition to enable proactive
medication and/or other therapeutic care adjustments before recently discharged
HF patients become symptomatic and are potentially re-hospitalized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to improve monitoring,
specifically self-monitoring in the home, for heart failure-impacted
individuals. The technology allows for daily serial monitoring and tracking of
NT-proBNP biomarker levels along with other analytes like Troponin, CysC, and
Serum Sodium. A smartphone-connected, daily finger stick blood test would
measure, track, and report circulating NT-proBNP and related cardiac biomarker
levels to a healthcare provider. The proposed technology would use fluorescence
detection and microfluidics along with smart-connected health features to allow
healthcare providers to monitor patient status after discharge, providing an
early pre-symptomatic alert of a worsening condition to enable proactive
medication and/or other therapeutic care adjustments before re-hospitalization
is required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.