* 2035625
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Do Government Regulations Drive Product Features? The Case of the Global Commercial Drone Industry
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Daniel Armanios, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 09/30/2022
* USD 15,638.00

This dissertation research advances a novel way to link government science and
technology regulation directly to product features by focusing on the global
commercial drone/UAV (Unmanned Aerial Vehicle) industry. This industry was
chosen as an example of a globally diverse high-tech market where multiple
product features and parameters are possible. The intent of this work is to
understand what product features are most crucial to the drone industry and how
differing standards affect them, as well as what features are most crucial for
affecting both the safety and trajectory of a technology. This work has
relevance to regulators and other decision-makers who must ascertain how best to
strike a balance in their standard specifications to support nascent markets
while protecting people from the potential harms of unregulated
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation will use web scraping and
other archival analyses to collect fine-grained product feature data to reveal
the relationship between type of institutional support available to a firm
(e.g., universities, public-private institutions, science parks) and the types
of product innovations that it produces. We will also examine the impact of
government standards on product features around weight, height, fuel mileage,
and other relevant performance dimensions. Besides having granular product
specifications, governments across the world have diverged as to what regulatory
standards they use. We will examine differences between the U.S. and China
around weight requirements for pilot licensing and drone registration and
investigate how this affects product features. Overall, this research will
improve our understanding of the effects of government regulations directly on
the product features of firms in nascent markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.