* 2035129
* SBIR Phase I:  Empowering Educators with AI During Distance Learning (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Gilles Ferone, LEARN2EARN CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2022
* USD 275,844.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it will provide new tools to evaluate
and enhance teaching of higher-order critical thinking. This project will
leverage advanced machine learning models to generate critical-thinking
questions for any text a student reads, analyze their written response, give
them immediate feedback on how to refine their thinking, and ultimately provide
data-driven insights to their teachers. The capability to automatically
interpret open-ended responses using artificial intelligence (AI) is a rich area
for the educational community. This project will deepen the education
community's knowledge in this area and apply the findings to K-12 education. In
particular, the results may lead to a new evaluation architecture relying less
on multiple-choice questions and related techniques, enhancing education with a
method to efficiently evaluate and provide feedback with open-ended and short-
response questions. This project will address the problem of using multiple-
choice assessments to assess ‘learning’ and move to more accurate ways to
ascertain the nuances of learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on automated short-answer
scoring to solve a pressing and largely unsolved problem. Most work in automated
scoring focuses on longer essay grading, which is more relevant for higher
education. At this time, there are no general-purpose algorithms available for
short responses. Adding to the technical complexity is the fact that this
project’s machine learning approach needs to work for any book or text, and
include questions written by any user. This project will improve the accuracy
and detail of assessments, particularly with written responses regarding texts
new to the reader. This project will require deep-learning natural language
processing (NLP) technology to fully model language representation. The proposed
system will ingest the subject text and the associated question before
evaluating the written response without prior submissions used as training data.
The project prototype will be developed for English Language Arts instruction
prior to broader deployment across other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.