* 2035899
* SBIR Phase I:  Microbiome for improving salt stress tolerance in crops
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,09/30/2022
* John Freeman, INTRINSYX BIO INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2022
* USD 254,735.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide an innovative approach to improve
crop tolerance using novel seed treatments. To feed the growing world population
(estimated 9.8 billion by 2050), global food production must increase by 70%,
while reducing impact on land use, the environment, and ecosystems. However,
high salinity conditions and drought have reduced the potential yield of crops;
furthermore, the excessive application of fertilizers is disrupting global
nitrogen and phosphorus cycles, reducing biodiversity, and causing aquatic
pollution. This project will develop a technology to promote crop growth through
improved stress tolerance and nutrient acquisition. The adoption of more
sustainable agricultural practices could help farmers in increasing their
profitability and reduce costs. This project will offer an effective solution to
570 million farms around the world for food production. By improving crop yield,
the project could help address the economic loss of more than $27 billion/year
in the US due to unproductive farmland. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will generate innovative endophyte-based formulations for seed
treatments to improve tolerance to abiotic stress. Seeds will be coated with a
mixture of highly characterized safe (non-pathogenic) endophytic bacteria and
yeast strains in formulation with selected osmoprotectants and prebiotics that
improve the survivability and efficacy of the selected microbes. The bio-
inoculants will improve crop tolerance to salinity stress while supporting
nitrogen fixation and mineral nutrient acquisition. This project will validate
the feasibility of this approach on treatments for selected vegetable seeds.
First efforts will be dedicated to obtaining stable seed treatment formulations
with a high shelf-life when used at scale in parallel with fungicide and
insecticide treatments. The ability of bio-inoculant formulations to increase
tolerance to salinity will be validated in the greenhouse. Finally, the
performance of the most optimal formulation will be tested in a small field
trial under high salinity conditions to validate its ability to increase crop
yield and quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.