* 2035150
* Collaborative Research: Climate Impacts on the Urban Built Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2024
* Melissa Bilec, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2024
* USD 225,000.00

This project is targeted to fill a gap in the understanding of how to interpret
and address climate change-related stresses on building performance. The project
will provide insights about how climate change-related impacts on the urban
built environment will influence regional energy supply, and what types of
design and operation strategies are needed to adapt to or mitigate these
impacts. The intention is to provide guidance for the development of standards
addressing new building design, and also to facilitate development of improved
adaptation and mitigation strategies in the existing building stock, while
taking life cycle environmental impacts into account.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will create an analytical framework for predicting urban building energy
consumption considering different energy source types and associated greenhouse
gas emissions under different climate scenarios. The framework will include
building performance vulnerabilities resulting from variations and uncertainties
in parameters that have the most impact on building energy use, and by
extension, life cycle environmental impacts. The approach for the project is the
development of a climate change-driven probabilistic framework for building
energy consumption with a lifecycle assessment model under future scenarios. The
specific objectives of the project are to: (i) predict the impact of possible
adaptation and mitigation factors as well as future lifecycle impacts; (ii)
quantify the uncertainties within a probabilistic framework of key climate risks
and vulnerabilities and discretize them to the total uncertainty; and (iii)
develop an urban scale energy and life cycle assessment framework to determine
future environmental impacts with a focus on greenhouse gas emissions. In order
to achieve these objectives, the project will develop a probabilistic model of
how buildings will be affected by future climate, including uncertainties from
both climate models and building performance. The project plan includes
developing energy sourcing scenarios to estimate the future environmental
impacts associated with the buildings’ energy consumption. Fourteen different
adaptation and mitigation strategies will be studied to examine their
effectiveness as the climate changes. The model will be developed, tested, and
calibrated using the City of Philadelphia as a case study, working with the City
of Philadelphia’s Office of Sustainability (OOS) in order to help them set
appropriate and achievable targets for their Greenworks Campaign, the City’s
comprehensive sustainability plan. The project is intended to help OOS create a
roadmap for climate-prepared buildings, to improve overall efficiency and reduce
maintenance costs for its building stock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.