* 2035365
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: Symposium on Predicting Extremes by Data-Driven Analytics
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2022
* A Surjalal Sharma, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Chaitanya Baru
* 02/28/2022
* USD 99,998.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. This symposium
on Predicting Extremes by Data-Driven Analytics will help identify topic areas
for new tracks in the NSF Convergence Accelerator. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extreme
events and associated hazards in natural, commercial, and security systems
underlie the most devastating catastrophes in society. The societal risks
arising from extreme events are very high both in terms of likelihood and impact
on society. The increasing impact of disasters and the consequent risks have led
leading organizations and institutions around the world to develop new
approaches to mitigate the impacts and develop strategies for resilience.
Improved predictive capability for extreme events is a critical scientific need
in order to achieve effective disaster risk assessment, which is a product of
three factors: the probability of the underlying events, vulnerability of the
system and consequences therein. The understanding and modeling of extreme
events contributes towards developing the probabilities of occurrence. This
symposium will bring together participants from academia, government and
industry to develop data-driven analytics as a pathway for predicting extreme
events in natural and anthropogenic systems, including applications in
terrestrial and space weather, finance and economics, and cybersecurity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium is planned as a 3-day event to be run as a
virtual meeting. It will emphasize participation by researchers and students
from underrepresented communities that may be especially vulnerable to the
effects of extreme events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An essential step toward
achieving better predictability is uncertainty quantification, which is an
inherently interdisciplinary endeavor, requiring convergence across multiple
disciplines and participation by multiple stakeholders across academia, industry
and government. A Convergence Accelerator track on this theme would benefit
multiple sectors. Developing a framework for predicting extremes requires the
harnessing of massive data from a variety of sources. The symposium will discuss
the idea of developing a common platform for stakeholders in government,
industry and nonprofits as part of this potential new track in the Convergence
Accelerator. The themes of the symposium are of general interest due to their
potential for high impact on society. A symposium proceedings will be produced,
which will provide broad exposure to the potential outcomes of convergence
research in this topic area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.