* 2035686
* RAPID: SaTC: COVID-19 and sexual cyberviolence: Impact on general users and vulnerable populations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Asia Eaton, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2023
* USD 194,360.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has forced diverse Americans to rely on the internet for
work, study, and socializing. Already, popular gaming platforms, adult
entertainment sites, and video conferencing applications have reported increases
in use since the start of the pandemic. In conjunction with the increased use of
online technologies, the Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI) released an
advisory in April 2020 warning internet users of a significant increase in
sexual extortion schemes specifically tied to COVID-19. In this project, Florida
International University (FIU) and Cyber Civil Rights Initiative (CCRI) are
partnering to understand and address increases in various forms of cyber sexual
violence since the start of the pandemic. Specifically, this project will use
quantitative and qualitative research to determine the ways in which the shift
to online communication during the pandemic may have facilitated an increase in
cyber sexual violence, and how that increase relates to the well-being of U.S.
adults from different backgrounds. It is anticipated that this research will
enhance the welfare and safety of the general public, especially for vulnerable
and marginalized populations. The research will also promote the progress of
technological innovation and design as relates to user privacy and user
safety.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research defines cyber sexual violence to
include nonconsensual pornography (also known as “revenge porn”), sexual
extortion, recorded sexual assault, doxing, deepfakes, cyber-harassment, cyber-
stalking, and cyber dating violence. The first objective of this research is (1)
to advance scientific knowledge on the prevalence of cyber sexual abuse
victimization, the risk factors for victimization, and the consequences of
victimization among diverse U.S. adults during the COVID-19 pandemic. To achieve
this objective the project will conduct a survey using a nationally-
representative sample, oversampling from vulnerable populations including women,
racial and ethnic minorities, sexual orientation minorities, and young adults.
Survey participants will be asked to complete measures of risk factors for cyber
sexual abuse victimization (e.g., ICT usage, gender role beliefs, level of
social support), measures of cyber sexual abuse victimization during the
pandemic (e.g., cyber-harassment and cyber dating violence), and measures
expected to function as consequences of cyber sexual abuse victimization (e.g.,
indicators of psychological, health, economic, and legal outcomes). The second
objective of this research (2) is to create practical recommendations for ICT
users, service providers, and companies to prevent cyber sexual violence and
reduce its harms. To achieve this, interviews with a diverse sample of 40 men
and 40 women who have been victims of cyber sexual abuse during the pandemic
will be conducted, as well as interviews with legal and technological experts.
The research findings will inform public and private sector guidelines,
including digital safety strategies for users; best-practice policy suggestions
for legislatures; and practical guidance for law enforcement and social service
providers. The recommendations are intended to serve as an applied and
meaningful contribution to society, particularly in future instances where
residents are required to perform a high level of daily activities using
information and communications technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.