* 2035260
* Collaborative Research: Linking pyroclastic surge dynamics and deposits through integration of field data, multiphase numerical modeling, and experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Greg Valentine, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2024
* USD 314,560.00

Explosive volcanic eruptions unleash flows of hot gases and particles called
pyroclastic surges; these are deadly to humans and severely damage or destroy
buildings and other infrastructure. Within the United States, pyroclastic surges
are a potential hazard in many areas such as the Southwest and along the Cascade
Range of the Pacific Northwest. Understanding parameters such as speed,
pressure, temperature, and particle concentration is necessary to predict
pyroclastic surge hazards and to take mitigative measures. Measurements of
active pyroclastic surges are essentially impossible because of their
unpredictability and the extreme conditions they create. As a result, we must
use indirect methods: (1) detailed study of the deposits that were produced by
pyroclastic surges, which can be studied after a volcano has gone quiet; (2)
experiments aimed at replicating some aspects of the surges; and (3) computer
modeling of the flows. This project uses these three methods iteratively. The
work will provide new insights and tools to use in forecasting and mitigating
volcanic hazards. In addition, the work will be done by a diverse, newly-formed
multi-university team, will train two new Ph.D. students, and will strengthen
partnership between academic researchers with the U.S. Geological Survey, which
has primary responsibility for hazard assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controls
on the development of local facies in pyroclastic surge deposits as well as
larger-scale parameters such as proximal-to-distal facies variations, runout,
and damage potential are poorly understood. We will address the following
research questions: (1) At the local scale (e.g., individual outcrop or group of
outcrops), what are the relationships of bed forms and facies to sedimentation
from suspended load, bed load flux, and local topography? (2) At the large scale
(proximal to distal), what are the roles of sedimentation, topography, initial
temperature, mass flux, and atmospheric entrainment on large-scale facies
distribution, runout distance, and damage potential? The proposed work includes
three components. (1) Detailed field studies will focus on two well-preserved,
young deposits (Ubehebe volcano, California; Crater Elegante, Sonora), with
documentation of facies, grainsize, and componentry as functions of distance
from vent and local topographic setting. (2) Experiments will test and extend a
simple relationship between dune-form parameters measurable in the field, bed
load flux, and suspended load sedimentation flux. (3) Multiphase numerical
modeling will use adaptive mesh refinement to resolve fluxes near the bed, will
improve the numerical solution of coupling between gas and very fine ash (key
for surge transport and deposition), and will use unstructured mesh technology
to model surge transport over complex natural terrains. A new multiphase
modeling tool that results from the project will be available for the research
community at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.