* 2035307
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: Re-Think Nature for Innovative Solutions to Grand Challenges
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Teng Li, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nakhiah Goulbourne
* 07/31/2021
* USD 66,596.00

This grant provides financial support for the workshop entitled, "NSF
Convergence Accelerator: Re-think Nature for Innovative Solutions to Grand
Challenges", to be held virtually in the Fall 2020. The workshop will bring
together and expand collaboration among key stakeholders from academia,
industry, and government with the charge of exploring grand challenges for the
future of humanity and planet by leveraging nature-inspired solutions. The
workshop will focus on three areas: (1) nature-inspired solutions to petroleum-
based plastics, (2) natural material-based solutions to clean water, and (3)
advanced materials for sustainable infrastructure. The proposed workshop will
explore sustainable and nature-abundant materials by synthesizing new ideas,
approaches, and technologies from diverse fields of knowledge to achieve
scientific breakthroughs and exceptional innovation, with the ultimate goal to
seek innovative solutions to grand challenges. By successfully integrating
diverse disciplines in chemistry, materials science, engineering, data sciences,
plant science, and public policy, the proposed convergence approach is poised to
achieve cutting-edge discoveries in nature-abundant resources and unprecedented
innovation in sustainable utilization of natural materials toward a wide range
of potential applications. For example, newly discovered properties of wood-
sourced materials could be exploited for more sustainable and in many cases
superior materials for products and processes that directly impact society,
which is an excellent example of re-thinking nature-inspired solutions for
humans and the planet. While tremendous research possibilities exist, center to
these opportunities is use-inspired convergence and building partnerships to
transition discoveries into practice. The objective of this workshop is to
review the recent progress and identify new directions and opportunities ripe
for convergence research. Funding from this grant will go towards web hosting
services for the workshop, and personnel support for organizing the workshop as
well as the production of a report. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this virtual
workshop, invited leaders, researchers, innovators, and stake-holders with a
diverse range of disciplinary expertise from across academia, government, and
industry will discuss present and future challenges and opportunities for
convergence related to nature-inspired solutions to grand challenges. The
workshop will be comprised of three tracks, with a mixed format of invited
talks, lightning talks, break out groups, and moderated discussions. The format
is intended to foster brain-storming discussions around the most important
technical challenges in each topic and opportunities for future convergence
research. This workshop will also feature panel discussions that will integrate
the topics and discussions from the three sessions. The outcome of these
presentations and discussions will be documented in a final report and will be
widely disseminated across academia, government, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.