* 2035032
* MsRI-EC- Develop a Research Infrastructure for Intelligent Water Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2020
* Zhiyong Ren, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2020
* USD 42,497.00

The nation’s water utilities collect and store massive amounts of data to ensure
reliable and efficient services. Yet, only about 10% of this information is used
due to a lack of data sharing as well as limited staff resources and skills.
This makes it impossible to apply Big Data tools that have revolutionized other
sectors such as energy and transportation. This gap in the national
infrastructure provides an opportunity to harness data science to provide real-
time prediction, data-driven decision making, and system level optimization. As
the nation’s water infrastructure is fragmented amongst many water utilities,
there is a need for federal support to jump start the Big Data revolution for
drinking water. This workshop will engage stakeholders and lay out a pathway to
build a national research cyber infrastructure for intelligent water systems.
This will include an online repository platform for storing, sharing, and
analyzing data, as well as workforce development for all stakeholders across the
water utilization cycle. The workshop will gather a broad range of stakeholders
to ensure the cyber infrastructure, once implemented, will be valuable for an
array of public and private institutions, and will impact national economic
competitiveness and health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Mid-scale Research
Infrastructure Engineering Conference is a first step towards building the
nation’s first interoperable cyber infrastructure for intelligent water systems.
Workshop participants will identify the needs of the nation’s digital water
infrastructure, lay out a pathway to design and implement the infrastructure,
organize a highly qualified team to develop a project proposal, and identify
best practices for management of mid-scale infrastructure. The conference will
gather a broad range of stakeholders and ensure that the proposed cyber
infrastructure provides value to private and public institutions. The proposed
platform will be developed for sharing data, analytics tools, and workforce
development for all stakeholders across the water utilization cycle. With proper
design and implementation, the vast empirical data currently being collected by
utilities can be converted into tools incorporating machine learning and
artificial intelligence to allow a new generation of water professionals to
harness data for not only daily operations but continued technology innovation,
optimization, and cost reduction. The conference will result in a report with
recommendations specific to the nation’s first interoperable cyber
infrastructure for intelligent water systems that address critical execution
issues around cyber security, data access, data management, and intellectual
property.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.