* 2035018
* EAGER: Neural Behavioral Analysis (NBA) Pipeline for Behavior and Neural Activity Analysis in Autism
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Qian Chen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 12/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Naturalistic behaviors are external reflections of brain's internal integration
of bottom up processes that mediate inputs sent to the brain, and top down
processes that mediate appropriate responses determined by the brain. Measuring
behavioral data without concurrent neuronal activity monitoring would only
provide an incomplete picture of brain function. One bottleneck in the field is
that these behavioral data and neuronal activity data are typically collected
separately under different experimental paradigms and subsequently analyzed with
different analytical pipelines. It is, therefore, impractical to infer
mechanistic correlation between behavior and neural activity using these
existing pipelines. A system that enables simultaneous collection of behavior
and neuronal activity data followed by integrated decoding of these two types of
data would be a breakthrough that offers unique opportunities to explore
behavior and its governing neuron activity pattern. This project will take
advantage of a clinically relevant mouse model of autism, to develop a novel
machine learning based pipeline for simultaneous decoding of behavioral and
neuronal activity data. By providing an novel and integrated data analytic
toolkit which enables analysis of high-dimensional large data sets of behaviors
and neural activities in an autistic mouse model, this project will delineate
the temporal and spatial pattern of neural activities underlying social deficits
and sensory abnormities which might provide a novel mechanistic link between
those two keys symptoms of autism. Besides providing a powerful and versatile
toolkit, this project will help fill in the critical knowledge gap between brain
circuit functional changes and social behavioral deficits in autism, with the
potential of strong impact on other psychiatry disorders, such as schizophrenia
and bipolar disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing a novel machine
learning based pipeline to enable simultaneous analysis of animal behaviors and
neuronal activities, this project will focus on addressing the following three
research challenges: (1) concurrently collecting large data sets of mouse social
behaviors and neural activity in different brain areas using intravital calcium
imaging, which will be used to establish and optimize the machine learning-based
neural behavioral analysis pipeline, (2) validating the neural behavioral
analysis pipeline in an autistic mouse model, (3) using the neural behavioral
analysis pipeline to interrogate mouse behavior and calcium imaging data from
different brain areas and infer causal relation between neural activity pattern
and autism-like behavior traits. Using unbiased machine learning algorithms to
extract videotaped behavioral and neural imaging data in a high-throughput
manner, this project will be able to make sense of neural circuit data in the
context of complex behavior deficits. Successful execution of the proposal will
establish a general "computational behavior-neural function" framework capable
of identifying the hierarchy of social deficits and sensory abnormalities in
autistic mice, which will provide a powerful tool to the field to untangle
complex animal behavior and neuronal activity pattern for mechanistic
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.