* 2035356
* MsRI-EW:  Mid-scale Research Infrastructure Engineering Workshop for National Silicon Carbide Fabrication Facility. To Be Held Virtually August 13-14, 2020.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Zhong Chen, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 12/31/2020
* USD 9,979.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The absence of prototyping infrastructure for
research into microelectronic devices based on silicon carbide (SiC) limits US
research and product discovery. The absence of such infrastructure forces
activity abroad, if it occurs at all, and slows progress on innovation of
electronic systems. The vision is of a unique SiC research facility that will
spark innovation from growth and processing of materials, to device and circuit
fabrication. This infrastructure would address a key gap in the nationâ€™s
research capabilities. The conference will benefit academic researchers and
students as well as collaborators from industry and national laboratories. This
will be a virtual conference and so online attendance will magnify its impact.
The conference will identify potential impacts and spur the design and
implementation of an open access SiC fabrication
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
this workshop is to identify the critical needs and user support for an openly-
accessible silicon carbide (SiC) fabrication facility that can enhance the US
research access to low-volume prototyping of the next generation of power
electronics. The conference will: (i) Organize leading SiC researchers and key
players to evaluate the current state and infrastructure needs of research
community; (ii) Include individuals with experience in the management of mid-
scale infrastructure for mentoring; (iii) Provide a platform for researchers to
meet and engage in objective and constructive dialog about future directions for
SiC research in materials, devices, and circuits and clearly define the needed
infrastructure; (iv) Allow researchers to exchange ideas on research areas that
can be addressed by the national SiC fabrication facility that surrounds the
power semiconductor driven ecosystem.; (v) Assess broader impacts that this mid-
scale research infrastructure can provide. The conference will identify national
needs for such research infrastructure, and provide plans to close the
identified gap in national needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.