* 2035626
* SBIR Phase I:  Edible, water soluble corn zein films for shelf life extension and improved safety of perishable foods
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,08/31/2021
* Antonios Zografos, AKORN TECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2021
* USD 255,994.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase 1 project will be in significant reduction
of food waste. Food waste is a critically important global challenge.
Approximately 30% of food produced for human consumption around the world is
either lost or wasted each year â€“ more than enough to feed the hungry. It is
estimated that food loss and waste also contribute 8% of the total global
greenhouse gas emissions. The methods used to reduce waste by extending shelf
life are not only ineffective, but they also exacerbate other global problems,
such as adversely impacting the environment through extensive use of plastic
packaging. The proposed solution uses non-GMO corn to create new edible coatings
that will reduce food waste by doubling the shelf life of whole and cut fresh
fruits and vegetables, enabling greater access to fresh foods for all
communities and improving the environmental impact of food waste.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance translation for a
process using corn zein, considered a water insoluble protein and therefore
prohibitively expensive to functionalize in food production. This has prevented
its use in food coatings. This project advances translation of a relatively
simple process to convert commercial grade zein to a readily water-soluble
formulation. The project will develop an effective edible food coating that
incorporates other plant-based ingredients, such as fatty acids and
plasticizers, to create a hybrid protein/lipid film that (1) exhibits excellent
gas barrier as well as moisture barrier properties and extends the shelf life of
many under-served commodities; (2) can be generated at reasonable cost; and (3)
can be delivered in a single application on existing food processing equipment.
The R&amp;D plan will target coatings for a variety of fresh produce that allows
comparison with competitive coatings where possible, and provides new coating
options where few options are available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.