* 2035223
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: Workshop on Design for a Circular Economy from Molecules to the Built Environment
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Gregg Beckham, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 07/31/2021
* USD 98,800.00

Our current economic model is linear; we take, make, and waste products. This
take-make-waste model has led to serious environmental problems from using too
many resources to creating too much waste, including vast amounts of plastic
waste into our oceans. In contrast with the take-make-waste or linear model is
the circular economy. The ideas behind the circular economy include keeping
products in use, eliminating waste and pollution by design, and aiming to help
nature. The circular economy is making progress in Europe and Asia, but progress
in the United States is lagging. Through this project, we are hosting a
workshop, aiming to create a much-needed research agenda for design for circular
economy in the United States. We also are aiming to create a curriculum for
design for circular economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current linear consumption
model of raw material extraction, production, use, and disposal dominates the
global economy. Today, we clearly see that this linear model has led to serious
unintended global consequences from resource depletion to global waste, spanning
all industrial sectors, from plastics to the built environment. In contrast to
linear models, circular economy aims to decouple economic growth from resource
consumption by cycling products and materials back into production, either by
returning materials to generate new products, or by releasing benign substances
to the environment through degradation. To achieve – or even begin to achieve –
a circular economy, a convergent research approach needs to be employed as a
multitude of disciplines -- from chemistry, biology, engineering, business,
economics, social sciences, and behavioral science need to work in concert for
circularity. Our vision is to foster and catalyze circular economy design from
molecules to the built environment. Through this proposed workshop, we aim to
develop the much-needed research agenda for design for circular economy from
molecules to the built environment. Ultimately from a societal perspective –
nationally and internationally, we address the pressing challenges of spiraling
global waste and resource consumption. We are also aiming to address NSF’s
Growing Convergence Research, one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments, by integrating diverse disciplines through curated workshop
activities. Our workshop includes a strong training sub-theme for our community
to create a curriculum for design for circular
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.