* 2035588
* SBIR Phase I:  Improved Catalysts for Sanitizer Ethanol Production (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,10/31/2021
* Stafford Sheehan, AIR COMPANY HOLDINGS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to scale a renewable technology. The proposed system
uses renewable energy to convert carbon dioxide and water into value-added
chemicals with the only byproduct being oxygen. This approach has the potential
to make chemicals and fuels that consume and prevent greenhouse gas emissions.
Unique to this process is production of the world’s first carbon-negative
alcohols. These can be used as feedstock for materials including consumer goods,
bioplastics, and fuel, both more sustainably and at a cost potentially lower
than any other technologies in use today. The system’s most critical component
is a proprietary catalyst that transforms carbon dioxide into alcohols, namely
ethanol, using only earth-abundant elements and avoiding the use of precious
metals. This SBIR project will focus on significantly improving these earth-
abundant catalysts to reduce the cost of sustainable chemical production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR project proposes to make transformative
improvements to heterogeneous catalyst efficiency and yield for ethanol
production. In doing so, it will improve understanding of how carbon dioxide
interacts with the metals in novel heterogeneous catalysts. The new industrial
chemical process produces ethanol from carbon dioxide in a single step. This
process produces the first and only lifecycle carbon-negative ethanol to date,
with the potential to be more energy efficient than legacy and state-of-the-art
renewable ethanol processes. The proposed novel catalysts enable new conversion
phenomena not observed previously, which presents a challenge toward improving
and scaling catalyst production. This project will study variants of the
catalyst under varied pressure, temperature, flow rate, and other conditions
along with chemical characterization to better understand how carbon dioxide and
hydrogen bind to the catalyst surface. This data will be used to iterate and
improve rate and selectivity toward production of USP grade
ethanol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.