* 2035827
* STTR Phase I:  Autologous Hematopoietic Stem Cell Production to End Graft-Versus-Host Disease
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Samuel Dilworth, IREPROGRAM, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is the potential elimination of Graft-Versus-Host Disease (GVHD). GVHD
is a devastating illness that afflicts transplant recipients who are recovering
from chemotherapy and who suffer from suppression of their bone marrow function
and immune system. GVHD associated illnesses lead to a very high rate of
premature death in these patients. This project focuses on the development of a
novel biocomputational platform to generate patient-derived stem cells to be
subsequently reintroduced to the same cancer patient. This completely bypasses
third-party bone marrow and blood donations, decreasing, and potentially
eliminating, lethal GVHD and drastically improving outcomes. The use of cells
derived directly from the same patient (e.g. skin cells) to reconstitute the
blood system is considered one of the highest and most challenging goals of
blood system regenerative biology research. This will advance bioinformatics and
cell therapy research and will advance the state-of-the-art in cancer treatment
and personalized medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will use a
high-fidelity prototype computational tool to generate transcription factor
recipes for cellular transdifferentiation, test those predicted recipes through
systematic and high-throughput wetlab validations, and demonstrate proof of
concept for the autologous production of persistent HSCs that maintain long-term
multilineage engraftment and self-renewal, potentially enabling recapitulation
of the entire blood lineage. The project scope includes an effort to survey,
identify, and procure appropriate initial cell types; determine cell type-
specific predictions for reprogramming into HSCs; prioritize the most promising
recipes and carry out appropriate viral transductions; create an in vitro analog
of target HSCs and determine alignment with the human HSC phenotype; and perform
reprogramming experiments for the top transcription factor recipes. Data
analysis will include key comparisons of reprogrammed HSCs, in vitro analog
HSCs, primary human HSCs, and data from prior published efforts to produce HSCs.
HSCs are fundamentally different from the differentiated cell types previously
targeted with the computational tool, as they retain proliferative potential and
are therefore very difficult to generate. Proof of concept in this challenging
system will not only address GVHD, but also further prove the efficacy of the
overall biocomputational platform for use in numerous other biological systems
and potential cures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.