* 2035358
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: Privacy and Pandemics: Responsible Use of Data During Times of Crisis
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2021
* Jules Polonetsky, FPF Education and Innovation Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Chaitanya Baru
* 02/28/2021
* USD 96,096.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports team-based, multidisciplinary efforts
that address challenges of national importance and show potential for
deliverables in the near future. The objective of this workshop is to explore
topics for potential NSF Convergence Accelerator tracks for FY
2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Future of Privacy Forum (FPF) will convene a
workshop on “The Responsible Use of Data During Times of Crisis”, for pandemics
as well as other crisis situations. The workshop will bring together US
government leaders, international data protection authorities, corporate
leaders, technologists, academic researchers and public health experts to
examine benefits, risks, and strategies for the collection and protection of
data in support of public health initiatives during crises, including for
COVID-19. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ensuring that US and global stakeholders leading
emergency efforts have the data-based knowledge, tools and governance structures
to navigate pandemic challenges is one of the defining public policy issues of
our time. This workshop will explore a proposed Convergence Accelerator track to
accelerate collaboration among government, industry and academic researchers to
make health data effective and usable and achieve positive lasting impact on
future preparedness for pandemics and other crisis
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are three-fold:
1) to bring expert knowledge to a diverse audience of policymakers and industry
leaders for timely consideration, collaboration and application as appropriate,
2) to address a number of priority research questions across a range of top
issues and technologies, and 3) identify challenges, information gaps, and
prospective areas for research and development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
C-Accel workshop will proceed as a “virtual conference” designed to engage
participants in immersive discussion and consideration of topics/findings from
top COVID and data-related issues that emerged from the Privacy &amp; Pandemics
educational series organized by FPF. Three discussion pillars will be used as
organizing themes: AI-Ethics-Health. The project will produce a coordinated
global “roapmap” (white paper) to point the way forward in research directions,
practice improvements, and development of privacy-preserving products and
services to inform COVID-19 and crisis situation policies and in preparation for
future pandemics and other crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.