* 2035623
* Collaborative Research: Understanding "wild-type" nanoplastic uptake in single microalgae cells with fluorescence tracking and computational modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Ke Du, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2022
* USD 265,788.00

Plastic products are essential for our daily life and underpin an expanding,
multi-trillion-dollar global market across numerous industry sectors. However,
the resulting plastic waste presents an emerging threat to environmental health
and public safety. Large plastic debris gradually breaks down to nanometer-sized
particles in the environment and the long-term effects of these ultrafine
plastic particles remain largely unknown. This project supports fundamental
research to understand the interactions of nanoplastic particles in the
environment with microorganisms, which provide insight into the nanoplastic
accumulation in the human food chain. The research team will combine theoretical
and computational modeling with cutting edge experimental techniques to discover
the relationship between particle shape, cellular entry process, and cell
responses. This new knowledge gained at the nano-bio interface will enable the
development of a rational hazard and risk assessment framework for nanoplastics.
The educational activities of this project will motivate and train a competitive
workforce for developing sustainable solutions to the plastic waste problem. The
project will provide multidisciplinary and inter-institutional research
experiences for graduate and undergraduate students via step-wise progression
and highly structured mentoring. The team will create a symposium at
professional conferences to stimulate growth of a research network on
nanoplastics. The goal of the outreach is to engage local middle and high school
students and to enhance the awareness of the global plastic crisis in the
broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
investigate the interactions of novel synthetic models of environmental
nanoplastics with green microalgae on the single-cell level as the starting
point to understand how they accumulate in the environment and to which there is
subsequent human exposure. To address the need for representative surrogates of
environmentally released nanoplastics, this research will create polymer-coated
nanocrystals with well-defined non-spherical morphologies and surface enhanced
fluorescence. A microfluidic platform will be developed for in situ and in vivo
experiments of nanoplastic uptake and toxicological responses of Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii cells. The team will apply the membrane elasticity theory and
coarse-grained simulation to predict adsorption and internalization of
anisotropic nanoparticles by lipid membranes on different length scales. The
integration of experimentation and multiscale modeling will allow the testing of
key hypotheses that irregular surface morphology influences individual uptake
and collective internalization of environmental nanoplastics. The project
activities will be accomplished by integrating graduate students through
collaborative and structured mentoring, as well as by providing course-based
research experiences to undergraduate students, particularly those from groups
traditionally underrepresented in science and engineering. The educational
component of the project will also support the development of a topical
symposium at the ACS Northeast Regional Meetings, a webinar series, and a
plastic pollution exhibition at the annual National Engineers Week Community Day
to engage broad research and education communities around
nanoplastics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.