* 2035660
* Collaborative Research: Investigations of Density-graded Auxetic Foams at Multiple Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Behrad Koohbor, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 278,068.00

Polymeric foams have been used in many impact mitigation applications, affecting
various aspects of our daily activities ranging from walking and running to
protection gears in action sports. Nonetheless, shortcomings in their
performance results in serious health hazards, e.g., concussions in football,
despite attempts to increase efficacy through layers or reinforcement. This
award seeks to exploit a novel derivative of foams, known as auxetic foams, to
effectively mitigate the danger from impacts to humans by leveraging new
deformation and energy dissipation mechanisms. To reach this goal, this award
strives to uncover how different aspects of the material and geometry contribute
to the efficiency of the auxetic padding in energy dissipation. The approach
integrates computational and experimental methods to elucidate the structure-
property-performance relations spanning multiple lengths and time scales. The
successful implementation of the proposed collaborative activities will lead to
novel impact-tolerant materials. The interdisciplinary nature of this research
will facilitate the engagement and training of the next generation of scientists
and engineers, with emphasis on students from underrepresented and underserved
minorities. Students from different academic levels will be recruited and
involved in different aspects of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Auxetic
foams and their density-graded derivatives, e.g., auxetic polyurea foams, can
simultaneously activate several energy dissipation mechanisms, making them ideal
impact mitigating materials. The award aims to develop a comprehensive
experimental-computational framework to elucidate the intrinsic energy
dissipation mechanisms operative in these materials at multiple scales. The
development of the integrated framework includes probing and modeling the
material over a broad range of length (molecular to μm to mm) and time (μs to
ms) spectra. For example, in-situ terahertz time-domain spectroscopy for changes
in the intermolecular vibrational modes during mechanical loading, high-speed
digital image correlation for dynamic deformation modes at multiple scales,
scanning electron microscopy for characterization at the microscale, and direct
numerical simulations using the finite element method. This expansive scope is
expected to reveal the complex interplay between the material entrapped in the
cellular microstructure and the change in their molecular arrangement, material
nonlinearities, the geometrical attributes and discontinuities of the cells,
elastic instabilities, and their fundamental role in the overall mechanical
response of density-graded auxetic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is co-funded by the Mechanics of Materials and Structures (MOMS) and the
Dynamics, Control, and Systems Diagnostics (DCSD) programs in the Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.