* 2036258
* SBIR Phase I:  Nanoremediation of oily waste waters from spills and discharges
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Paul Vecchiarelli, GEOMAT, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 06/30/2022
* USD 275,937.00

The broader impacts of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project address oil pollution in Alaskan waters by reducing costs associated
with oil cleanup projects. In Alaska, the challenges of remoteness and cold
raise oil cleanup costs by 100 times compared with other areas. The technology
is a magnetic nanoparticle, 80,000 times smaller than the width of a human hair,
that can completely remove oil from water. To become competitive with current
oil cleanup methods, it will undergo improvements for large scale production.
The project also includes design, building, and testing a new prototype device
for the technology. The technology will make spill cleanup faster and reduce
environmental harm. In Alaska alone, oil spills cost $150 million to clean up
annually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Phase I project is a cost-effective,
environmentally-benign nanoparticle technology that can quantitatively remove
oil from contaminated water. Alaska has been targeted as a testbed due to
limitations posed by cold and geographical remoteness that raise oil cleanup
costs 100-fold compared to less remote regions. The goal of the project is to
develop an oil removal device that can be deployed to remote regions with low
cost and effort, reducing the length and cost of a spill response. The first aim
of the project will optimize the nanoparticle synthesis to minimize costs and
maximize active yield at commercial scales. A laboratory-scale, prototype oil
removal device will be designed, built, and validated to enable pilots with
larger volumes of contaminated water. The initial application will be to dewater
oil recovered from the environment within the holds of barges; this can exceed
80% water. Dewatering reduces waste volumes and transportation costs, reducing
environmental exposure and subsequent environmental health impacts from oil
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.