* 2036546
* SBIR Phase I:  OptimizerAero - A robust production scheduling optimizer for aerospace manufacturers
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Vivek Saxena, ADVISORY AEROSPACE OSC LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 01/31/2022
* USD 249,011.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be in making US manufacturing base more competitive. The aerospace
supply chain contains thousands of less digitally sophisticated Small and Medium
Enterprise (SME) manufacturers. The SMEs constitute a vast aerospace supply base
across the country and have largely remained unaffected by the advances in
operations research. Consequently, local manufacturers compete unfavorably with
those in low-cost countries. While the computing power and speed of optimization
techniques have increased to a point where one could now solve large-scale
industry problems in real time, little attention has been given to the many
modeling decisions that need to be made to accurately capture the complexities
of real factory physics into a prescriptive mathematical model. This project
will develop of a plug-and-play software for SMEs this estimated $850 M market
that will improve efficiency along the entire supply chain. The resulting
solution is expected to be a production optimizer that can be implemented in
less than two weeks at any SME aerospace manufacturer using their existing data
streams. Use of digital technologies and operations research advances embodied
in this project will ultimately play an appreciable role in bringing outsourced
manufacturing back to the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will advance translation of powerful optimization tools in production
planning and execution. The proposed contributions include 1) a hierarchical
approach that allows for planning and scheduling at different timescales, 2)
computational improvements to classic operations models to incorporate real-time
issues such as incomplete orders, carryover of production and continuation of
setup activities across periods, 3) the design of algorithms to adapt the shop’s
data to the different timescales while preserving model accuracy, 4) the
analysis of the impact of planning horizon, time period choice and objective
coefficients, as well as the creation of systematic schemes to determine their
best value to meet user needs, and 5) the development of heuristics for quick
re-optimization to respond to small deviations from the
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.