* 2036370
* SBIR Phase I:  An Ozone-Based Field Sterilizer for Rapid sterilization and Reuse of N95 Respirators and other PPE in Response to COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Amir Khazaieli, Fathhome, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2023
* USD 255,999.00

The broader impacts of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to develop a new rapidly dry-sanitizing technology for disposable
single-use personal protective equipment (PPE) and other articles in a manner
that preserves material integrity and function to enable multiuse during
pandemic and post-pandemic times. It will promote energy and water conservation,
and reduce plastic waste significantly. This ozone-based sanitization technology
will benefit all frontline workers regularly exposed to infectious diseases such
as COVID-19. The need for rapid sterilization technology is likely to grow to
mitigate social distancing configurations. Schools, daycare centers, health and
fitness facilities, factories, and airports will need to implement sterilization
protocols. With this technology, clothes, face shields and masks, phones, smart
devices, and all manner of personal articles can be easily sanitized in less
than ten minutes. The market for small industrial-scale waterless appliances
with the capacity to offer on-demand sterilization may also expand rapidly.
While ozone is used in a wide range of sterilization technologies, there is
currently no consumer-friendly dry washing machine. Thus, this project may also
support development of an eco-friendly and effective laundry solution. Together,
the sanitization and safety tasks will advance this technology as a viable
waterless sanitization device, with the distinct advantage of lower cost,
compact size, operational ease, and accessibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project advances translation of a low-cost, rapidly deployable gas-
based field sanitizer that does not require water, solvents, or detergents. To
combat infectious viruses and odor-causing bacteria, this technology must meet
aggressive benchmarks set by federal regulatory agencies for ozone emissions
while achieving the highest bioburden reduction levels short of an autoclave.
This project will optimize the ozone dose (ppm and time of exposure) required
for viral inactivation and testing mask fit and filtration efficiency after
repeated exposure to high ozone concentrations. The device will also incorporate
new containment and neutralization technologies to meet environmental safety
requirements. The device performance will be characterized by monitoring the
exhaust for residual ozone during and after operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.