* 2036515
* GOLD-EN Broadening Participation in Coastal and Estuarine Sciences: A Workshop of the 26th Biennial Conference of the Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Kristin Wilson Grimes, Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2023
* USD 99,999.00

CERF's Rising TIDES (Toward an Inclusive, Diverse, and Enriched Society)
workshop will support broader, cross-cutting efforts by the NSF to increase
participation in STEM by under-represented minority (URM) individuals. Support
of this workshop strengthens CERFâ€™s commitment to and capacity in broadening
participation, including participation in an NSF INCLUDES Alliance and
additional URM activities. Through this workshop, CERF will leverage other NSF-
funded programs, specifically the INCLUDES SEAS Islands Alliance and
IUSE:GEOPAths C-StREAM projects. The proposed morning workshop session will be
dedicated to building and strengthening relationships between underrepresented
student scholars (URSS) and professional and near-peer mentors, inspiring URSS
participants to see themselves as science professionals and part of the CERF and
coastal and estuarine science and management community, and providing URSS with
tools useful to achieve their career goals. The afternoon workshop session will
train participants on addressing implicit bias in their academic and
professional settings; the session will be open to all CERF conference attendees
(with 50 anticipated workshop attendees). The afternoon workshop develops
diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) champions who can return to home
institutions with additional DEI skills. Efforts begun at the workshops will be
scaled up throughout the conference through various structured activities
involving student and professional participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening
participation in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) is
widely recognized as critical to the science and engineering enterprise. There
is still a wide gap in U.S. STEM educational attainment between URM individuals
and whites and Asians, and coastal and estuarine science faces similar gaps in
URM representation. In recognition of this gap and to incorporate fundamental
change in the way the CERF community supports and addresses the individual needs
of all members, CERF seeks to support diversity and inclusion efforts at its
2021 Biennial Conference. Specifically, these efforts include: (1) enhance URSS
professional development, including cohort building, mentoring, and
participation in a URSS-focused workshop, scientific sessions, and other
conference and post-conference activities; (2) build the capacity of CERF to
achieve DEI objectives through a workshop open to all attendees, and through
additional learning opportunities throughout the conference; and (3) ensure
broad engagement of the CERF community by infusing DEI throughout the
conference. Evaluation of the workshop and broader conference DEI efforts will
improve future Rising TIDES actions and provide transferrable lessons for
similar DEI conference programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.