* 2036439
* SBIR Phase I:  A parallelized microscope for high-speed, high-resolution imaging of organism behavior
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2022
* Mark Harfouche, RAMONA OPTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to improve current digital microscope imaging technology to produce
better images and video of biological phenomena. Current microscopes are limited
by a tradeoff between image resolution, viewing area and video frame rate, which
presents a bottleneck in many imaging experiments. For example, current
microscopes cannot observe model organisms such as the zebrafish and fruit fly
at cellular detail during free movement. By simultaneously capturing high-speed,
high-resolution video over a large viewing area, this proposal’s new microscope
will overcome the limitations of standard microscopes to allow scientists to
make new discoveries surrounding fundamental behaviors.It will also dramatically
increase the speed and scope of current high-content screening experiments that
observe many organisms at high-resolution in parallel, and will also open new
applications in high-throughput industrial inspection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will address the limited throughput challenges faced by current
microscopes by adopting a novel parallelized imaging strategy. To overcome
current trade-offs between image resolution, field-of-view and frame rate, the
project’s first research objective is to develop a new type of microscope
consisting of an array of micro-cameras simultaneously observing a large viewing
area at high resolution and high speed. Synchronized image data captured by 54
micro-cameras, arranged in a 9x6 array, will be digitally combined via novel
software into 100 megapixel-per-frame video at 100 frames per second. The
resulting video stream will contain 10-100X more pixels per frame than any other
high-speed image sensor currently on the market. The project’s second research
objective is to create software that can efficiently process the large amount of
resulting image data to enable efficient storage and analysis. The software’s
first specific goal is to track, crop and analyze video data of multiple freely
moving organisms to extract key behavioral statistics (e.g., position,
orientation, body length/curvature). The project’s third research objective is
to test and verify the new imaging hardware and software in a series of
biological experiments monitoring the high-speed behavior of Drosophila
Melanogaster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.