* 2036803
* EAGER: (ST2) Integrating synthetic genetic regulatory networks into soft materials to orchestrate new forms of mechanical responsiveness
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Joelle Frechette, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to develop an adhesive
(sticky) gel in which a chemical reaction senses mechanical force applied to the
gel and, in response, alter the adhesive layer of a material to make it easier
to peel or remove from the surface onto which it is bonded. One goal of
developing this new method is to create a new means of easily removing adhesives
on delicate tissues, such as those used for bandages, without damaging the
material the adhesive is stuck to, such as skin. Inspired by discussions at the
NSF-sponsored Square Table-2 meeting about how the development of materials
might be advanced by incorporating ideas from synthetic biology, this project
brings together two disparate fields, the study of adhesives and synthetic
biology, to advance and directly improve our capabilities to create and
understand medical adhesives. This project provides multi-disciplinary training
for 2 graduate students and 4 undergraduate students and integrates new findings
generated during the research into core and elective chemical and biomolecular
engineering courses. Short courses at professional societies and to art students
presented by the principal investigators about this research are designed to
foment interest in these approaches to material design outside the science and
engineering communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how embedded molecular force
sensors in hydrogels can be employed to modulate adhesion. The strategy employed
by the team involves developing molecular force sensors that change conformation
and expose a specific chemical domain when a predetermined amount of compression
is applied to the hydrogel. The exposed domain can then interact with mobile
chemical elements (such as enzymes or nucleic acid complexes) to initiate a
downstream chemical cascade that leads to debonding, and ultimately to
delamination. The research combines materials design, photopatterning,
biomolecular conjugation, and characterization in order to obtain a new form of
mechanical responsiveness and to gain a better understanding of the mechanisms
behind hydrogel adhesion. Moreover, this work lays the groundwork for a new
class of biomaterials in which arbitrary and complex stimuli and arbitrary and
complex responses are orchestrated by molecular sensors and actuators and
molecular circuits embedded within the biomaterial itself.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Division of Materials Research (DMR) grant supports
research to integrate synthetic genetic regulatory networks into soft materials
to orchestrate new forms of mechanical responsiveness managed by the Condensed
Matter Physics (CMP) Program in DMR of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(MPS) Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.