* 2036768
* FMSG: GOALI: Microbial Upcycling of Petrochemical Polymer Waste into High Value Protein-Based Polymers for a Circular Economy
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Guohong Mao, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,999.00

The sustainability of mankind’s endeavors will require future manufacturing of
materials with closed-loop lifecycles, rather than the traditional linear
extract-process-consumer-dispose paradigm. In this project, investigators will
develop new technologies and conceptual frameworks towards enabling a
regenerative circular bioeconomy for the plastics industry. The project proposes
to develop new engineered microbes that will be able to grow on a plastic
produced from a petrochemical feedstock, and produce protein polymers that have
properties that are appropriate for use in a wide range of consumer products.
The investigators at Rensselear Polytechnic Institute will partner with Conagen,
Inc. on this project. The project will generate new biotechnologies and
elucidate fundamental concepts that enable upcycling of nonbiodegradable plastic
waste as well as design and synthesize protein-based polymers as a sustainable
solution to petroleum-based plastics. Furthermore, the investigators will
establish a "Biomanufacturing of Sustainable Materials" certificate program for
undergraduate students as part of the Arch Program at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute (RPI), which will provide hands-on training in the multidisciplinary
skillsets required to engage in future manufacturing for a circular economy.
This training program will also connect students with off-campus work
experiences which will further provide career opportunities and workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from 1) the Future Manufacturing
Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, and 2) the NSF
2026 Fund Program in the NSF Office of Integrated Activities, the team of
researchers from RPI will bioengineer bacterial strains that upcycle
petrochemical plastic waste into de novo designed recombinant silk fibroins
(RSFs), a class of structural proteins that can potentially exhibit material
properties resembling a wide range of commonly used plastics. In parallel, using
experimental and computational approaches, the investigators will examine the
relationships between molecular/supramolecular structure, processing methods and
conditions, and thermomechanical properties in these RSFs, with particular
emphasis on identifying primary sequences that are suitable for melt processing
into common thermoplastic products. With their industry partner, Conagen Inc.,
they will explore RSF bioproduction with the engineered microbes at pilot scales
to provide a key link between lab-scale research efforts and commercial-scale
biomanufacturing. These combined efforts represent a multidisciplinary approach
towards solving grand standing challenges in the biomanufacturing of protein-
based polymers for use as sustainable plastics in a circular economy. This
project addresses priorities of the Future Manufacturing Program. The project
also directly addresses several of the NSF2026 Idea Machine winning entries: "a
world without waste", "designing ecosystems for the future", and "repurposing,
recycling, renewable energy".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.