* 2036072
* SBIR Phase I:  DEEP-MOP - Development of anÂ Electrification Enabling Platform for Maritime Outboard Propulsion
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,10/31/2021
* Benjamin Sorkin, FLUX MARINE LTD
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 10/31/2021
* USD 255,684.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to reduce pollution and noise in and on waterways for the
recreational boating market, and provide a silent, reliable alternative for
search and rescue operations, defense, and law enforcement. The project will
result in an important prototype outboard motor designed as an electric marine
propulsion system from inception. This project will double the cruising range of
current commercial electric outboard motors, thereby matching gasoline-power
engines in terms of range, while resulting in less than half the ten-year cost
of ownership. This has important environmental benefits as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project aims to provide a competitive electric outboard motor and battery system
for boats up to 25 ft in length which will match the range of gasoline engines,
while mostly eliminating maintenance costs. Four development trajectories are
being pursued: (1) replacing shaft-and-bevel gear systems with modern
transmission materials to reduce noise and improve efficiency, (2) improving
propeller thrust by adopting a larger and redesigned propeller enabled by
electric motors running more efficiently at low revolutions per minute, and
optimizing fluid dynamics properties of the assembly, (3) developing a cooling
system that avoids sea water ingestion to reduce maintenance effort and cost,
and (4) adapting batteries with more flexible form factors and optimizing the
battery control system to maximize cruising range. Technical requirements and
challenges include: (A) demonstrating that the durability of the new drive
materials exceeds existing gear drives; (B) predicting fluid dynamics, and the
successful interplay between computational modeling and tank testing; (C)
designing a completely sealed cooling system, which will neither leak during the
lifetime of the motor, nor overheat even during peak operation, and (D)
understanding the complex interplay between motor and battery control
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.