* 2036434
* STTR Phase I:  Near Infrared Nerve-Specific Fluorophores for Fluorescence-Guided Surgery
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Connor Barth, INHERENT TARGETING, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2022
* USD 244,277.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the development of a technology that will reduce intraoperative nerve
damage using fluorescence imaging to enable surgeons to see the unseen.
Intraoperative nerve injury is a major complication of surgery, affecting all
specialties and often causing irreparable damage. Nerve damage occurs in ~17% of
all surgeries and intraoperative nerve injuries affect 50 million patients
annually worldwide, incurring undue pain, loss of function, and high costs to
the healthcare system. Currently, no clinically approved technology exists to
enhance intraoperative nerve recognition - surgeons rely solely on anatomical
knowledge and visualization. The proposed project will finalize development of
first-in-kind nerve targeted substance allowing surgeons to “cut by color” –
identifying and sparing nerves more effectively to reduce these complications
and the associated costs, estimated at $12.5 billion
annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is focused on the
development of near-infrared nerve-specific fluorophores for fluorescence-guided
surgery (FGS) that are clinically viable for translation to human studies.
Recent work has allowed modification of the base structures of the fluorophores
to significantly improve brightness, solubility, and toxicity while maintaining
high nerve specificity. The immediate milestones of the work proposed herein
include (1) characterization of a library of benzo[c]phenoxazine small molecule
derivatives with chemically tuned water solubility and quantified nerve
specificity, (2) elucidation of the biological target and mechanistic
understanding of nerve-specificity for the fluorophores, (3) preliminary single-
dose toxicology analysis in rodents, (4) quantified pharmacokinetics,
pharmacodynamics, and biodistribution to determine the optimal imaging dose and
time window, and (5) identification of a lead compound for clinical translation.
Successful completion of the proposed work will enable selection of a lead
candidate with a proven safety profile and bright, long-lasting (~1 hour) nerve-
specific fluorescence for identification of buried nerve structures at up to 1
cm depths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.