* 2036190
* SBIR Phase I:  A Tech-Enabled Urinary Catheter for Patients with Neurogenic Bladder Dysfunction
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Alex Arevalos, STARLING MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2022
* USD 255,988.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this small business innovation
research (SBIR) Phase 1 project will be to revolutionize the lives of the
millions of patients currently using multiple urinary catheters per day due to
severe bladder dysfunctions from nervous system damage. The current standard of
care is associated with a poor quality of life and frequent hospitalizations due
to life-threatening infections linked to the sensory issues of this population.
The proposed project restores these patients' ability to sense, enabling a
significant decrease in mortality and costs (~$12B/yr). The proposed technology
will allow these patients normal relief and fewer hospitalizations by using an
app enabled with artificial intelligence (AI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a wireless
communication circuit and downstream AI algorithms to advise patients of the
need for relief, and alerting both patients and clinicials to the presence of a
urinary tract infection in real time to enable an early intervention. In
addition, the technology is directly applicable to all urinary catheters used in
the hospital setting, where they are a major source of costs and
mortality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.