* 2036881
* FMSG: Additive Manufacturing via Bioinspired Distributed Agents
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Mark Yim, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 12/31/2022
* USD 499,997.00

Production of complex structures via a swarm of simple, distributed agents is
ubiquitous in biology (e.g., ant colonies, cellular formation of tissues), yet
technological limitations have traditionally prevented this approach in
manufacturing. In contrast, traditional manufacturing, from machining and
casting to modern approaches such as roll-to-roll or additive manufacturing,
require a deterministic plan which is executed in a series of precise,
sequential steps. With miniaturization of robotics and novel inverse design
tools, it is now feasible that the distributed, swarm approach used in nature
could become an essential future manufacturing platform. The advantages of this
approach include (1) the ability to produce complex multimaterial, multiscale
structures without predetermined steps and (2) extreme robustness to
manufacturing errors. This Future Manufacturing Seed Grant (FMSG) will establish
the theoretical foundation and the practical tools necessary to pave the way for
this nascent area of research and to understand its feasibility. In addition to
the technical aspects of this work, this research could lead to a new area of
manufacturing with beneficial economic and workforce implications. In
conjunction with mid-sized and large manufacturing firms the researchers will
therefore seek insight about how this new manufacturing paradigm would require
changes to manufacturing curricula for the training and retraining of future
manufacturing workers. This project will lead to the training of diverse
graduate and undergraduate students and to outreach to K-12 students and the
general public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this seed grant is to
provide the framework and foundation for a new paradigm for future manufacturing
in which multiple simple agents operate based on local information (e.g.,
temperature, light, pre-existing structure) to modify or manufacture complex
structures based on simple local design rules. The feasibility of this new
approach will be examined, and suitable vocabulary, processing formalization,
design rules, etc., will be developed to establish this paradigm as a new,
transformational area of research. The work will address the following key
questions: How do local design rules map to different structural features, and
ultimately to global mechanical properties (e.g., stiffness, strength, mass,
Poisson's ratio) and combinations of properties (e.g., maximal specific
toughness for a structure of minimal mass)? How do different design rules affect
the rate of convergence toward optimal properties? The answers to these
questions will also be incorporated in an inverse design framework, allowing
local rules to be generated based on the desired properties. This grant is co-
funded by the division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI)
and the division of Industrial Innovation and Partnerships
(IIP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.