* 2036200
* EAGER: (ST2) Using Principles of Synthetic Ecology to Design Communicating Colonies
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Anna Balazs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Biological microbes have developed complex
mechanisms for working as a community to perform a range of collective tasks
crucial to their survival. Inspired by the interactive behavior in microbial
communities, the researcher is developing computational models to design
synthetic materials systems that share information and through this
communication, perform concerted functions. The research can facilitate the
development of self-reporting, self-regulating materials that not only signal
when the system deviates from normal operating conditions or “homeostasis”, but
also restore the system to homeostatic conditions. Such self-regulating systems
will lead to dramatic increases in energy efficiency since they do not require
external intervention to maintain their functionality. These bio-inspired
autonomously functioning materials can also bring about transformative changes
in the field of soft robotics, enabling the fabrication of small-scale,
interactive devices that cooperate to perform specified functions in the absence
of external stimuli. The students and postdoctoral researchers involved in the
project are participating in a highly interdisciplinary field, and through their
research efforts are actively learning and synthesizing new ideas at the
boundaries of synthetic biology, biomaterials and soft matter. In particular,
they will be adapting the approaches of synthetic ecology, which aims to
understand microbial colonies by constructing new functioning communities, to
determine factors controlling interactions in the synthetic communicating
materials. The field of synthetic ecology is still in its infancy and
constitutes a new frontier in science; by training the next generation workforce
and developing new modeling approaches, the research team can make a significant
impact in the growth of this burgeoning area. Moreover, by applying concepts
from synthetic ecology to synthetic materials, the investigators will develop
new approaches for performing materials research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to design “communicating materials”
that: 1) are self-reporting and self-regulating, 2) evolve their properties in
response to environmental changes, and 3) share information to perform a range
of collaborative functions. Despite advances in active soft matter and self-
propelled particles, few synthetic systems mimic these modes of biological
activity. The NSF ST2 workshop concluded that such communicating materials
systems provide a useful construct for addressing fundamental questions that lie
at the intersection of biomaterials, soft matter and synthetic biology.
Furthermore, the realization of communicating materials can pave the way to new
technological advances. The investigator is specifically using theory and
simulation to design communicating materials from experimentally realizable
synthetic microcapsules that interact through viable physical and chemical
phenomenon. The work is yielding new computational models that encompass both
the spatial and temporal behavior of assemblies of three-dimensional capsules;
the hydrodynamic interactions between the capsules and surrounding solution; and
chemical reactions occurring both within the capsules and in the outer solution.
These models also incorporate feedback loops that mimic regulatory networks in
biological cells. Using these approaches, the investigator is determining
conditions that trigger the synthetic capsules to exchange chemical information
and through this communication, perform concerted functions. The studies have
the potential to elucidate fundamental physical and chemical phenomena that play
a vital role in signaling and communication among biological cells. Notably,
both the biological and synthetic communicating systems dissipate energy and
operate out-of-equilibrium. Research on controlling the self-organization and
collective dynamics of the communicating, interactive capsules can provide much-
needed guidelines for harnessing dissipative, non-equilibrium behavior in bio-
inspired, physical systems. By determining fundamental physicochemical
principles that underpin behavior in biological microbial communities, these
studies can provide a window into the physics of living systems and organization
of primitive cellular communities at the origin of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Division of Materials Research (DMR) grant
supports research to understand and develop communicating materials that
incorporate cell communities managed by the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP)
Program in DMR of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS)
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.