* 2036162
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated Robotic Disinfection System (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Thomas McCreery, Zeteo Tech, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will improve infection control in public transportation.
There is currently no high-speed, autonomous method capable of decontaminating
commercial aircraft and public transit vehicles. The proposed technology rapidly
inactivates viruses and other potential biothreats in an automated robotic
disinfection system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes
development and scaling of a system using radiofrequency (RF) directed energy to
activate a benign chemical, producing biocidal reactive oxygen on surfaces.
Preliminary studies of MS2 bacteriophage viruses have demonstrated inactivation
of 99.999999% of MS2, despite being 7-10x more difficult to inactivate than
SARS-CoV-2. The proposed system consists of four subsystems: application
sprayer, RF, robotics, and power. This project will optimize and integrate these
subsystems. A key technical objective is identifying the power density threshold
and appropriate frequency for virus inactivation without negative interactions
with electronic equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.