* 2036498
* STTR Phase II:  The Next Generation of Environmentally Friendly Coatings for Marine Antifouling
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2023
* Sheu-Jane Gallagher, Repela Tech, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2023
* USD 993,788.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is the development of a novel non-toxic
antifoulant that keeps the hulls of vessels clear of biofouling without the
environmental harm imposed by today's current antifoulant products. Biofouling
is the accumulation of algae, barnacles, and other marine organisms on
underwater surfaces such as the hulls of ships and boats. A ship with a
biofouled hull experiences drag, which slows it down and drives up fuel
consumption by as much as 40%. For the global shipping industry, this increase
imposes an annual fuel cost penalty of $36 billion. Moreover, the excess fuel
consumption due to biofouling adds 386 million tons of CO2 emissions to the
atmosphere. Over 90% of antifoulants in the market today contain copper, a toxic
biocide harmful to the marine ecosystem. This project will develop a competitive
antifoulant which avoids harmful environmental
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase II project develops a first-of-its-kind antifouling marine coating that is
high-performing and safe for use in aquatic ecosystems. This antifouling coating
contains no biocides but delivers antifouling performance matching that of the
market leading copper coatings. The novel coating consists of a hydrophilic
polymeric material that is naturally antifouling. It prevents biofouling by
creating a liquid barrier around a surface which masks the surface from fouling
marine organisms. While other hydrophilic coatings are notoriously unstable in
aqueous environments, this innovation includes a method of application that
helps to greatly increase the coating's stability and durability. The objectives
of this Phase II project are to tune the formulation of the novel coating to
meet marine end user performance requirements and regulatory benchmarks and to
demonstrate small-batch production capabilities. The outcome of this work will
be a rigorously tested, ready high-performing eco-friendly antifouling
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.