* 2036455
* SBIR Phase I:  Use of ultraviolet light as a treatment for pathogens in strawberry fields
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,09/30/2021
* Adam Stager, TRIC ROBOTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to accelerate the transition from chemical
pesticides to non-chemical alternatives by providing farmers with a sustainable,
long-term solution for managing plant diseases (e.g., fungus), while reducing
agricultural impacts on human health and the environment. Organic farms lack
effective fungicide treatment methods resulting in high labor costs and
increased risk of yield loss. This project will develop a system for using
ultraviolet light as an efficient and effective alternative for chemical
treatments, by providing farmers with a healthier and more environmentally-
conscious method for treating crops. The solution may eliminate chemical
applications, reduce labor requirements, and increase profitability for farmers.
Additionally, technologies developed as part of this project will minimize human
exposure to chemical fungicides and greatly reduce the ecological damage caused
by existing agricultural treatment
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to understand how environmental and
physical variabilities affect dosing of ultraviolet light in open-field
strawberry production. Ultraviolet light has been shown to effectively treat
pathogens including gray mold, for which there is no organically accepted
treatment other than picking by hand. Ultraviolet light can be used as a non-
chemical alternative for treating pathogens but is not commercially feasible due
to environmental and physical variabilities that affect treatment dosing.
Excessive dosing damages plants and reduces yield, while insufficient dosing is
ineffective. This project will advance agricultural best practices by developing
the equipment and predictive software necessary for reliably applying
ultraviolet treatment on commercial farms. The project team will establish an
experimental process for measuring multi-dimensional irradiance profiles as a
function of physical and environmental factors, then use empirical data to
establish functional relationships between variables and irradiance. Using real-
time sensor feedback, the treatment system can automatically modulate exposure
time and achieve desirable treatment dosing in open fields. By developing the
ability of maintaining ultraviolet treatment dosages, food can be grown reliably
without dangerous and costly chemical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.