* 2036316
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-High Throughput COVID-19 Serology Test Using a Novel Biomarker Multiplexing System
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Casey Wright, Inanovate, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2022
* USD 255,851.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to create a rapid, inexpensive, and ultra-
high throughput test to screen patients for antibodies against the SARS-CoV-2
virus that causes COVID-19. The proposed test will facilitate population-wide
screening for prior exposure, giving epidemiologists and policy-makers insight
into the virus's spread and the frequency of asymptomatic cases. Individuals
will understand their levels of risk (e.g., someone with strong immunity may be
protected from re-infection in the near-term) to make informed decisions. The
proposed technology will be a quantitative test, which may allow immunity level
to be correlated with disease severity or other parameters. The proposed test
can be adapted easily to query multiple antigens simultaneously to address more
complex medical assessments. Beyond the current pandemic, this flexible
technology will be useful for exposure testing for diverse pathogens and
immunogens in applications ranging from epidemiology to vaccine
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project explores a novel method for ultra-high throughput serology
testing. Briefly, high density arrays of patient samples will be queried with
fluorescently labeled COVID-19 antigens to identify patients with antibodies
against the SARS-CoV-2 virus. For the proposed project: Sample preparation and
arraying (printing) techniques and workflows will be optimized. Assay probes
(Covid-19 antigens) and conditions will be optimized using spiked samples and
commercially purchased sera from patients, purchased commercially and
deidentified. The assay's sensitivity and specificity will be measured using
anti-COVID (50 samples) and non-reactive (100 samples) sera. Finally, given that
the SARS-CoV-2 virus is related to other coronaviruses––some of which regularly
circulate in humans, the potential for assay probes to cross-react with
antibodies raised against previous (i.e., non-COVID) infections will be
determined. The results of the proposed work will provide proof-of-concept for
massively parallel, population-level serology
screening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.