* 2036119
* SBIR Phase I:  Off-the-Shelf immuno-compatible cell therapies
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Gary Sams, PROGENITOR INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2022
* USD 255,750.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to improve cell therapy by enabling the rapid development of novel
and safe therapies through the seamless production of pre-characterized, good
manufacturing practice (GMP) grade, universally immune-compatible induced
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) cell lines. The solution will target the global
cell therapy market, expected to be the fastest-growing sector in the
regenerative medicine industry and reaching $9.8 B by 2026. This project will
advance a technology for better clinical trials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project explores feasibility
of a platform for the generation of completely immune-compatible Off-The-Shelf
cell therapies. The platform employs a fully scalable workflow centered on
master induced pluripotent cell lines engineered for universal immune-
compatibility. Cells are further functionalized by site-specific insertion of
bacterial integrase receiver sites enabling safe and reliable insertion of new
DNA constructs into defined genomic loci with low risk for off-target events.
This approach will produce immune-compatible iPSC Receiver Cells that can be
differentiated into many different mature cell types for use in cell therapy
applications. The proposed activities will validate a new approach to prevent
host-versus-grafts rejections based on the disruption of chaperone proteins that
impair major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-1 function without eliminating
MHC-1 cell-surface expression. Several iPSC cell lines will be generated and
tested in vitro and in vivo to investigate the efficacy of the proposed method
to prevent HLA-dependent cytotoxic T cell “non-self” and NK cell “missing-self”
responses. The ability of the generated iPSC to generate differentiated immune-
compatible cell lines will be assessed, validating the entire workflow of the
proposed platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.