* 2036552
* SBIR Phase II:  Integrated Solution for Low Cost Distributed Wind Energy Generation
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Erika Boeing, Accelerate Wind, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,016,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in its strong potential to disrupt the small
wind market, which to date has lagged behind solar counterparts. Through dual
installation with solar on commercial buildings, the proposed roof-edge wind
turbines will be able to deliver enhanced energy capture systems to buildings,
with a shorter payback period, thus improving cost-efficiency and power
potential, and attracting a broader body of adopters. By improving product
offerings in the renewable energy sector, this technology has the potential to
promote sustainable infrastructure, reducing reliance on and consumption of
fossil fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project develops a roof-edge wind capture technology with
commercial viability. The proposed distributed wind technology reduces costs by
harnessing elevated wind speeds at the roof edge, optimizing powertrain
architecture, and mitigating soft costs through sale to solar installers, who
have already achieved significant market penetration yet would benefit from a
diversified portfolio. The project aims to: 1) Prove the feasibility of
integrating a Vertical Axis Wind Turbine into the system 2) Design for
additional stakeholders, with respect to aesthetics, structural integration,
ease of installation, and code compliance, while maintaining cost targets needed
for scaleup 3) Design and test full powertrain architecture using components
intended for commercial scaleup and 4) Build and test the full turbine for
reliability and certification testing. These efforts will inform critical needs
to address prior to large-scale commercial rollout, providing a strong
foundation for translation as a reliable and cost-efficient distributed wind
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.