* 2036809
* FMSG: Enabling Technologies for Biomanufacturing EV-Based Therapeutics
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Alissa Weaver, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 610,000.00

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are cell-made particles that provide a natural
mechanism of information and material transfer between cells. There is growing
interest in large-scale production of EVs that can be used as therapeutics due
to their ability to communicate signals from producer cells and their potential
use as carriers for delivery of drug molecules. EV therapeutics are being
developed for treatment of a wide range of diseases including metabolic
disorders, cancer, and neurodegeneration. Despite the excitement generated by
several early-stage EV biotech companies, the technology to produce mass
quantities of purified EVs with tunable properties is still in its infancy. The
long-term goal of this project is to enable production of "designer EVs" that
can be packaged with desired cargo molecules, decorated with tunable surface
ligands, and secreted in high yield from specific producer cell types. The
overall objective of the current project is to identify cellular processes that
can be engineered to control the production, content, and in vivo trafficking of
therapeutic EVs. Making this new class of drugs available to the public has
potential to improve the health and quality of life of millions of patients in
the US and around the world. The project will also provide the unique
educational opportunity for trainees to engage in collaborative research with
industry scientists. Other broader impacts will be accomplished through engaging
undergraduate and high-school students in EV research, and through integration
of the project with the Vanderbilt Program for EV Research and bioengineering
courses led by the PIs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigators will focus
their research program on loading and delivery of small RNAs, which are
promising drug molecules that are not delivered efficiently to recipient cells
using established nanoparticle-based carriers. The central hypothesis is that
developing tissue-specific producer cells with tuned expression of EV-associated
proteins and RNAs will enable researchers to maximize the product yield of
specific EVs and the efficiency of RNA delivery from EVs to recipient cells.
First, they will boost targeting of miRNAs to extracellular vesicles through
modulating specific molecules at ER-contact sites. Second, they will optimize
cargo delivery to target cells by engineering EVs for efficient endosomal escape
and macrophage evasion properties. Third, they will develop a scalable platform
for manufacturing tissue-specific EVs by differentiating induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs) to producer cells in 3D suspension cultures. The proposed
research is innovative because it applies a multidisciplinary approach to
address several critical barriers to commercial production of therapeutic EVs:
cargo loading, cargo delivery, and scalable manufacturing. EVs secreted by MSCs
are recognized as a viable alternative to overcome the potential risks from
transplantation of primary MSCs. By developing the tools and strategies to
customize and maximize EV production from iPSC-derived MSCs, the researchers
will establish a flexible EV manufacturing platform that can expand to other
relevant organ and tissue systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.