* 2036315
* SBIR Phase I:  Digital Imaging Radar for Autonomy Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,09/30/2021
* Jungah Lee, AURA INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a foundation for unified secure sensing and
communication for next generation wireless infrastructure. To ensure the safety
and security of scalable commercial drone usage and autonomous driving, a sensor
infrastructure is needed to detect, track, and identify fast moving vehicles in
urban environments. Existing commercial radars developed for defense
applications do not scale for the massive deployment of emerging civilian
operation environments. Aura’s digital imaging radar addresses problems that
plague the existing radars and offers a solution for this critical
infrastructure need. Commercial opportunities include infrastructure security
and automation providing situational awareness around airports and industrial
sites and next generation wireless infrastructure for unmanned traffic
management and connected autonomous vehicles. The technology has the potential
to enable new services by integration into vehicles for vehicle safety and
autonomous driving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops a real-time system design
and simulation platform for novel digital imaging radar. Aura has developed an
all digital imaging radar technology for smart infrastructure for autonomous
vehicles and unmanned traffic management. Unlike conventional radars relying on
Frequency Modulated Continuous Wave (FMCW) waveform or phase modulation (PM),
Aura develops time- frequency MIMO radar technology leveraging standard 5G
component technology. Aura’s technology provides agile and secure waveform with
low peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR), addressing the operational challenges
due to interference, jamming, and energy efficiency. Key challenges for
commercialization of this digital radar are system complexity due to wideband
data converters and real-time baseband processing. The goals of Phase I project
are to complete low-complexity, real-time system design and to validate the
performance of the proposed technology in realistic channel environments.
Scientific tasks that will be completed in Phase I project include a low
complexity system design architecture for real-time implementation of the end-
to-end simulation platform with a realistic channel model for performance
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.