* 2036098
* SBIR Phase I:  Early Diagnosis of the COVID-19 Cytokine Storm via Point-of-Care Antibody Profiling
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Anna Schibel, Electronic Bio Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to predict a patient’s risk for developing an
adverse and often lethal response to certain viral infections, such as COVID-19.
This project proposes a fast and accurate test for the severity of COVID-19
infection. The proposed assay has the potential to enable early intervention and
save lives. It can potentially be used for many other infections and public
health hazards beyond COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will produce a new technology capable
of diagnosing immune response dysregulation to any infectious disease (e.g.,
SARS-CoV-2, dengue, influenza, hepatitis C, etc.) that progress through an
antibody dependent enhancement (ADE) mechanism. While infection by the SARS-
CoV-2 virus begins as a mild illness, some patients experience a sudden and
rapid decline in health, precipitated by a massive release of pro-inflammatory
cytokines, i.e., a “cytokine storm,” Cytokine storms cause hyperinflammation of
the lungs, which leads to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), the
leading cause of COVID-19 mortality. Unfortunately, there is presently no test
capable of predicting this event. This project aims to fill this medical
technology gap via the development of a highly multiplexed, rapid, sensitive,
disposable immunoassay specific to COVID-19 infections to be deployed at scale.
The effort will include designing, building, and optimizing a prototype
immunoassay based on nanopore technology innovations and analytically validating
the developed technology against industry standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.