* 2036633
* I-Corps: Digital Therapeutics using autonomic regulation training for students challenged with debilitating stress, anxiety and depression
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Scott Ransom, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a biofeedback training tool to increase student academic
performance. As pressures to improve academic performance continue to increase,
students are increasingly coming to school emotionally unprepared to learn. This
is frequently compounded by the lack of a healthy social and emotional
environment within the school to support, motivate, and emotionally engage
students. As research has illuminated the important connections between
emotions, learning, and performance, it has become apparent that effective
school-based interventions are needed to foster and integrate students’
emotional, social, and academic development to provide them with tools and
skills needed to increase self-awareness and emotional self-management; promote
effective communication; practice healthy, responsible behaviors; and build
functional, collaborative relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a peripheral autonomic biofeedback
training device as an effective process by which patients self-monitor heart
rate, skin conductivity, peripheral skin temperature, and respiration rate while
attempting to alter their internal responses. Breathing exercises and
mindfulness techniques paired with biofeedback display has proven a powerful
tool when teaching self-regulation of stress and anxiety. Not surprisingly, a
number of studies have closely examined college student populations and their
response to biofeedback training. The technology provides an emotion-aware,
mental health and wellness platform that uses multimodal peripheral biofeedback,
wireless sensor technology, and a goal-oriented software agent that will
automatically refine the user experience based on the users’ real-time feedback
from emotion-analyzing and gesture-tracking modules. Augmented by software
agents, the interactive virtual objects will possess rich personality and
emotional states flexible enough to respond to user’s interactions with
intelligence and affective awareness. The results of this project will enable
further development and translation of gamified, multimodal biofeedback
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.