* 2036488
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Voices Of Integrating Culture in the Earth Sciences (VOICES)
* GEO,RISE
* 03/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Gillian Bowser, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Bernard Grant
* 09/30/2023
* USD 42,761.00

The Voices of Integrating Culture in the Earth Sciences (VOICES) is a
collaborative pilot study focused on identifying new pathways to dismantle
persistent barriers in the recruitment, retention, and representation of
different racial, ethnic and cultural groups, including the intersectionality of
those with disabilities.VOICES contributes to a greater awareness of cultural
knowledge and best practices in diversity, equity, and inclusion in the Earth
sciences, with implications of reaching a broader segment of the STEM community.
This project will target key areas of engagement related to personal identity,
feeling of belonging, history of place, and sense of security from
underrepresented minorities. VOICES uses creative strategies within a social
behavioral framework, to address those elements that have the potential to shift
from the traditions and legacies of a historically exclusive discipline into a
more diverse Earth science community. Including voices from distinct cultural
values and perspectives that are commonly undervalued, can result in changing
exclusionary teaching, learning, and research practices. By highlighting
individual voices as part of a collective whole, a more powerful, awakened, and
inclusive community has the potential to transform strategies to engage leaders
and learners in Earth science disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Voices of
Integrating Culture in the Earth Sciences project will invoke the power of
disaggregated stories and individual cultural identities that persevere despite
the traditional expectations, values, and methods of teaching and learning Earth
science. VOICES has four primary elements: Identity, Belonging, Place, and
Security. Each element reflects different contexts within Earth science
education (e.g., field and classroom learning environments, and career
development) for groups of diverse students, faculty and professionals. Using a
mixture of social behavioral approaches including surveys focus groups and 3
thematic workshops, VOICES will focus on the interrelationship of Identity,
Belonging, Place and Security through the lens of those who are commonly
underrepresented in the Earth sciences. Thematic workshops (Nagaajiwanaang,
Barataria and Potomac) use cultural histories and places to anchor workshop
activities and outcomes around diversity and inclusion approaches to integrating
culture in field experiences. VOICES represents a novel and highly
interdisciplinary approach will lead to: 1) a more culturally robust science
community through broadening the awareness of cultural and intersectional
knowledge across multiple underrepresented groups, 2) the establishment of a
national diversity champions network VOICES Net as a sustainable communication
platform, and 3) the design and deployment of best culturally inclusive
practices for welcoming all students and scientists from groups underrepresented
in the Earth sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.