* 2036490
* STTR Phase I:  Manufacturing of Enhanced Composites via Interlaminar Incorporation of CNT/Epoxy Nanoscaffolds using Genetic Algorithm Assisted Machine Learning and Neural Networks
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2022
* Hamid Dalir, MULTISCALE INTEGRATED TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 01/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Program (STTR) Phase I project is to improve strength and stiffness of
carbon fiber reinforced composites in aerospace, automotive, energy, and other
applications. Carbon fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP) materials are used to
reduce weight without compromising the strength of structural components, but
because they are built layer by layer, they have certain weaknesses. This
project will advance a new approach to to enable production of higher
performance automobiles, airplanes, turbines and more. The process can be highly
automated, cost-effective, and seamlessly integrated with existing CFRP
manufacturing. This can be integrated into existing processes. The continued
development of stronger and lighter composite parts will also have an impact in
related fields including renewable energy resources. The technology holds the
promise of reducing operating costs, improving fuel efficiency, and decreasing
emissions. This will lead to significant impacts on national security in
advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strong technical innovation in
the project is identifying the use of electrospinning to coat a prepreg CFRP
roll with carbon nanotube (CNT)/epoxy nanofilaments that can form a CNT-
reinforced bonding surface that is square meters in area and just tens of
microns in thickness. This project will address the longstanding weak through-
thickness interlaminar strength of CFRP prepreg laminates using a low materials-
cost and highly automated process. The project will expand on the primary
innovation to develop a theoretical understanding of multiscale nanoscaffold-
enhanced CFRP advanced composites through genetic algorithm assisted machine
learning (GAML) and artificial neural networks (ANN). The objective is to
establish an experimentally and computationally supported GAML framework for
determining optimal processing parameters and structural features. Results will
lead to better optimization tools in the design of new composite materials, and
the development of instrumentation supporting the emergence of new weight and
cost saving opportunities in the composite industry for complex
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.