* 2036944
* FMSG: Electrochemical Upcycling of Waste Nitrates for Eco-Manufacturing of Nitrogen-Based Chemicals
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Wenzhen Li, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Nitrogen-based compounds are indispensable chemicals critically valuable to many
industrial applications. However, today they are manufactured directly or
indirectly from ammonia. Ammonia is manufactured via the Haber-Bosch process and
demands heavy use of fossil fuels, high temperature, and pressure. This results
in large carbon dioxide emissions. Meanwhile, huge amounts of nitrate are
generated as a notorious and hazardous pollutant in wastewaters from many
industrial processes and as agricultural run-off. Costly mitigation of nitrate
pollution is often required to maintain healthy ecological systems. Led by
Professors Wenzhen Li and Mark Mba-Wright at Iowa State University, and
Professor Shuang Gu at Wichita State University, the team is conducting
pioneering research on “electrochemical nitrate upcycling”. This process is
turning harmful nitrate wastes into useful nitrogen-based chemicals, without
continuously depleting the dwindling fossil energy sources. By leveraging
inexpensive and over-generated wind electricity, especially in Midwest
agricultural areas, the proposed innovative eco-manufacturing system could lay
the foundation for distributed, cost-effective, and ecofriendly future
manufacturing of versatile nitrogen-based chemicals. Fusing the interests from
chemical industry, power plants, and environmental sectors, the project is
strengthening American leadership in advanced manufacturing by helping address
three grand global challenges: sustainability, climate change, and clean water.
This project is jointly funded by the Division of Chemistry, the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems, and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team led by Professors Li (Iowa
State), Mba-Wright (Iowa State), and Gu (Wichita State), focuses its research on
the desirable transition from waste nitrate to valuable hydroxylamine (NH2OH)
and its useful derivatives, by integrating their expertise across nitrate
concentrating &amp; polymer science, selective nitrate reduction &amp; nitrate
electrochemistry, techno-economic analysis &amp; data-driven decision making,
and device engineering &amp; system integration. This project aims to 1) acquire
the fundamental material sciences of both nitrate-reduction catalysts and
nitrate-exchange polymers; 2) advance the scientific understanding of functional
processes including selective nitrate reduction, nitrate concentrating, and
hydroxylamine separation; and 3) examine the promising future manufacturing
system based on the “electrochemical nitrate upcycling” for nitrogen-based
chemicals. The achieved research outcomes are to be incorporated into existing
elective courses. A teaching module on eco-manufacturing is to be developed for
local community college students. The team is actively working with the
Bioeconomy Institute and Electric Power Research Center at Iowa State, with a
long-term goal of producing a new generation workforce in the fields of advanced
manufacturing. This project is jointly funded by the Division of Chemistry, the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems, and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.