* 2036493
* SBIR Phase I:  Geometric Unified Learning
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Weiqing Gu, DASION CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2022
* USD 275,998.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is that the proposed Geometric Unified Learning (GUL) technology,
consisting of reusable building blocks, overcomes several disadvantages of deep
learning methods and brings increased value to end-users by: 1) saving time and
resources in data processing, since GUL has an auto data cleaning and
compressing capability; 2) fitting data before it is input to a deep neural
network to avoid overfitting since GUL can search and learn simultaneously and
select the most important data to use; 3) providing transparency and trustworthy
solutions that can easily be understood by data-to-decision makers; 4) making
data analysis interesting for software developers, scientists and engineers
outside of the machine learning field since GUL outputs are comprehensible; 5)
producing flexible, robust and agile solutions for debugging since GULâ€™s
components can be decomposed or re-organized to form new solutions for different
problems; and 6) saving money since GUL runs faster in parallel and only uses
around 1% of the original data points.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project has several intellectual merits that
address several technical challenges in deep learning, such as garbage-in
producing garbage-out, needing large volumes of training data, long running
times, unexplainable outputs, excessive parameter tuning, then repeating until
the desired results are obtained. GUL, rooted in differential geometry, creates
appropriate local (GUL) coordinate systems, Riemannian (GUL) metrics,
transformations, and geodesics to identify data invariants, intrinsic patterns
to engineer and design GUL data adaptors, characteristic extractors, and
measurements that can be reinforced to be better each time an end-user runs
their data. The GUL tools have capabilities of vectorizing data, compressing
data, searching and learning simultaneously, with highly interpretable results.
When the technology makes predictions it will show the user exactly which data
points are responsible for those predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.