* 2036534
* Building the research innovation workforce: a workshop to identify new insights and directions to advance the research computing community.
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Thomas Hacker, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 163,960.00

The research enterprise requires a skilled research innovation workforce,
consisting of highly trained and skilled practitioners in areas such as advanced
cyberinfrastructure (CI), research software engineering, operations, and user
support. A recent report from the National Science and Technology Council
highlighted the need for this workforce. This project will conduct a series of
virtual workshop sessions among a variety of affinity groups that includes
academics and practioners to discuss and explore the problems and challenges
affecting the growth and vitality of the research innovation workforce, and to
discuss and identify potential strategies and solutions to help address these
challenges. The workshop will be conducted entirely virtually with the aid of a
skilled workshop facilitator. The outcomes of the proposed workshop will be a
set of recommendations to the National Science Foundation related to CI
professional workforce development; a better understanding of the challenges and
problems affecting research innovation gleaned from discussions within and
across affinity groups; and increased awareness of potentially cross-cutting
strategies and solutions to encourage the growth and health of the national
research innovation workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop seeks to
facilitate a discussion among the affinity groups who collectively participate
in the research enterprise, specifically targeting issues related to building
and enhancing the CI professional workforce (e.g. research software engineers,
research data science professionals, advanced cyberinfrastructure systems
professionals, etc.) with the goal of identifying problem areas, discussing and
identifying potential solutions, and developing a set of recommendations for
consideration by the national research community and the NSF. The workshop co-
chairs and steering committee represent a broad group of stakeholders. The
primary goal of the proposed workshop is to explore the challenges and potential
strategies and solutions to address the need for an advanced CI research
innovation workforce that is essential to advancing the frontiers of
computational and data-intensive scientific research. The workshop will result
in a report with recommendations for fostering growth and career paths for a
diverse, inclusive, and emerging set of professionals that collaborates across
traditional boundaries and enables research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.