* 2036023
* SBIR Phase I:  An innovative calibration software to suppress torque ripple and improve performance of electric motors.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Matthew Piccoli, IQInetics Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2021
* USD 255,238.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the market by developing a
software solution to intrinsic electric motors’ hardware problems. Inexpensive
Brushless Direct Current (BLDC) motors have electromagnetic flaws that limit
their adoption in industrial and service robotic applications. These industries
require precise positioning, advanced trajectory control, and smooth operation
which require high-end motors that minimize electromagnetic flaws using high-
quality materials and complex hardware designs. Unfortunately, this increases
production costs, making them prohibitively expensive for many applications. The
proposed solution will make electric motors extremely precise, efficient, and
easily controllable while keeping manufacturing costs low. The combination of
low-cost hardware and performance-enhancing calibration software will bring
high-end motor performance to a wide range of industries, which may be able to
improve the performance of their devices while saving up to 90% on motor costs.
The first target will be the Robotic Market, expected to reach $158 billion by
2025, in particular the drone and industrial segments, where many manufacturers
must balance cost and performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to prove the technical
feasibility of a new calibration approach to solving electromagnetic and
hardware flaws in brushless direct current (BLDC) motors. The technology is
based on 1) embedded position sensors in the motor to collect the position-
dependent parameters necessary to generate maps of motors’ electromagnetic
flaws; 2) proprietary algorithms that map cogging and mutual torque to vary the
input voltage/current, eliminating the negative impact of the respective torque
ripple; 3) encoder error correction to eliminate the discrepancies between the
true and the measured angular positions of the motor magnets, improving motor
calibration and position control. The research activities in this project may
result in the generation and validation of a minimum viable calibration process
that integrates all the described components. The ability of the calibration
software to minimize the impact of the inherent electromagnetic flaws in low-end
BLDC motors and enhance performance will be assessed together with the
feasibility of generating an innovative hardware motor configuration
specifically designed to reduce manufacturing costs. The successful outcome of
this project will demonstrate the commercial feasibility of the calibration
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.