* 2036161
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a novel technology to manufacture animal-free muscle proteins in bacteria and yeasts
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Chenfeng Lu, FYBRAWORKS FOODS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project includes improved food security, environmental benefits,
and human health benefits. This project will develop a meat alternative that
more closely mimics the taste and texture of animal meat. The technology
developed from the proposed project will be used to build a vertically
integrated food manufacturing platform that can withstand supply chain
disruptions from natural disasters and pandemics. These meat alternatives will
reduce and replace traditional meat consumption, with many environmental
benefits - lowered greenhouse gas emissions and aquatic pollution; lower use of
energy, water and land; and reduced antibiotics usage. There are benefits to
human health for reduced meat consumption. Furthermore, production costs will be
eventually be comparable to that of mushroom farming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project aims to develop a fermentation-based meat alternative that more
closely mimics the taste and texture of animal meal through recombinant protein
technologies. Additionally, the project aims to leverage the texture and flavor
of mushroom mycelia, and supplement this with recombinant muscle proteins to
further enhance the taste and nutritional profiles and overcome many of the
shortcomings of existing plant-based meat products. To date the concept of
combining recombinant muscle protein and single cell protein is novel and has
not been reported. Large gaps persist between plant-based and lab-grown meat,
with regards to cost and consumer experience. Plant-based meat is more
affordable but faces consumer resistance due to sub-optimal texture and
nutritional profiles, while cultivated meat offers a consumer experience similar
to that of animal meat but at a much higher cost. Towards this goal, muscle
protein genes will be expressed in a microbial host and enzymatically cross-
linked with vegetable protein to produce protein fibers that can be formulated
into synthetic meat. The technical objectives also include demonstration the
feasibility of crosslinking muscle fiber proteins extracted from meat with
mycoprotein from mushroom to produce desired textural and flavor
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.