* 2036909
* Build and Broaden: Bridging Critical Research Collaborations for Faculty Success in Texas MSIs
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Colleen Fitzgerald, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2022
* USD 90,000.00

The state of Texas has more minority-serving institutions (MSI) than any state
other than California. The state's pressing priorities mimic many at the
national level, such as a need for greater inclusion at all levels of the
scientific enterprise. While the National Science Foundation (NSF) has
identified many effective strategies to demystify the grants process, funding
rates at MSIs still lag behind other institutions with fewer students of color,
including in the social, behavioral, and economic (SBE) sciences. In turn, this
means MSI students have fewer opportunities to participate in research or to
acquire cutting edge scientific techniques, the kinds of experiences that
increase options for career paths and advanced education. This grant funds three
mini-conferences for MSI faculty in Texas, with a focus on participation by
faculty of color, women faculty, and mid-career faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mini-conferences will feature presentations by former
NSF staff and other faculty who bring expertise in navigating different career
pathways, including at MSIs. Through the events, faculty at MSIs will learn more
about NSF grant proposals and research collaborations and will have access to
on-site mentorship and collaboration opportunities. The conference organizers
also plan to collect survey data on the career pathways of participating faculty
in the SBE sciences at these institutions, with an eye towards better
understanding how to support research capacity, especially for collaborations.
As a result, a larger pool of faculty at MSIs will share an understanding of NSF
proposals and fellow SBE researchers in the region. Increased attention to SBE
research and funding in the state of Texas will advance fundamental knowledge in
the SBE disciplines, highlighting the value of SBE research in a state which
receives roughly 90% of its funding in the non-SBE disciplines, according to
figures from the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
Board.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.