* 2036151
* EAGER: COVID-19 Real-time Detection via Hyperspectral Analysis of Sweat Metabolite Biometrics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Emanuela Marasco, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 01/31/2024
* USD 154,321.00

The project seeks to address the ongoing challenge pertaining to the Covid-19
outbreak and the need for prompt diagnosis in a reality where the Test Kits are
scarcely available, expensive, labs-based and slow. The analysis of biometric
metabolites has the potential to be clinically applicable in monitoring the
health of individuals based on particular biomarker combinations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory study will evaluate the sensitivity and
specificity of sweat metabolite biometrics for detecting COVID19 infection in
human subjects with and without symptoms. The proposed methodology involves a
radically different testing approach while engaging novel interdisciplinary
perspectives: medical technology, artificial intelligence and machine learning
are combined to prevent and diagnose an infectious serious disease. This will
reduce the cognitive burden on humans by promoting human-machine teaming for
improved overall detection performance. The project seeks to develop tools that
will enable real-time and accurate screening of COVID-19 applicable on a large-
scale population, aiding the community to face further spread of it. Through
monitoring of the disease biomarkers in sweat, the proposed method has also the
advantage of being non-invasive. The methods, theory, and data resulting from
this proposal will impact the scientific community in several positive ways and
will be made publicly available through an appropriate website. Findings and
results achieved through this project will enhance the engineering curricula,
including image processing, biometrics and machine learning. Advances produced
with this project will be disseminated by the investigators through publications
and web seminars. The proposed research will create a new hyperspectral imaging
methodology to acquire sweat metabolites specifically impacted by COVID-19 to be
processed through pattern recognition strategies. Hyperspectral imaging is a
powerful tool for non-destructive analysis, enabling real-time monitoring of
spatially resolved spectral information of materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks to design, extract and evaluate features from hyperspectral data
cubes, stacked images across pre-defined wavelengths, using a compact
hyperspectral imager without involving chemical methods. A novel dataset of
hyperspectral fingerprint images will be developed during this research study.
Advanced image processing techniques will be used to extract rich signals and
machine learning for training pattern classifiers to distinguish between
diseased and non-diseased subjects. In addition, this project seeks to build a
bridge between recent advances in chemistry and image processing, creating a
novel effective representation of COVID-19 profiles based on discriminative
biomarkers quantified in terms of concentrations in the hyperspectral domain.
The concentrations of the biochemical content in human sweat have been measured
using reagent kits and instruments such as spectrophotometers. With this
research, relevant spatial information will be integrated with corresponding
spectral signature to enable the diagnosis through artificial intelligence. The
proposed COVID-19 detector will be assessed using standard performance metrics
of machine learning algorithms and compared to tampon-based testing
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.