* 2036870
* FMSG: ARM4MOD: AI-powered and Robot-assisted Manufacturing for Modular Construction
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Semiha Ergan, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2023
* USD 499,721.00

Modular construction is a revolutionary way to transform the construction
industry with established records of accelerating projects and reducing costs as
compared to the traditional processes. However, new construction capabilities
are needed to perform modular construction at scale, where the industry suffers
from the dependency on skilled labors, which is a well-acknowledged challenge at
manufacturing factories as well. This project focuses on the facts that (a)
every project is unique and necessitates efficiency and accuracy in recognition
and handling workpieces, (b) design and production line changes are common, and
necessitate design standardization and optimization of modules, and (c)
production lines are complex in space and time, and necessitate the guidance of
workers while processing design and installation information
accurately.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a unique attempt in studying
modular construction within the context of Future Manufacturing (FM). It
exploits opportunities at the intersection of AI/robotics/building information
modeling and manufacturing, with the potential to increase the scalability of
modular construction. This research will pioneer initial formulations to enable
(a) high throughput in manufacturing through the definition and evaluation of
processes that embrace real-time workpiece semantic grounding and in-situ AR-
robotic assistance, (b) feasibility studies of optimizing and standardizing the
design of modules, and utilization of a cyberinfrastructure for their
standardization, (c) prototyping cyberinfrastructures as both novel ways of
forming academia and industry partnerships, and data infrastructures to
accelerate data-driven adaption in FM for modular construction, and (d)
synergistic activities with a two-year institution to train and educate FM
workforce for the potential of FM and technologies evaluated. While the
evaluations of technologies will focus on the modular construction, the proposed
technologies will improve the competitiveness of manufacturing industries,
particularly heavy manufacturing industries that share similar challenges such
as agricultural, mining, and ship building. The project will enhance the US
competitiveness in production, bolster economic growth, educate students, and
influence workforce behavior towards efficiency and accuracy with the skills
required for leadership in FM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.