* 2036339
* SBIR Phase I:High-resolution Volumetric 3D Printing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Peter Kazlas, QUADRATIC 3D, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 01/31/2022
* USD 255,352.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be the development of a new strategy for patterning polymers on the
microscale. Specifically, this project will develop a high-resolution volumetric
3D printer. This printer will generate objects in high performance materials
that feature no accompanying support structures, and minimal artifacts such as
layering from the printing process. This project will achieve printing at the
focal point of a laser beam. Because this process has substantially reduced
power requirements, printing can be achieved much faster and a a significantly
reduced cost. This technology will support rapid prototyping of ultrahigh
resolution parts or creation of microelectromechanical systems and will enable
widespread use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build a volumetric 3D
printer based on photon upconversion nanocapsules. These nanocapsules contain a
liquid core of molecules that undergo triplet-triplet annihilation to convert
red photons to blue photons with a quadratic power dependence. When paired with
an appropriate photopolymerization scheme that is activated by blue light but
transparent to red light, these nanocapsules can be used to drive polymerization
exclusively at the focal point of a red laser. The development of larger anti-
stokes shifts for the upconversion process, and the enhancement of the
upconversion efficiency will allow for rapid printing. Work optimizing
upconversion wavelengths and efficiencies will be achieved using
photoluminescence spectroscopy. The development of multiplexed optical schemes
will further enhance the printing speed. Beam profiling will be performed to
determine the success of light-shaping approaches. Functionalization of the
nanocapsules will allow them to be made compatible with a broad range of 3D
printing resins. Development of resins especially suited for this style of 3D
printing will further differentiate this technology from existing approaches to
3D printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.