* 2036873
* FMSG: Internet of People and Things Bridging manual to semiautomated processes through Cybermanufacturing Collaborative Intelligence
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Joshua Summers, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports fundamental research in
understanding how human roles in manufacturing will evolve with the introduction
of increasingly intelligent autonomous agents and what characteristics of
assistive technology are important to provide the most effective collaborative
relationship between humans and artificial intelligence systems. Application of
this research will not only help reduce costs and improve quality for parts
designed and manufactured in technical environments but will also explore the
sociology of human interaction with artificial systems in ways that further
human purposefulness and fulfillment in work. This project promotes the progress
of interdependent science and advances national prosperity and welfare through
facilitating value creating in future manufacturing systems. Additionally, this
work includes a plan for broadening participation of underrepresented groups in
scientific research by a targeted set of recruiting activities toward minority
and female candidates through social media and peer-to-peer networks, as well as
formal programs such as the National GEM consortium and Clemson's Women in
Science and Engineering (WISE) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of
this project are to model collaboration strength in manufacturing among systems
of people and artificial intelligence agents and to measure assistive
technologiesâ€™ influence on manufacturing collaboration. As the manufacturing
supply chain has grown from a progression of sequential parts creating an
assembly to more modern networks of specialized module builders, the role of
interorganizational and intraorganizational collaboration has grown immensely in
its influence on productivity and profitability. Considering the advent of new
intelligent planning, automation, and production systems, the proposing team
conjectures that the strength of collaboration will retain its influence on
positive manufacturing outcomes and can be affected significantly by assistive
technologies for human participation. The project outcomes have important
implications for future manufacturing in regard to the transition to artificial
intelligence implementation throughout the supply chain, and lasting human
presence in manufacturing; both of which must work in
harmony.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.