* 2036496
* SBIR Phase I:  Measuring and Mapping Pain Intensity onto a 3D Image of the Human Body
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Andru Zeller, JUST HEALTH CARE, LTD. CO.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 02/28/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will significantly improve the way clinicians
and researchers measure, study and treat pain. Chronic pain affects 20% of U.S.
adults and costs $600 billion annually. Opioids are often the first treatment
option offered to patients with chronic pain. Currently pain is assessed using
simplistic, subjective and generalized visual/verbal scales (1-10) with little
ability to localize the origin. It is essential for clinicians and medical
researchers to have calibrated and accurate measures of pain to assist patients
in determining the underlying disease and directing patients to the most
effective therapies. This project will develop a new biomedical tool to quantify
pain data for multimodal treatment plans to potentially minimize opioid use.
This tool will improve quality of life for people suffering from chronic pain
and help those on opioids find better therapies. Furthermore, it will help
clinicians with varied levels of training and experience achieve the highest
level of exam skill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will digitize a physical exam by capturing
palpation location and pressure and patient pain expression via multiple
biosensors to create a personalized “contour” map of pain intensity onto a 3D
image of the human body. This comprehensive and calibrated data set can then be
used to assist clinicians in developing a more accurate differential diagnosis
for the underlying pain condition. This project will advance the hardware and
software components for future integration with augmented reality and artificial
intelligence modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.