* 2036153
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of An Allergen-Free Peanut Using Genome Editing Technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Hortense Dodo, IngateyGen LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,196,023.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to address health concerns associated with peanut allergies. Peanut
allergies affect a large population and can be extremely dangerous for those
with the most severe forms. Given the ubiquity of peanut products, peanut
allergy is a significant medical and legal concern worldwide, with a rising
incidence of this potentially fatal condition in children. An allergen-free
peanut developed from this project has the potential to significantly dampen the
life-threatening reactions to peanuts, as well as the following benefits: (1)
reducing the overall incidence of food allergy, (2) preserving human lives by
eliminating anaphylaxis and death caused by accidental ingestion of peanut, (3)
eliminating emotional distress of peanut allergic individuals and their
families, (4) enhancing the public perception of peanuts as a health-promoting
food, and (5) reducing the number of product recalls due to peanut
contamination. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to develop and
to commercialize an allergen-free peanut devoid of all clinically documented
allergens using a genome-editing tool such as CRISPR/Cas (clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeats and CRISPR-associated system). Allergic
reactions to peanut occur shortly after contact of peanut allergens with their
specific IgE antibodies already bound to mast cells. The crosslinking of
allergen specific IgE by the respective peanut allergens stimulates mast cells
to release chemical mediators responsible for the clinical symptoms including
sometime anaphylactic shock or death. Ara h 1, Ara h 2, Ara h 3 and Ara h 6 are
the most clinically documented peanut allergens. The objectives of the project
are: (1) Construct and validate vectors for Ara h gene editing, transform peanut
embryogenic callus and regenerate T0 peanut plants; (2) Identify T0 individuals
with deletions in Ara h genes; (3) Assemble lines carrying homozygous deletions
in all target Ara h genes; (5) Characterize the selected lines for Ara h mRNA
and protein expression; (6) Assess vegetative development of Arah-free lines
under greenhouse conditions. If the resulting plants demonstrate tolerance to
the gene deletions, the allergen-free peanut will be very significant in
protecting the peanut sensitive populations and promoting peanut
sales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.