* 2036294
* SBIR Phase I: Development of a novel peptide inhibitor of coronavirus papain-like protease as a prophylactic and anti-viral therapeutic for COVID19, administered by inhalation
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2022
* Natasha Shtraizent, GRIT BIO INC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2022
* USD 255,981.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will result from development of a safe and sustainable anti-viral
treatment for COVID-19. Vaccine and drug development efforts are underway, but
the efficacy of these treatments and their safety particularly for high-risk
populations remain a concern. The proposed project is an anti-viral inhaler that
delivers a natural immune defense salivary protein that blocks the activity of a
molecule essential for viral replication in the lung. The candidate therapeutic
will potentially be a safer treatment option for people with compromised health.
The sustainability of this treatment relies on three factors. First, the
therapeutic targets a viral genome replication process. Thus, this targeted
technology will not be compromised by virus mutations and will maintain its
efficacy against current and future coronavirus outbreaks. Second, it does not
require clinical administration and is thus more easily accessible by patients.
Third, the treatment has potential as an broad anti-viral
therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will validate a novel anti-
viral treatment against SARS-CoV-2. First, the anti-viral action will be
validated in a cell-based model that mimics human lung infected with
coronavirus, alveolar epithelial cells cultured in an air-liquid interface and
infected with SARS-CoV-2. Next, an in vivo model will be used to confirm that
the therapy can reach the virus target site in the lung, undergo uptake by the
alveolar epithelial cells and avoid the barriers of pulmonary delivery (e.g.
mucus, pulmonary enzymes or macrophages). Finally, this project will confirm
that the therapy does not elicit a pro-inflammatory response and toxicity in
lung cells, so it can be safely given to people with compromised health without
exacerbating their immune response. The treatment will be delivered by
inhalation and ultimately become a therapeutic and prophylactic anti-viral
inhaler.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.