* 2036538
* SBIR Phase I:  Endoluminal Fixation of a Distraction Enterogenesis Device
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Andre Bessette, ECLIPSE ENTEROGENESIS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to create a novel intestinal lengthening
system for the treatment of Short Bowel Syndrome (SBS). SBS is a devastating
condition defined by the loss of greater than 50% of a patient’s small bowel due
to a congenital or acquired defect that often requires surgical treatment. For
pediatric patients, SBS can be more devastating with the mortality rate
approaching 50%. Existing non-surgical treatment options are inadequate and
often lead to complications such as life-threatening central venous line
infections, clotting of the major venous systems, metabolic imbalance, liver
disease, and organ failure. The average cost per SBS patient ranges from
$150,000-$200,000 for nutrition alone, and when combined with pharmaceutical
therapies, the cost can exceed $500,000 per year. Today, there is no known
restorative solution to SBS. This project will develop a technology that can be
delivered endoscopically to the small intestine without the need of open
surgery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase 1 project intends to create the first fixation method for devices to be
endoscopically placed inside the small intestine, held temporarily in place, and
then released for natural passing out of the body in the stool. Current fixation
methods and technology are permanent and require either an open surgical
procedure or a device that remains in place. This project will be accomplished
as follows: (1) select a preferred fixation method, including fabrication and
testing subassemblies on the laboratory bench to optimize fixation performance
and subsequent release; (2) incorporate the optimal fixation and release concept
with existing endoscopic imaging and delivery devices to demonstrate system
feasibility on the laboratory bench; and (3) prepare a system for animal
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.