* 2036199
* SBIR Phase II:  Universal Proteome Sample Preparation Kit Development
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Amber Lucas, IMPACT PROTEOMICS, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,684.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a universal protein sample
preparation kit that extracts proteins from any biological sample, removes
contaminants, and prepares them for downstream analytical methods with higher
yields and deeper coverage than currently available technology. Proteins are the
molecular machines of the cell that do all the work required to keep humans
healthy, and incorporation of protein analysis is becoming increasingly
important for developing a clear understanding of integrated biological systems,
realizing the promise of precision medicine, and rapid drug discovery. Sample
preparation is the first step in any protein-based project workflow and without
a high-yield, fast, and reproducible way to prepare samples, downstream analyses
are difficult to interpret and highly variable, leading to long project times
and wasted resources. The proposed innovation improves sample yields,
reproducibility, and speed, accelerating research seeking to discover new
therapies and diagnostics and improving cost-effectiveness. It will also purify
other important biomolecules from the same sample, such as DNA, RNA, and
metabolites, allowing researchers to obtain more information from each sample,
prepare multiple samples in the time it takes to prepare one, and improve
reproducibility by using the same starting material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will utilize reversible protein tagging chemistry to create a
one-tube workflow for the capture, wash, and elution of protein samples for
analysis. Because this novel reversible protein tagging chemistry is not
dependent on a catalyst, does not produce byproducts, and is completely
biorthogonal, it has the potential to work universally with all types of buffer
systems, including harsh denaturants and detergents commonly used for cell lysis
and protein solubilization. This proposed work will optimize the utilization of
this sample preparation technology in the most used buffer systems, model
organisms, and will show superior yields in the preparation of diagnostic sample
types such as blood, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid. Additionally, because our
reversible protein tag does not cross react with other biomolecules, we will
show that we can also use this technology to purify other important biomolecules
such as DNA, RNA, and metabolites. The technology developed in this project will
revolutionize how researchers prepare samples for analysis, providing them with
modular tools that can purify any biomolecules they need from the same starting
sample, reducing time, improving yields, and decreasing batch to batch
variability by comparing within the same starting
sample.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.