* 2036018
* SBIR Phase II:  Data Analytics and Physics-Based Insights into Vehicle Mobility Patterns
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Samveg Saxena, GREEN LIGHT LABS, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2024
* USD 999,600.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to provide new insight to consumers on their vehicle
use, to inform environmental and economic impact. Unfortunately, typical car
buyers currently do not understand their mobility patterns, and in particular
how electric vehicle (EV) fuel costs and range viability will impact their day-
to-day lives. Thus, prospective car buyers may not appreciate the potential
financial and practical savings. This SBIR Phase II project proposes to support
the development of data collection, processing, and analytical methods to
measure an individual's (or fleet) driving tendencies to predict the value and
viability of EV use. This can potentially save billions of gallons of avoided
petroleum use as well as hundreds of billions in associated costs, and
dramatically reduced emissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
advances data science, machine learning, and convex optimization techniques to
estimate vehicle performance. This project has three stages: (1) develop
mathematical and physics-based algorithms for predicting the energy or charge
requirements and range viability for any electric vehicle on any trip, including
uncertainty bounds on the calculated results; (2) integrate the trip energy
calculations to develop algorithms that predict and optimize EV charging
deployments; (3) develop algorithms for use at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.