* 2036806
* FMNet: Future Manufacturing: A Network for Cybermanufacturing in Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Noel Greis, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 515,999.00

This Future Manufacturing (FM) project is to establish a research community of
interest with the aim of expanding cybermanufacturing capabilities in the
machining sector. Machining is an important manufacturing process, touching upon
literally every portion of the manufacturing sector, including automotive,
aerospace, medical products, defense and many others; as such this award
directly impacts American economic welfare and national security. The project
will convene meetings with the machining industry, engineering professional
societies, and academia on the future of machining and manufacturing science and
engineering and will conduct targeted webinars led mby participating members
aimed at creating a broad foundational knowledge base encompassing diverse
expertise. The project includes a subcontract to the National Center for Defense
Machining and Manufacturing to coordinate the development of a research roadmap
that focuses, prioritizes and drives research on cybermanufacturing topics in
machining. Samples of research topics include physics-guided machine learning,
augmented reality and the human/machine interface, and democratization of
manufacturing. The identified reseach directly aligns with four of the NSF Big
Ideas: Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier, Convergence, Harnessing
the Data Revolution, and NSF Includes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project on
cybermanufacturing in machining brings together a consensus group made up of
industry, government and academia to focus on next-generation topics that can
revolutionize the machining sector. Central to this objective is ensuring that
defective parts are not produced and that the provenance of parts is known. The
project will address the use of physics-based models coupled with machine
learning approaches, gamification of controllers, the wider use of Big Data, and
cyber-physical systems. In addition, machining will be made more efficient
through use of augmented reality tools and enhanced computer integration across
the entire design and manufacturing chain. The project includes development of
coursework at the undergraduate and community college levels to promote
cybermanufacturing in the machining sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.