* 2036234
* STTR Phase I:  A Software Platform for Assessment of Untrusted Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Shaojie Zhang, SILICON ASSURANCE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 09/30/2022
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to address the security challenges that
currently exist in integrated circuit (IC) design and the electronic design
automation (EDA) software market. It will create a platform for ‘secure-by-
design' of integrated circuits using untrusted third-party intellectual property
blocks. It will provide a tool to semiconductor designers to automatically
analyze security vulnerabilities and address them before fabrication. Such a
capability will lead to security improvement of the fabricated chips and the
systems they are integrated into, while also reducing the cost and time for
secure system design through automation of vulnerability analysis and
mitigation. The proposed toolset will address a critical technology gap in the
semiconductor design and EDA marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop a netlist
assessment toolset which analyzes gate-level netlist of third-party integrated
circuit (IC) design blocks used in modern system-on-chip (SoC) designs. The
toolset converts the gate-level netlist to readable formats to support the
existing security analysis tools in the electronic design automation (EDA)
software market. During gate-level security analysis, this toolset will enable
the detection of vulnerability for piracy, reverse engineering, as well as
malicious logic in a design. To make the toolset market ready for our customers
in the EDA and semiconductor industry, the SBIR/STTR Phase I project will mainly
focus on scalability testing, interface design, analysis of security benefits,
and performance improvement. Scalability testing of the toolset will be
performed internally and with EDA industry customers to demonstrate the
capability of the toolset in analyzing and converting the gate-level netlist of
large scale SoCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.