* 2036017
* SBIR Phase I:  Slowing the Spread of COVID-19: Development of Persistent Antimicrobial Compositions to Prevent Cross-Contamination via Hands and Gloves
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Gulustan Ozturk, CARRISAN TECHNOLOGIES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2022
* USD 255,990.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research SBIR project will be to transform the ability to control cross-
contamination by pathogens via hands and gloves in the healthcare and food
sectors and strengthen the nationâ€™s response to the COVID-19 crisis by limiting
its spread. This innovation will also reduce the healthcare-acquired infections
from other pathogens that cause 1.7 million illnesses, 98,000 deaths and an
estimated $45 billion annually in direct costs to US hospitals. Cross-
contamination via hands and gloves is a leading cause of spread of pathogens and
resulting infections. Handwashing and hand sanitizers provide periodic
sanitation, however, cross-contamination via hands between periodic handwashing
or sanitizing is an inherent risk. Likewise, donning fresh gloves helps ensure
the gloves used are sanitary, but they become contaminated during use.
Innovations described in this proposal provide continuous sanitation for hands
between handwashing and between changes of gloves. Maintaining persistent
antimicrobial activity for an extended period on hands and gloves of workers
will reduce transmission of pathogens including SARS CoV-2. This research aims
to develop cell-based antimicrobial compositions with diverse class of
antimicrobials to coat both biotic surfaces (hands) and abiotic surfaces
(gloves) for persistent antimicrobial activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase I project proposes to address the technical challenges in maintaining
persistent antimicrobial activity on both biotic and abiotic surfaces against
viral and bacterial targets including SARS CoV-2. The technical challenges
include: (a) ability of antimicrobial compositions to persist on biotic and
abiotic surfaces in the presence of organic content including proteins, lipids
and cells as well as physical factors including sweat and mechanical forces; (b)
achieving rapid inactivation of contaminating pathogens on complex surfaces such
as hands and gloves; and (c) ensuring the biocompatibility of the compositions
and removal with simple washing steps. To address these challenges this proposed
research aims to develop innovations in the following technical areas: (a)
discovery of cellular compositions and process engineering to stabilize diverse
antimicrobials and maintain rapid inactivation of pathogens (b) development of
nature inspired designs for retaining cell-based antimicrobial compositions on
skin surfaces to maintain persistent antimicrobial activity (c) engineering
polymer compositions to retain cell-based compositions on abiotic surfaces and
(d) engineer cellular compositions to achieve rapid inactivation of these
pathogens. This may be achieved based on engineering affinity of the carrier
compositions for pathogens as well as the release rate of antimicrobials from
cell-based carriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.