* 2036520
* CAREER: Mixed-bonded IV-VI semiconductors for hybrid heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Kunal Mukherjee, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2025
* USD 471,069.00

The nature of bonding between the atoms that make up any material sets the
ultimate properties of that material. This is true for structural materials used
in construction with critical mechanical properties as well as for electronic
materials used in computers, solar cells, and energy efficient lighting. The
bonding in common electronic materials such as silicon, germanium, and III-V
semiconductors has certain limitations in the infrared, a part of the light
spectrum invisible to our eyes but that new sensors can use to examine objects
around us in unprecedented ways. This project focuses on exploring a different
class of electronic materials known as IV-VI semiconductors, which have very
unusual bonding. The researchers would like to understand how the peculiar
bonding of the IV-VIs can be harnessed for better infrared devices. Here, the
research team is adopting a hybrid approach to combine the unique strengths of
IV-VI materials without losing the practical advantages of common, established
electronic materials. Along this theme, the team is building visual education
tools, lab demonstrations, and public understanding videos all to highlight the
nature of atomic bonding and demonstrate how a few simple rules at the atomic
scale lead to complex structures. These activities engage with students at the
high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels, guided by an inclusive approach
to scientific education and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixed covalent-ionic
bonding in IV-VI semiconductors offers opportunity for advancing optoelectronics
in the underserved mid-infrared and terahertz domains. These materials have
ultra-narrow direct band gaps, with unusual carrier transport and recombination
properties that are favorable for efficient integrated infrared light emitters.
The research team is integrating IV-VI semiconductors with covalently bonded
III-V materials via heteroepitaxy. This offers the chance to take the mature
technology platform offered by III-V systems and boost it with new abilities
from the IV-VI materials and their respective heterovalent interfaces. This
project evaluates if such hybrid heterostructures may help overcome limitations
in conventional infrared heterostructures by (1) modulating traditionally fixed
interfacial electronic properties using tunable heterovalency, (2) screening and
slowing down minority carriers from recombining at dislocation defects in
integrated devices, and (3) providing new optical properties within
heterostructures via stable and metastable polymorphs with inverted band
structures. The research team uses molecular beam epitaxy to synthesize pristine
IV-VI/III-V films and interfaces and analyzes their structure by transmission
electron microscopy, x-ray diffractometry, atom probe tomography, and electron
channeling contrast imaging. Electrical and optical measurements in the mid-
infrared on larger devices as well as at the individual defect level provide
insight into how synthesis and structure connect with the properties of
interest. Bonding of matter and the search for new electronic materials form the
core pillars of the research in this project. The research team integrates these
two themes into an education and outreach program comprising of developing a
cost-effective teaching tool to understand bonding in matter, science teacher
training, workforce development via research, industry interaction, and
curriculum development for this generation of post-silicon
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.