* 2036078
* SBIR Phase I:  Optimizing black soldier fly genetics and husbandry for industrialization of organic waste bioconversion
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Lydia Miner, BIOMILITUS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2022
* USD 254,689.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is in promoting insect protein as an alternative source of protein for
animal feed with a considerably lower environmental footprint compared to soy
and fishmeal. With over 40% of food produced in the U.S today wasted and a
potential $162 billion in annual loss related to waste, the proposed technology
leverages the bioconversion potential of the non-pestiferous, voracious black
soldier fly larvae (BSFL) to rapidly convert these wasted materials into a
valuable protein-rich, high-fat insect biomass suitable for animal feed.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will explore dynamics related to
generation of larval products in animal feed. The project will untangle the
dynamics controlling depletion of resources and heat exchange underpinning the
insect-substrate-microbial complex within bioreactors. By leveraging the rapid
turnover in insect generation time and applying Genomic Selection, the project
will improve many economically relevant traits in BSFL, enhance bioconversion
rates, and make the larvae more robust to thrive with a variety of waste
feedstock materials. Similarly, by developing a proprietary bioreactor design to
solve the challenges associated with heat exchange and oxygenation of colonies
posed by traditional rearing systems and optimizing environmental conditions
(heat, oxygen, and moisture) during larvae growth, the project will inhibit
lethal conditions and permit a significantly higher stocking density. Overall,
the main sustainability objective is to upcycle agricultural by-products that
may contain toxic or undesired compounds. This project will assess the fate of
pollutants in larval products, if any, in order to assure high-quality animal
feed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.