* 2036494
* SBIR Phase I:  A Digital Platform That Engages Elementary Aged Girls In STEM Through Personalized Informal Learning
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Abimbola Olukeye, SMART GIRLS HQ LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2022
* USD 255,935.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is ultimately to increase the representation of women in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) employment areas, enabling the US to
meet the increasing demand for STEM workers and maintain competitiveness in the
global innovation community. Factors promoting underrepresentation of girls and
women in STEM often take effect early in education and extend beyond traditional
classrooms settings; this solution specifically addresses the support needed by
parents in order to facilitate STEM informal learning in a way that is
particularly engaging for their young daughters. This proposed project, based on
evidence-based research in learning in informal environments, will deliver
monthly personalized informal learning plans to enable parents to catalyze
positive STEM experiences for girls early in their learning journeys so that
they are more likely to embrace STEM careers and better positioned to secure
them in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will transform the way young girls perceive and engage in
STEM career exploration by providing a progressive playlist of STEM informal
learning experiences personalized to their unique interests. This is
accomplished through a novel artificial intelligence (AI) driven recommender
system that learns from user preferences and attributes to recommend content and
learning experiences, which are meant to increase STEM confidence and interest
for young girls as well as inspire their curiosity. Parents can opt to provide
immediate feedback on the recommended plan that further tunes the plan to their
child’s needs or swap selections with secondary recommendations. The proposed
project’s objectives are to develop and test algorithmic model for sequenced
recommendations, design and build the prototype application, and conduct
research to determine that personalized recommendation sequences deepen and/or
expand STEM knowledge and interests. To guide the development, efficacy of the
recommender will be assessed by comparing results from conducting studies using
human recommendations with results using the AI recommender. Once the
algorithmic model is established, pre and post assessments will be conducted to
assess impact of the intervention on engagement and curiosity with STEM, thereby
contributing to an increase in knowledge in the field as well as a commercially
applicable and timely marketplace product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.