* 2036317
* SBIR Phase I:  Blockchain-Enabled Clinical Registry Program
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2022
* Anthony Deasey, SOFTHREAD, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will develop novel cybersecurity for highly regulated
industries and expand the applications of blockchain, focusing on enhancing and
securing the exchange of medical data among different stakeholders. To date,
medical consents can involve multiple parties: participant, medical center,
physician, ethical review boards across various research institutions, and
sponsors. Each group maintains independent systems, resulting in delays and
potential for misuse of underlying clinical data. Additionally, minimal controls
ensure the data input's completeness and accuracy, leading to lower confidence
in and stagnation of the data and lost opportunity for real-world learning
experiences. The proposed project proposes to establish a proof-of-concept
decentralized, digital health data platform. It can be expanded to other highly
regulated industries where it can improve the accuracy, confidentiality and
security of data sets.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will
utilize blockchain immutability to provide an advanced electronic medical
consenting service, ensuring the integrity of consenting transactions and a
novel publish/subscribe and fine-grained, attribute-based access control to
audit access to underlying datasets. Additionally, the project will employ novel
approaches to encryption that can preserve the privacy of the transactions and
messages that transit the system. The approach is built on emerging threshold
cryptography standards, but proposes a novel vector-label-input threshold
encryption. Today's labeled threshold encryption implementations only take a
single string as a label, but a vector-label-input threshold encryption
implementation will support a vector of strings as labels. This enables an
innovative approach to fine-grained access control by allowing the system to
check for any number of string-based attributes at the time the transactions are
signed and committed into the ledger on the blockchain. To enable high-
performance, total-order preserving data streams, the project will combine
innovations in the publish/subscribe messaging pattern with state-of-practice
blockchain technology platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.