* 2036470
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Cost High-Efficiency Solar Desalination
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* John Floyd, SolMem LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I award is through the development of a low-cost
desalination technology directly powered by sunlight. Combining cutting-edge
nanotechnology, concentrating solar power, and innovative and compact design,
the technology can convert any saline water or wastewater to potable quality
fresh water using sunlight as the only energy source. The research will evaluate
a novel reactor design that allows the thermal energy converted from sunlight to
be recovered and reused multiple times for desalination and purification of
saline water, all in one compact, low cost device. If successful, this
technology could provide a low-cost, energy-efficient, and environmentally
sustainable solution to a wide range of water challenges: providing reliable and
affordable drinking water for communities that lack access to fresh water or
reliable power supplies; supplying clean water at off-grid industrial production
sites; recovering clean water from municipal and industrial wastewaters;
minimizing discharge of contaminants-laden waste streams to the environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project aims to develop a high
efficiency, low cost desalination technology directly powered by sunlight. The
research pursues two innovations that greatly enhance the performance of a novel
desalination process: nanophotonics enhanced solar membrane distillation
(NESMD). First, a novel membrane module design (patent pending) could achieve
multi-effect solarthermal membrane distillation in a compact, low-cost module;
second, coupling the multi-effect module design with a low-cost solar
concentrator would deliver high intensity solar irradiation necessary to drive a
multi-effect process while maintaining high membrane flux. The goal is to
increase in the gained output ratio (GOR) by a factor of 5. The high GOR value
will reduce the specific energy consumption for desalination, and enhance water
production rate per irradiated area. Proposed research includes (1) constructing
a multi-effect NESMD module that demonstrates multi-stage heat recovery, (2)
modeling the nonlinear, and coupled heat, momentum, and mass transfer in the
module, (3) determining the effect of solar concentration, and (4) determining
the effect of operating conditions and feed water quality. Model simulations
will guide design, prototype testing, and optimization, while experimental
research results will be used to improve the process model. Technoeconomic
analysis will compare the proposed technology with existing desalination
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.