* 2036664
* SBIR Phase I:  Viral inactivation in air and on surfaces across large areas by safe, non-thermal, non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Luke Raymond, AIRITY TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2022
* USD 254,392.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is a new and safe non-contact method and device to
inactivate viruses in air or on surfaces and objects. The non-chemical method
proposed is scalable and can be quickly adjusted to target novel pathogens and
therefore prevent or mitigate future epidemics of novel viral pathogens. The
solution enabled by the proposed project is a relatively low-cost portable or
ceiling-mounted device to be operated in health care settings, offices, schools,
public transit, or other locations where the risk of disease transmission is
high. The device would provide a continuous antiviral effect in thousands or
millions of locations while operating within safe limits for human exposure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to validate the concept
of a non-contact viral inactivation method that relies on resonant energy
transfer from microwaves, and to demonstrate the efficacy in viral assays under
operation parameters that are safe for humans and within regulatory guidelines.
To accomplish this, a miniaturized and cost-effective high power pulsed
microwave source and antenna is required. To this end, a prototype device will
be developed that consists of a high-power vacuum electronics device, such as a
magnetron or a traveling-wave tube, a custom and novel high voltage power
source, and firmware and controls. The power supply will be designed to drive an
existing vacuum device, by means of a regulated high-voltage output in the
kilowatt range and a floating low-power auxiliary power source. To control
pulsed operation, a control algorithm will be implemented in a microcontroller.
The prototype will be characterized and used to expose viral samples in common
viral growth assays, followed by a quantitative assessment of the antiviral
effect. The outcome expected is a functional prototype that achieves significant
reduction, e.g., 2 logs, within safe limits that will serve as a blueprint for a
novel class of antiviral devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.