* 2036917
* FMNet: A Network for Rapid Execution for Scaling Production Of Needed Designs (RESPOND)
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Julie Chen, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2025
* USD 499,955.00

Crises require rapid response, resilience, and preparedness, as observed in the
COVID-19 pandemic. Crisis resilience and preparedness necessitates a rich
manufacturing ecosystem of agile production assets which can be rapidly
reconfigured, as well as an overarching innovation architecture that leverages
policymakers and academics to accelerate crisis response. Now, more than ever,
policymakers must develop actionable, evidence-based toolkits which can be
reconfigured and deployed to combat the urgency and novelty of crisis scenarios.
The challenges posed by the COVID-19 public health emergency reflect the breadth
of disruption inherent to crisis events. For the COVID-19 crisis, it was
necessary for manufacturing systems to rapidly pivot to fabricate critical life-
saving products at scale without existing supply chains and manufacturing lines.
In contrast to directly supporting a particular new manufacturing process, the
RESPOND network will establish a transdisciplinary, diverse stakeholder
ecosystem that sustains critical supernodes of communication and accelerated
crisis response through product development, supply chain management and
manufacturing capacity during crisis response. The future manufacturing focus of
this network is providing the framework for understanding what shared resources,
tools, and education and workforce development are needed to rapidly pivot
manufacturing, for effective decision making by organizations, as well as
stimulating new relevant research topics. The outputs of the network will thus
be valuable beyond the scope of an individual crisis as an exemplar of product
innovation in a truncated timeline, with limited information. The network is
supported by the experience of the Massachusetts Manufacturing Emergency
Response Team (MERT), a government-led initiative that facilitated the
production of millions of medical products through dozens of pivoted
manufacturing firms at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RESPOND network will contribute principally to the
fields of manufacturing science, agile business models, product development and
innovation, emergency preparedness and resilience, risk management, economics,
and data science. The network will disseminate its findings through partner
engagements, convening activities, and publications which include actionable
documentation, resources, and tools. This network will contribute directly to
the aforementioned fields as well as form a foundational ecosystem upon which
future research into related subjects can be performed. RESPOND will: (1)
Perform a detailed analysis of the relationships between technological,
organizational or environmental factors and the probability of firm-level
success in pivoting production using fuzzy-set theoretical methods applied to
data acquired through qualitative interviews and quantitative surveys of firms
that were both successful and challenged in participating in MERT; (2) Refine
statistical models utilized by the MERT and the Massachusetts Emergency
Management Agency for demand-projection across product categories with the
intent to publish them as templates for future statistical models; (3) Utilize
rank-matching and machine learning approaches in making recommendations for
manufacturing capacity database architectures which may enable organizing bodies
to triage efforts towards high-impact firms; (4) Evaluate the influence of
exogenous factors on firm-level success and provide policy recommendations for
emergency management stakeholders and regulators; (5) Prepare an adaptable game-
based simulation framework used both as a research tool for informing
alternative approaches and as an instructional tool in preparing stakeholders
for future crises; (6) Physically or digitally convene a network of stakeholders
around these activities and, especially, the aforementioned game-based activity,
for the purposes of fostering connections, transferring knowledge between
different actors, and refining research; and (7) Disseminate the sum-total of
knowledge generated or captured within the preceding tasks through modular
curricula deployed via academic and professional credentialing
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.