* 2036680
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated Assembly of Discrete Cellular Structures
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,06/30/2022
* benjamin jenett, DISCRETE LATTICE INDUSTRIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2022
* USD 254,430.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of architected, cellular
materials at large scales. Size constraints of 3D printing can be overcome by
discrete assembly of modular, mass-produced parts. This approach benefits from
incremental assembly, which eliminates scale limitations and enables best-
practice manufacturing for reliable, low-cost part production, and
interchangeability through a consistent assembly process across part types.
Further, the system can be automated. Precision and repeatability are embedded
in the parts themselves. This project will match state-of-the-art performance
metrics while reducing reliance on fixed tooling, offering customization for
user-defined products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address issues of large-scale, digital
manufacturing by introducing a new type of material based on modular, cellular
units. In contrast to continuous, layer-based, additive deposition processes,
this approach relies on discrete assembly. Here, global geometries are defined
by local constraints, errors can be incrementally detected and corrected,
heterogeneous parts can be joined, and parts can be repaired, reused, and
recycled. The goals of this project are to define a material system (constituent
material, unit cell geometry, and fastening solution) that can achieve high
stiffness-to-weight ratios at low cost. Such properties do not currently exist
in a single monolithic material; rather, they are achieved through expensive
processes to shape traditional materials into complex geometries. These methods
are labor-intensive and have significant capital expenditure for tooling. This
project will demonstrate the ability of discrete lattice materials to match
state-of-the-art while offering cost reductions through automation, reduction in
factory overhead, and performance benefits unachievable with traditional
methods. Analytical and numerical models will be used to project performance and
cost at larger scales (greater than one hundred
meters).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.