* 2036077
* EAGER: AF:Small: Algorithms for Relational Machine Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Kirk Pruhs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 148,828.00

Relational database-management systems constitute a mature, ubiquitous,
sophisticated technology that is deeply entrenched. Seemingly all organizations
are collecting vastly increasing volumes of structured as well as unstructured
data, and want to extract knowledge from this data using machine-learning
techniques/algorithms. Thus many learning tasks faced by working data scientists
involve relational data. Thus a marriage of machine learning and relational
databases seems inevitable. However, standard machine-learning algorithms are
not designed to operate directly on relational data, and further, it is far from
obvious if and how one can adapt many of these algorithms to work on relational
data without suffering a significant loss of efficiency. The current standard
practice for a data scientist, confronted with a machine-learning task on
relational data, is to issue a feature-extraction query to extract the
(carefully curated) data from the relational database by joining together
multiple tables to create a design matrix, and then to import this design matrix
into some machine-learning tool to train the model. This standard practice is
wasteful because (1) computing relational joins is computationally expensive,
both in terms of time and space, (2) the resulting design matrix will likely
contain much redundant information and consume much more space than the original
tables, and thus (3) the machine-learning task takes more time than should
conceptually be necessary. Algorithms that are orders of magnitude faster for
standard machine-learning problems on relational data are certain to exist, and
the goal of this research program is to discover them. Such algorithms would
allow the extraction of information from data that is now not currently feasibly
extractable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals of this project are
threefold. The first goal is to design and analyze relational algorithms for
common machine-learning queries. A relational algorithm works directly on the
relational data, without forming the design matrix, and can be orders of
magnitude faster than standard machine-learning practice for such data. The
second goal is to design a layer of relational algorithms for commonly arising
subproblems and that can be utilized by the data scientists as a sort of
middleware toolkit when designing their algorithms. The third goal is to build
some intuition as to what problems are, and are not, solvable by relational
algorithms and that researchers/practitioners can rely on when faced with a new
problem. These goals will require the development of new algorithmic-design and
-analysis techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.