* 2036255
* SenSE: Smart Grasper for Intelligent Surgical Manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Blake Hannaford, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 740,168.00

This project will develop a novel innovative smart surgical instrument as a
multimodal sensing system to advance surgical health care. Modern surgical
paradigms, including minimally invasive laparoscopic surgery and robotic
assisted surgery, have deprived surgeons of important tactile information that
this project aims to partially restore and expand into new dimensions. This
project builds a tiny multimodal system that includes optical, electrical,
thermal, mechanical and ultrasound sensors that is affixed to a basic surgical
device such as a grasper or scalpel (either hand-held or used by an advanced
surgical robot). This will turn the device into a diagnostic instrument able to
measure blood oxygenation (SpO2), physical damage, and potentially other tissue
states like cancer. Advances in machine intelligence are required to process
this raw, multidimensional, data into information that is clinically useful to
the surgeon. This novel system will promote safer and more effective
manipulation of tissues in complex surgical situations protecting delicate
tissues easily damaged unintentionally or tissues that are hard to visually
identify. The project will support graduate and undergraduate students,
including from underrepresented groups, in their STEM studies, and support
participation by the PIs and students in outreach events designed to promote and
broaden participation in STEM educational programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, proposed by a multidisciplinary team, aims to advance health discovery
through combining advanced machine learning with a novel multimodal sensing
system aimed at improved surgical outcomes. This project will obtain the first
ever simultaneous in-vivo measurements of pulse oximetry (blood oxygen
saturation, SO2), temperature, electrical impedance (1-100kHz), pressure, and
acoustic properties at multiple sites in multiple functioning organs. It will
develop, test, and demonstrate a novel, highly integrated, multimodal sensing
surgical grasper suitable for endoscopic use. The instrument will generate a
continuous stream of a new type of sensed data specific to surgical work with
tissues. This project will generate the first such database of in-vitro and in-
vivo data along with ground truth from surgical videos, imaging studies, expert
evaluations, and post-operative pathological analysis of tissues. The new data
set will be shared openly online via an achieved open repository. The new
classification and clustering machine learning systems will correlate measured
tissue properties with organ anatomy and physiology, especially at interfaces
between tissues, aiding in surgical planning and execution, and potentially
supporting new modes of clinical care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.