* 2036312
* SBIR Phase I:  Micro-textured surfaces for high-performance drone propellers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Ali Doosttalab, FLOW RAIDER, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 10/31/2022
* USD 255,864.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to improve the performance of drones -
unmanned aerial vehicles - that are quickly being adopted for numerous
commercial and civil applications. It is estimated that by 2021 the number of
new drones will reach 29 million worldwide. Two of the main challenges in drone
operation are the limited flight time and the noise generated by the drone
propellers. Both of these represent obstacles for a more efficient and universal
use of drones, and both are linked to propeller aerodynamic performance, more
specifically, flow separation on propellers. This project aims to use micro-
textured surfaces to create favorable aerodynamic conditions to mitigate noise,
vibrations, and efficiency losses. Passive mitigation of aerodynamic
inefficiencies will prolong component lifespan, reduce radiated noise, and
increase energy efficiency. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to evaluate the effect of
micro-textured surfaces that were previously shown to be effective in increasing
lift, reducing drag, and mitigating noise from airfoils on drone propeller
blades. The improvements may increase payload capacity, extend the flight time,
and reduce the noise of drones. The main goal of the proposed effort is to
design propellers with a micro-textured surface that improves the efficiency up
to 10% over leading industry propellers and mitigate generated noise. Thrust,
torque and noise will be quantified for a combination of micro-textures and
propeller designs. Additionally, field experiments will be carried out to
understand the impact of the micro-texture on flight performance, noise, and
maneuverability of a drone. Project will pursue an overall understanding of
micro-texture/flow relationship to effectively design micro-textured surfaces
for industrial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.