* 2036968
* FMSG: 3D-printed, granular hydrogels for the controlled expansion of mesenchymal stromal cells
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Christopher Highley, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2023
* USD 499,266.00

Because of their well-established immunomodulatory functions, mesenchymal
stromal cells (MSCs) hold promise in the development of therapies for the
treatment of immune diseases. This promise is currently limited by the ability
to obtain relevant numbers of MSCs in an undifferentiated state, and therefore a
significant expansion and biomanufacturing of MSCs is needed prior to patient
administration. Multiple issues stemming from the limited understanding of the
effects of biomanufacturing on MSC behavior have significantly contributed to
the lack of successful translation of MSCs to the clinic. This team of
researchers will overcome this limitation by performing basic research to
understand the impact of microenvironment during biomanufacturing on MSCs and
develop a novel 3D-printed biomaterial culture system that would enable the
reproducible biomanufacturing of MSCs in a controlled microenvironment. The
research project will be integrated with education and workforce development
efforts at all levels from K-12, community college, and graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several biomanufacturing issues that have limited
the success of MSC clinical translation, including: 1) heterogeneity between
MSCs derived from different donors, tissues, and manufactured using different
conditions; 2) the lack of standardized approaches to manufacture MSCs and lack
of critical quality attributes (CQAs) that effectively predict how a given MSC
lot performs; and 3) the unknown impact of changes in 3D microenvironmental cues
during biomanufacturing on MSC immunomodulatory function. To address these
issues, this project brings together an interdisciplinary research team to 1)
identify distinct MSC morphological responses to microenvironment cues that
predict MSC function following expansion in a large-scale 3D manufacturing
context, and 2) develop a 3D-printed biomaterial culture system using
microporous annealed particle (MAP) technology that enables expansion of MSCs
with reproducible immunomodulatory function. The success of these aims will
advance future manufacturing and the translation of MSC-based therapies by
enabling both the reproducible expansion of MSCs in a scalable 3D format and the
establishment of MSC morphology as a CQA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.