* 2036131
* Investigation of a Novel Pressurized Sand Damper for Sustainable Seismic and Wind Protection of Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Nicos Makris, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2024
* USD 632,827.00

Over the last 40 years, a variety of well-engineered structures, designed
according to building codes that were valid at the time of their construction,
experienced severe damage during earthquakes. Most of this damage was the result
of excessive seismic displacements, and subsequent research has sought to
enhance the seismic performance of civil structures through the development of
various strategies to dampen structural displacements. Many existing
technologies, however, are disruptive and costly. This research will perform
laboratory testing and computer simulations for a newly developed damper, where
the material enclosed within the damper is pressurized sand. This research will
advance the state-of-the-art in high-performance structures by using a
pressurized sand damper (PSD) device, which can perform well under a wide range
of temperatures and is low-cost. Scientific understanding and advancement of the
PSD will contribute to the welfare of society by mitigating human and economic
losses caused by severe earthquake and prolonged wind loading, while meeting
current requirements of longevity and sustainability of built infrastructure.
Another advantage of the PSD is that it consists only of traditional materials
(sand and steel) along with the established technology of post-tensioning, with
which civil engineers are most familiar. Educational, outreach, and research
activities will be created for middle and high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students, including the university's Summer Camps for Girls.
Experimental and simulation data generated by this project will be made
available publicly in the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Engineering
Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-CI.org). This
award contributes to NSF's roles in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Program (NEHRP) and the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The original contribution of this research is the
development and the experimental and numerical validation of an innovative, low-
cost, long-stroke, environmentally friendly, stable PSD that meets the criteria
for sustainable engineering without suffering from the challenge of viscous
heating. Energy dissipation in the PSD originates from the shearing action of
the pressurized sand that exploits the pressure-dependent shear strength of the
sand and its effect on increasing the dissipated energy during cyclic motion.
The specific goals of this research are to (a) perform comprehensive testing on
various configurations of the prototype damper to identify the physical
similarities and scaling laws that govern the prototype design; (b) provide
continuous, real-time monitoring and adjustment of the internal pressure of the
sand damper; (c) conduct numerical modeling of the sand flow/behavior of the PSD
using the discrete element method while utilizing crushable models of sand
grains, which upon validation with the experimental data will allow for the
design of sand dampers at various scales and configurations; and (d) refine a
recently developed macroscopic, phenomenological model of the PSD that can be
incorporated in open source codes such as OpenSees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.