* 2036394
* SBIR Phase II:  Collaboration, Creativity and Computational Thinking - A Cooperative Music Tinkering Game
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Anna Jordan-Douglass, MAKEFULLY, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to enable the learning of Computational Thinking, which is widely
viewed as the new literacy of the 21st Century and has become an important
initiative in educational research, policy, and practice and represents a
specific set of problem-solving skills applicable in any domain to create
solutions. Teaching this kind of problem solving is difficult; problems in the
real world are complex and ill-defined and require the ability to apply
different strategies to be solved. The proposed solution provides learners a
space to practice productive struggle with the concepts of algorithms and trying
new solutions in concert with development of communication skills. Moreover,
this learning environment will support students as they practice additional
skills critical to their future, including collaboration, teamwork, leveraging
one anotherâ€™s expertise to find a solution, and communicating ideas. This
platform will scale to accommodate deep learning experiences in
interdisciplinary problem-solving, and will revolutionize game-based learning
through advances in physical/digital integration and collaborative problem
solving. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will research, design and develop a flexible physical/digital
learning platform targeting students in grades 3-5, focusing on learning
collaborative problem solving, computational thinking, tinkering and debugging
practices. Key technology objectives include development of a machine learning-
powered adaptive game environment, refinement of the hardware system design and
development of the teacher dashboard tools necessary to enable real-time
teaching support and assessment. The adaptive learning environment will enable
learners to participate in collaborative problem-solving while engaging in
Computational Thinking practices that promote productive struggle, critical
thinking and reflection. This project will advance the field of education
technology by pushing innovation in designing collaborative connected play
(digital/physical) solutions for classroom considerations and use; designing
adaptivity that supports learners at the individual and group level; reimagining
teacher tools for real-time support, insights and ability to manage multiple
groups simultaneously; and developing best approaches in tangible interfaces to
promote learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.