* 2036502
* SBIR Phase II:  PeTeS: Personalized Text Simplification For Struggling Readers (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Yevgen Borodin, Charmtech Labs LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project seeks to develop a
Personalized Text Simplification (PeTeS) technology to be used as a Computer
Assisted Tool for students with learning difficulties and/or disabilities.
Several automatic text simplification tools are available in the market.
Unfortunately, the existing tools are one-size-fits-all solutions offering no
personalization and not supporting the teacher’s instructional goals. The
innovation of PeTeS is in the use of Machine Learning and Natural Language
Processing algorithms to perform automatic text simplification customizing texts
for each student, enabling him/her to understand the curriculum and improve
vocabulary knowledge at the same time. PeTeS will be compatible with both
independent use by students and teacher-driven data-driven instruction. PeTeS
will be usable both in class and in remote education settings, which is a new
critical demand in our schools caused by COVID-19 pandemic. The objective of
this Phase II Project is to fully develop the PeTeS product and evaluate its
effectiveness in classroom and remote education
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Phase II Project is to
develop PeTeS a Personalized Text Simplification tool. PeTeS will enable
teachers of material in courses such as education, reading, language, and
literacy coaches to provide personalized reading accommodations and intervention
to their students to improve their reading skills by automatically simplifying
the text to match the individual student’s knowledge. PeTeS will be compatible
with both independent use by students and teacher-driven data-driven
instruction. PeTeS will be usable both in class and in remote education
settings, which is a new critical demand in our schools caused by COVID-19
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.