* 2036336
* SBIR Phase II:  Thermal Intensification for Continuous Thermoplastic Composite Forming
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Christopher Oberste, WEAV3D Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 10/31/2023
* USD 1,199,884.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project addresses the historic challenges associated with composite
manufacturing, including long cycle times, poor recyclability, labor-intensive
manufacturing, and energy-intensive curing processes, leading to low production
throughput and high part cost. This combination of factors has limited the
adoption of composite materials in mass markets such as construction and
automotive, despite strong demand for lightweight solutions. This project
proposes implementation of low-cost composite materials in construction products
is projected to reduce the lifecycle cost of utility and infrastructure projects
through a combination of lower initial installation costs and lower service and
maintenance costs over the life of the installed equipment. In automotive
applications, vehicle weight reduction translates to reduced energy consumption,
meaning better fuel economy in combustion vehicles or improved electric vehicle
range, both of which reduce pollution. Weight reduction, enabled by lightweight
composite materials, is a significant component of automaker compliance
strategy, as a 10% vehicle weight reduction can achieve a 6-8% fuel economy
improvement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project involves the design, fabrication, and testing of a
continuous composite forming machine that uses ultrasonic welding to achieve
high throughput of composite materials. Replacing infrared heating for
thermoplastic consolidation with ultrasonic welding can achieve an 82-85%
reduction in embodied energy (energy per unit mass of material produced), while
matching or exceeding the production speed of the infrared system. The research
activities proposed for Phase II will translate the embodied energy reductions
into production speed improvements through the fabrication and testing of a
next-generation continuous composite forming machine that is suitable for high-
volume automotive production, with the goal of demonstrating a minimum
production capacity of 250,000 door-panel-sized units per year. The key
objectives to be addressed are: 1) scale-up and integration of a continuous
ultrasonic welding system, 2) fabrication of a 1-meter-wide production machine
capable of composite production at a line speed of 200 linear meters per hour,
and 3) implementation of process controls suitable for automotive quality
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.