* 2036143
* Conference: Building HSI Research Capacity in  NSF CISE Core Research Areas
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Ann Gates, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 07/31/2022
* USD 125,875.00

The Computing Alliance of Hispanic-Serving Institutions (CAHSI), an NSF National
INCLUDES alliance, is focused on increasing competitive research efforts at
HSIs. One such effort was a 2019 NSF-funded community workshop that brought
together Hispanic and other researchers from HSIs to make recommendations on how
to increase representation of Hispanics and HSIs in the NSF Computer and
Information Science &amp; Engineering (CISE) directorate’s portfolio. Another
effort was the American Society of Engineering Education’s (ASEE) NSF MSI CISE
conference in early February 2020 that involved researchers and representatives
from CAHSI, Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), the American
Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES), and other organizations. They
participated in panel discussions and presentations centered on research-
capacity building and met with NSF program officers to learn about research
funding opportunities. These efforts correlate to a recent report from the
National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine that calls for increased
investment in Hispanic-Serving Institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAHSI
Backbone will organize facilitated, virtual meetings that aim to build
collaborations around critical areas of research and to strengthen research
capacity. With researchers from HSIs, other Minority-Serving Institutions
(MSIs), and Primarily White Institutions (PWIs), the initial convening will be a
two-day event. The convening will model an Ideas Lab and will build upon the
aforementioned CAHSI and ASEE efforts that laid a foundation for capacity
building among MSIs. Researchers will have an opportunity to identify specific
problems, advance ideas, and begin planning research projects. The CAHSI
Backbone will organize follow-up meetings to provide feedback to the
collaborative teams on their research plans with the intent of teams iteratively
refining and improving their research ideas. The purpose is to ensure the
projects are competitive, transformative and, representative of the investment
priorities for the NSF CISE core research areas. The expected outcome is a set
of research plans developed and refined over six months to a year that will be
presented to NSF program officers at a 2021 ASEE workshop for critical feedback
and that will lead to submissions of competitive proposals for funding. Building
a community of HSIs committed to improving research capacity and building
infrastructure translates into more opportunities nationally for faculty to gain
knowledge of how best to collaborate and seek funding opportunities, especially
for faculty who typically have not been engaged. It is expected that the
convenings will lead to collective efforts that will be immense and far-reaching
and can serve as a model for other minoritized institutions. The
transformational change that can result from strategic actions and support has
the potential to meet the demand for diverse researchers who can contribute
solutions to society’s pressing problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.