* 2036188
* SBIR Phase I:  Medical Device to Isolate and Purify Therapeutic Antibodies from Recovered Donors (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,03/31/2022
* Sunil Mehta, ATHEM L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 03/31/2022
* USD 255,943.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in managing pathogenic outbreaks. This
project will purify therapeutic antibodies from recovered patientsâ€™ blood for
therapeutic use in other critically ill patients in a novel and safe process.
This technology can be used even as viral mutation takes place. The device based
on this technology will be portable and can be deployed easily and swiftly to
remote areas to save lives. This is a platform technology and will not only be
useful as a potential COVID-19 treatment but also for future pathogenic
outbreaks or to give antidotes for various poisons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will address issues associated with convalescent sera used for
COVID-19 treatment. This approach is not widely used as the first line of
defense due to potential risks for both donors and recipients. In addition, one
donor can provide only a limited amount of convalescent sera to treat only one
recipient. Currently no methods exist to isolate immunoglobulins directly from
whole blood and generate multiple doses from a single donor. One of the key
challenges is the development of a suitable magnetic chromatography media that
is coated with Protein A, has paramagnetic properties, and high binding capacity
for immunoglobulins. This project will generate media using core paramagnetic
particles. Media will be used to perform studies with rabbit and human blood to
assess its suitability. A prototype separation chamber will be developed for
separation of magnetic beads from other materials. This project will also
explore systems engineering for single-use disposable components and automated
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.