* 2036668
* SBIR Phase I:  A Medical Device to Secure Endotracheal Tubes and Reduce Unplanned Extubations for Neonates in Intensive Care
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2020,09/30/2022
* Eric Chehab, Novonate Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a device that effectively and
reliably secures endotracheal tubes for babies in the neonatal intensive care
unit. Endotracheal tubes are airways placed in patients to help them breathe,
but babies in the NICU experience high rates of unplanned dislodgement and early
removal. These dangerous events are primarily attributed to poor and ineffective
securement of the endotracheal tube to the patient. An integrated solution to
endotracheal tube securement would reduce complications for the 80,000+ neonatal
intubations that occur every year in the United States. This is especially
urgent in lower-resourced settings that may have limited staff that are
experienced in neonatal resuscitation. This project will develop a new system to
support these patients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project enables advanced patient securement to minimize
the risk of unplanned extubations. Endotracheal tube securement presents unique
challenges in neonates, given their delicate and small anatomy. The research
objectives include developing a custom adhesive that maintains functionality in
incubator environments and in use on underdeveloped neonatal facial skin;
designing, validating, and manufacturing device securement mechanisms; and
conducting bench testing and simulated use testing with
clinicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.