* 2036347
* STTR Phase I:Dramatically improving algorithm execution on quantum devices through advanced noise-awareness and control
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2021
* James Ricotta, ALIRO TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 10/31/2021
* USD 255,682.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project will be to enable much more widespread use of quantum computing. Quantum
computing will drive massive improvements in the world economy and the human
condition in areas as diverse as drug discovery, novel materials, energy
efficiency, and artificial intelligence. Industry analysts project rapid growth
for the quantum computing/networking market: $5B in 2022, $24B in 2026, $270B in
2030. In terms of technological progress, this project will increase our
knowledge of how to use the quantum properties of matter as a powerful new way
to compute. In addition to commercial potential and scientific knowledge, the
vision is that this work will also help catalyze a new generation of “quantum
first” software developers, and this will be critical in maintaining our
nation’s competitiveness in the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to address a key
challenge facing the current generation of quantum computers: execution quality.
Each operation on a quantum computer incurs some error due to various types of
noise that are present in and around these delicate systems. These errors
accumulate, and this limits the size of program that can be successfully run.
This in turn dramatically reduces the already limited set of problems that can
be solved on a quantum computer. While noise characteristics of a quantum device
are defined by the underlying hardware technology and device architecture, there
are ways to improve execution quality through software by identifying or
estimating errors and compensating for them. In fact, there is evidence from the
literature that such improvements can improve fidelity of the execution by 10
times or more. In this project, a quantum compiler &amp; circuit optimizer
software product is developed that will incorporate known optimization methods,
quantum error correction techniques, plus develop new approaches. The resulting
software will match a quantum program with the quantum computer that will
provide the best execution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.