* 2036127
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Interdisciplinary Models to Identify and Understand Cyberbullying
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Huan Liu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 515,999.00

Cyberbullying, a common form of online misbehavior, can do serious psychological
and physical harm. This project integrates computer science and psychology
frameworks to advance our understanding of how cyberbullying can be identified
and prevented. The core objective of this interdisciplinary project is to design
and develop models and apps to prevent and identify instances of cyberbullying
in social networks. It uses psychological theory to guide investigations of the
nature of cyberbullying and the adoption of automated anti-bullying tools, as
well as carefully-designed data collection processes and evaluation frameworks.
The project's impact includes sharing research and educational resources,
raising cyberbullying awareness with policy-makers, and providing graduate and
undergraduate students with the scientific scaffolding to develop into
recognized interdisciplinary scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project stems from its synergistic integration of computer and
psychological sciences to address a major social problem. This project studies
automated models for cyberbullying detection that leverage a large body of
relevant empirical work in psychology and seeks to develop evidence-based tools
for identifying and preventing cyberbullying. It integrates innovative machine
learning models for cyberbullying identification (including personalized,
temporal-analysis-based, multi-modal, and privacy-preserving models) with the
development of evidence-based apps for identifying and addressing cyberbullying
(e.g., apps that strengthen parent-teen relationships within the context of
cyberbullying and social media). The project also uses systematically-annotated
datasets and survey methods to identify mechanisms to enhance the use and
usability of anti-cyberbullying technologies and investigate key aspects of the
nature of cyberbullying, including temporal characteristics of cyberbullying and
connections between social media use and psychological correlates of
cyberbullying.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.