* 2036717
* Scaffolding NSF CISE REU Site Evaluation Through Comparative and Longitudinal Tracking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Burcin Tamer, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 09/30/2024
* USD 649,852.00

The Computing Research Association will examine the Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Sites funded by the CISE Directorate to evaluate their
effectiveness, particularly for students from demographic groups that
underrepresented in computing. The field of computing is facing challenges in
terms of building a diverse domestic talent pool. Various interventions are
implemented to address this issue. Creating opportunities for undergraduate
students to engage with their field of study through participation in research
experiences is one of the ways for building students’ interest and retaining
them in their field. These research experiences are also beneficial for
retaining students from demographic groups that are underrepresented in
computing. Through this evaluation, the results of this project will help to
improve the undergraduate research experiences and enhance their impact.
Further, the insights gleaned from the increased scope of research and reporting
will provide a nationally recognized resource for STEM education that informs
the national community about long term trends and effective practices for
diversity and inclusion in computing. By informing the computing community about
these evidence-based best practices, with attention given to practices that are
especially impactful for the success of underrepresented student groups within
computing (e.g., women, students of color, etc.), the project outcomes will help
enhance the impact of REU participation, resulting in a stronger and more
diverse pool of domestic talent in the field of science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Evaluation Project (REP) is intended to assess the
impact of CISE REU programs on the participants and establish an infrastructure
for the sustainable and scalable evaluation of REU programs going forward. The
REP will build on an existing NSF-funded project, CISE REU Toolkit, that has
been evaluating CISE REUs since 2009. The unique contribution of REP is its
ability to harness other data collection efforts specific to computing that will
provide a higher-level and larger-scale comparative analysis of the CISE REU
program. For evaluating the REUs, the project will collect survey data from the
students participating in NSF CISE REUs and site-specific information from the
REU PIs. This evaluation will be combining pre-post and comparative methods to
provide a multi-dimensional look into the impact of REU participation. The
results from the evaluation will be shared with the REU site PIs and NSF Program
Officers through annual reports. This project will also establish a data
collection and evaluation infrastructure based on another national level
project, CRA Data Buddies Survey, run by the project team. Such an
infrastructure to conduct this type of evaluation at scale will enable
sustainable monitoring of the success of REUs going forward. Collecting
systematic data through this infrastructure annually will enable the
investigators to track REU participants as they progress in their career. At a
higher level, results generated through this project will contribute to our
understanding of how undergraduate research programs support students’ academic
and research career development. Additionally, this project’s focus on
understanding what aspects of REU programs encourage the success of student
groups considered underrepresented in computing (e.g., women, students of color,
etc.) contributes knowledge and evidence-based best practices that support the
computing community’s efforts to broaden participation in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.