* 2036354
* FMSG: Lean Cement Manufacturing Enabled by Renewable Energy
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Mo Li, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2024
* USD 512,000.00

The manufacture of Portland cement – the most common type of cement used for
structural concrete – presently accounts for roughly 5% of global energy usage
and 8% of carbon dioxide greenhouse gas emissions. The current manufacturing
process has not changed substantially over the past 140 years, and requires
temperatures above 1400 degrees Celsius with heat provided by the combustion of
fossil fuels. This Future Manufacturing seed project explores the potential of
substituting an electrochemical process for the combustion process, thus opening
the door to eco-manufacturing utilizing renewable electricity from sources such
as wind and solar energy. The project includes broader elements aimed at
preserving U.S. leadership in efficient, low-carbon-emission manufacture of
cement while developing a highly-trained workforce skilled in renewable, energy-
efficient technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enable future
manufacturing of cement by transforming the chemical process of converting
calcite (i.e. limestone) to calcium oxide (CaO) via calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2)
formation, the latter being produced in an electrolyzer rather than direct
limestone calcination in a conventional fossil-fuel fired kiln. This approach
offers a new, chemical pathway to produce cement with much reduced carbon
footprint and energy usage, while enabling the use of electricity from renewable
resources. This project will advance knowledge in several different fields,
including electrolysis, cement chemistry, advanced manufacturing, and system-
level assessment of the economic and environmental impacts of cement industry
processes. Specifically, the research efforts will (1) provide fundamental
insight into the lower-temperature chemical process of cement manufacturing, (2)
assess the scalability of the electrochemical method of value-added products and
chemical process of Ca(OH)2 co-production and its overall efficiency, (3) assess
and understand the chemical composition, reaction chemistry and resulting
properties (mechanical strength and durability) of cement manufactured through
this new versus conventional approach, and (4) quantify economic and
environmental advantages of this new cement manufacturing process through
system-level analysis. Three electrolyzer designs with various redox couples
will be investigated to advance knowledge of cement manufacturing and efficiency
of co-production of value-added products. Multi-techniques characterization will
generate new understandings on the chemistry of the cement synthesis, formation
of various phases, efficient separation processes, and resulting composition and
properties that are instrumental to construction materials. Educational and
outreach activities will focus on training next generation students on renewable
manufacturing of cement. A workshop and seminar series will introduce
underrepresented minority students and faculty from two-year colleges to
industrial stakeholders. In addition, the workshop/seminar series will explore
opportunities for collaborative R&amp;D between the academic community, the
electrochemical industry, and cement manufacturers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET), the Division of Chemistry (CHE), and
the Division of Undergraduate Education (DUE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.