* 2036514
* STTR Phase I:  Robust High-Performance Organic Electro-Optic Materials
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2021,10/31/2022
* Larry Dalton, NONLINEAR MATERIALS CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 10/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I Project is to enable large-scale integration of photonic
and electronic components in computing and communications systems. Optical
computing represents the a potential path forward in the expansion of computing
power. Hybrid devices utilizing organic electro-optic (OEO) materials are a
potential enabling technology for electronic-photonic digital computing (EPDC),
with further applications in telecommunications, quantum computing, and quantum
networking. Compared to existing silicon photonics and microwave photonics
systems, hybrid electro-optics deliver critical performance enhancements, with
potential for improved capabilities and lower operating costs for computing and
5G telecommunications systems. The growth of EPDC will also reduce power
consumption and carbon footprints of high-performance computing and cloud
computing, especially intensive applications such as artificial intelligence and
machine learning, where operations are particularly conducive to being performed
optically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project directly addresses key challenges in bringing high-performance
hybrid organic electro-optic (OEO) components capable of direct integration with
conventional silicon-based semiconductor technologies to market. Hybrid devices
utilizing OEO materials have demonstrated significant advantages in speed, size,
and power consumption compared to existing technologies. However, rigorous
definition of materials properties, optimization of long-term thermal and
photostability, and ability to translate new OEO material concepts into
commercial materials are essential for establishing market viability. This
project includes evaluating stability and encapsulation techniques to ensure
long-term reliability and commercial-scale synthesis of a next-generation
material for commercial applications, translating recent academic developments
from theory aided design into a commercial supply chain. These results will de-
risk adoption of hybrid OEO-based technologies and enable a wider range of
applications via higher performance and better understanding of thermal
constraints and encapsulation requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.