* 2036231
* I-Corp: A Data-Driven Cloud Optimization Tool
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Tian Lan, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of cloud management software using machine learning algorithms and
optimization/reasoning to adapt to different application environments/demands,
enable advanced forecasting and analytics, and automatically-generated,
actionable recommendations. As more businesses and organizations continue to
adopt a cloud-centric Information Technology (IT) infrastructure, there is an
increasing demand for solutions to help optimize their cloud operations with the
goal of improving the cost and operation efficiency of the infrastructure with
advanced alerts, maximizing resource utilization and incident
reporting/forecasting, and ensuring security compliance, e.g., access control
and abnormal behavior detection. While there are some cloud management tools
available on the market, they often lack the required intelligence to adapt to
different application environments/demands, to enable advanced forecasting and
analytics, or to automatically generate actionable recommendations on the fly.
An automated and intelligent cloud management tool will address the needs of
these customers. The tool will enable small- and medium-sized businesses to
offer cloud-based services in a reliable and secure
fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will explore the translation
of new developments of Reliability-as-a-Service (RaaS) technologies. RaaS are
cloud management software technologies that address security and reliability. To
enable fully automated, unsupervised operation of RaaS, the goal is to leverage
multiple Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to mine and decompose various trends
(e.g., business growth and demand peaks) from rich cloud statistics. This mining
and reduction process will allow the proposed artificial intelligence (AI)
reasoning engine to identify complex underlying trends and analyze them in a
synergistic fashion to obtain the most accurate analytics. The AI reasoning
engine provides four functionalities in cloud management – Infrastructure
Monitor, Cost Control, Efficiency Optimization, and Security Compliance. In
addition, preliminary results show that the Infrastructure Monitor may predict
cloud anomalies with an accuracy of over 91%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.