* 2036639
* SBIR Phase I:  A Beat-to-Beat Blood Pressure Monitor Using Micro-Nanoscale Wrinkled Functional Materials
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Joshua Kim, VENA VITALS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to provide medical workers and consumers
the utility of continuous blood pressure monitoring with an easy to use adhesive
soft sensor, which can greatly improve personalized care and patient outcomes.
While a patient is undergoing surgery, blood pressure is monitored because
sudden drops have been linked to irreversible tissue and/or organ damage,
resulting in post-operative complications and mortality. The traditional arm
cuff blood pressure monitor is primarily used in surgical settings but while it
is not invasive, the cuff doesn't capture sudden changes in blood pressure.
There are more than 50 million surgeries are performed annually, &gt; 85% of
which rely on non-continuous blood pressure arm cuffs. This project will develop
a new wearable medical device to non-invasively and continuously measure beat-
to-beat blood pressure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase 1 project will advance a new device for non-invasive and
continuously blood pressure monitoring. Current devices are limited by their
accuracy and temporal resolution. The proposed medical device is based on soft
wearable pressure sensors that solves the cost, accuracy, and temporal
resolution problem. The soft sensor adheres to the body wherever a pulse is
palpable and measures the arterial expansion on the surface of the skin as a
pulse wave traverses the artery. Soft sensor technology leverages the highly
elastic properties of micro-nanostructure wrinkled electronic thin films
developed using a novel shrinking fabrication process. Preliminary results using
these soft wearable sensors established high correlation to the gold standard
arterial line. This project will develop electronics to read and output signals
wirelessly from multiple channels as well as highly pressure-sensitive
multichannel sensors and a wristband form factor
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.