* 2036236
* Seeing the Unseen: Passive RF Sensing via Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Biao Chen, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 235,000.00

This project explores the prevalence of wireless services and devices to extract
valuable information about the ambient environment. This includes, among others,
occupancy status of an indoor environment, occupant and movement/motion
classification, and other high-level information that can be inferred from
wireless signals. The benefits of having access to such timely and accurate
situational awareness information are enormous. Real-time occupancy information
is essential for intelligent and green building to reduce carbon footprint of
commercial and residential buildings. Accurate motion detection, and in
particular, the ability to distinguish motions between human and pets can help
provide low-cost home security solutions. Autonomous fall detection in a non-
intrusive and continuous manner is key to providing long-term care for the well-
being of some of the most vulnerable populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project takes a data-driven learning approach for passive RF sensing, i.e.,
extracting situational awareness information of the ambient environment through
judicious processing of existing radio frequency (RF) signals. Passive RF
sensing has a unique set of challenges due to inherent RF impairments,
environment fluctuation, and transceiver location changes, leading to divergent
approaches in the literature. This project brings domain knowledge and strong
expertise in wireless communication and RF propagation to passive RF sensing
applications. Such domain knowledge is critical for understanding the challenges
and helps inform the formulation of associated learning problems including
supervised dimensionality reduction, learning with data imbalance, and learning
with sampling bias. Striving for a data-driven approach, the project will build
up our knowledge of the cause-and-effect relationship between environment and RF
signal reception and provide theoretically sound and practically meaningful
solutions to a number of passive RF sensing problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.