* 2036823
* RCN: GOLD-EN: Leadership Academy and Network for Diversity and Inclusion in Geosciences (LANDInG): Building, Developing and Sustaining DEI Leaders
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Stephanie Goodwin, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

The American Geophysical Union (AGU) will organize a Research Coordination
Network (RCN) to support community and leadership development efforts with the
goal of creating a more diverse and inclusive geoscience workforce. Cultural
shifts can be facilitated by leadership, and research indicates that Diversity,
Equity and Inclusion (DEI) initiatives are more often effective when championed
from the top. Increasing capacity for DEI leadership through a Community of
Practice (CoP) and professional development within the geosciences would fill an
infrastructure gap for efforts that broaden participation in the geosciences and
improve DEI outcomes (directly and indirectly) across the discipline. DEI
champions and leaders in the geosciences lack a central community for networking
and professional development, hindering broader impact of their efforts. LANDInG
RCN's (Leadership Academy and Network for Diversity and Inclusion in the
Geosciences-Research Coordination Network) aim is to develop a sustainable
network of formal and informal leaders to champion DEI values and practices,
developing cohorts of new leaders to implement DEI efforts that broaden
participation across the geosciences. Leveraging the membership and reach of
AGU, in partnership with other geoscience societies, the program will achieve
four objectives: Objective 1: Implement a sustainable CoP Network for DEI
champions in the geosciences, including a virtual platform (The LANDInG Site)
and in-person events to engage and support a broad representation of DEI
champions within the geosciences in networking, resource-sharing, and
professional development activities. Objective 2: Implement a DEI Leader Academy
for the geosciences, building capacity for evidence-based leadership of DEI
efforts that specifically address the needs of the geoscience community.
Objective 3: Create and foster opportunities for direct experience leading DEI
initiatives in the geosciences, to further ensure broad engagement with
evidence-based strategies for culture and organizational change while broadening
impact for the CoP. Objective 4: Raise the visibility and recognition of DEI
champions/ the value of DEI leadership in the geosciences amplifying the
expertise and successes of those who participate in the CoP Network and Academy
to elevate recognition and value of DEI champions and leaders within the
discipline. The model for change draws from research and theory spanning social
and organizational sciences, including the literatures on professional
networks/mentoring, and implementing effective diversity and leader training.
The methods for enacting change are evidence-based and framed by national models
for cohort-based professional development within higher education/STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LANDInG's
outcomes for geosciences would include: 1) new models for DEI professional
development; 2) increased capacity for DEI leadership; 3) broader and stronger
professional networks for DEI champions; 4) increased understanding of DEI
needs; 5) institutionalization of new practices/models for DEI change across the
discipline. LANDInG's goal's include 1) Increased recruitment, retention, and
advancement of women, persons with disabilities, underrepresented minorities,
and those at the intersections of these identities in the geosciences; 2)
Increased capacity for DEI champions to emerge and affect change in the
geosciences; 3) Scalable, sustainable models for professional societies to
affect DEI change and broaden participation in STEM; 4) enhanced partnerships
between academia, associations, industry, and nonprofit organizations; and 5)
development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.