* 2036980
* Fluid oscillations in conduit-reservoir systems, very long period seismic signals at Kilauea volcano, and the phenomenology of unsteady magma ascent
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Brittany Erickson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2024
* USD 286,666.00

Volcanic eruptions and the human hazards associated with them are challenging to
predict because they involve highly unsteady motions of magma hidden below
Earth’s surface. Although observations critical for inferring subsurface magma
motions, such as seismicity and infrasound, are being collected more and more
often, we lack a theoretical framework for understanding the physical processes
that give rise to such signals. This work will be a study of magma flow within
volcanic conduits on short timescales, in order to understand the physical
processes that give rise to a variety of eruptive phenomena. The first goal is
to study volcanic activity at Kilauea volcano, Hawai’i’, associated with rocks
falling onto an active lava lake, which cause resonant oscillations of magma
within the conduit and sometimes small but hazardous explosions at the surface.
These well-documented natural experiments provide a unique test for models of
the shallow conduit and magma reservoir geometry as well as multiphase magma
fluid properties. The second goal is to develop a high performance computing-
enabled modeling framework to predict transient motions of magma in volcanic
conduits under a range of flow conditions, including during explosive eruptions.
This work will help bridge the gap between geophysical observations, volcano
physics, and advanced computing. The project will support graduate students in
interdisciplinary scientific research, and contribute to ongoing development of
“The Volcano Listening Project”, an outreach effort dedicated to representing
volcano data as sound and animations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
describes a study of small amplitude oscillatory magma flow in volcanic
conduits. The first goal is to study short term (tens of minutes) unrest
episodes at Kilauea volcano, Hawai’i’, associated with rock falls onto an active
lava lake and from rising gas slugs. These disturbances cause ‘very long period’
(VLP, 5−40 s) oscillations of the multi-phase magma within the conduit,
explosions, unsteady surface gas flux, and lava lake height variations, recorded
on a nearby network of geophysical instruments. These well-documented natural
experiments provide a unique test for unsteady conduit flow models, which will
be used to invert for subsurface conduit and reservoir geometry as well as magma
rheology and primary volatile content. Previous NSF-funded work developed a
preliminary framework for modeling and inverting VLP seismic data in terms of
the resonant eigenmodes of coupled conduit-reservoir systems, where fluid
pressure changes cause elastic deformations of the surrounding solid Earth that
are recorded instrumentally. This framework will be applied to thousands of
events spanning the ten-year lifespan of the Halema’uma’u vent on Kilauea.
Bayesian Markov-Chain Monte Carlo inversions will incorporate constraints from
seismicity, ground deformation, continuous gravity, petrologically-determined
melt viscosity and volatile content, and lava lake geometry. The second goal is
to generate a forward modeling framework to predict wave motion in complex
states of magma flow. Modeling relative motion between gas and liquid will
predict surface gas flux data during transient unrest events, as well as
transient explosions triggered by rockfalls. Wave-like disturbances will also be
studied in the context of explosive eruptions, where such oscillatory fluid
motions may play a key role in state shifts during eruptions such as the onset
of fragmentation and explosive behavior. Flow in volcanic systems is typically
not studied at the short timescales proposed here. Explicit consideration of
non-equilibrium bubble growth and resorption, complex conduit geometry that
includes branching cracks, and stratified, multiphase fluid flow with strong
interfaces (such as bubble exsolution or magma fragmentation) is necessary to
achieve consistency between multiple geophysical datasets. This approach also
permits a critical examination of quasi-steady conduit flow models, which can be
shown to be conditionally linearly unstable to perturbations. This suggests a
new approach to studying transitions in eruption style. Finally, the study of
unstable wave motions in strongly stratified multiphase systems will contribute
to numerical method developments with applications beyond volcanology.
Numerically resolving flow instabilities using recent developments in provably
stable high-order finite difference methods provides a unique opportunity to
advance models of volcanic conduit flow, discover new eruptive phenomenology,
and connect with volcano monitoring efforts. The project will involve two PhD
students at the University of Oregon across Earth Science and Computer Science.
Software will be open-source and available to the community. The project team
will visit and collaborate with the USGS (Hawaiian Volcano Observatory) to study
Kilauea. Ongoing results of modeling and seismic data analysis will be
incorporated into public presentations and to “Volcano Listening Project”
outreach effort dedicated to representing volcano data as sound and
animations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.