* 2036270
* SBIR Phase I:  Determine Performance Characteristics During Cultivation of Living Organisms in a Novel Single-Use Horizontal Modular and Pressurizable Microbial Fermentor
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,05/31/2023
* Ernest Stadler, NEW HORIZON BIOTECH INC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to significantly improve the ability to
generate biological pharmaceuticals. The biopharmaceutical industry is working
to grow specific genetically engineered microbial cells that will produce a
vaccine, injectable protein, or other products. There is a pressing need to
culture unique microbes, starting from small scale batches, that rapidly scale
to commercially viable batch sizes with high product output. A pressurized
horizontal fermentor supports the industry’s drive towards single-use bags for
microbial fermentation, as single-use fermentors lower operating costs and
reduce cross-contamination that can result in loss of an entire batch. This
scalable, single-use fermentor should achieve higher yields and allow drug
producers to produce kilogram quantities of protein in a more cost-effective
manner. This innovative, flexible, pressurizable, horizontal modular design will
decrease time-to-market for vaccines, therapeutic proteins or other microbially
manufactured products, from both small and large biologics producers, to combat
global infectious, and other diseases, at reduced operating costs, saving
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance the knowledge of
how microbial cells are cultivated in a horizontal, pressurized single-use bag
fermentor. The knowledge gained will validate microbial production using a
modular design that provides flexibility to adjust the capacity of the system,
without significant facility modifications or cost. An initial prototype
demonstrated highly encouraging results regarding fast mixing times, proper
scalable power input, and excellent oxygen mass transfer. The design to be
refined here has the potential to transform the biologics manufacturing industry
by impacting the ability to generate high cell densities and reduce the cost of
microbial manufacturing. Research objectives are to demonstrate: a fully
developed design with the heat removal capacity required of high cell density
fermentation (currently unachievable using existing industry vertical single-use
fermentor designs); a pressurized bag system that can achieve oxygen transfer
rates needed for high density cultures; and a scalable format that allows for
rapid scaling to 3000 liters. A fully functioning test fermentor will be built
and evaluated using both computational fluid dynamics analysis and laboratory
testing of culture conditions. Experimental work will evaluate high agitation
impellers, high gas flows, gas sparger designs, and system structural
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.