* 2036740
* Collaborative Research: ECCS-EPSRC: Nitride Super-Junction HEMTs for Robust, Efficient, Fast Power Switching
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Yuhao Zhang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 01/31/2024
* USD 230,000.00

Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 2036740 &amp;
2036915&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Yuhao Zhang and Han Wang
(co-PI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: ECCS-EPSRC: Nitride
Super-Junction HEMTs for Robust, Efficient, Fast Power
Switching&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University (Lead) and University of Southern
California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Power semiconductor devices are regularly
utilized as solid-state switches in power electronic systems that are widely
used in consumer electronics, data centers, electric vehicles, electricity grid,
and renewable energy systems. The global power device market exceeds $15 billion
in 2019 and is fast growing. Gallium nitride (GaN) high-electron-mobility
transistors (HEMTs) are commonly perceived as the next generation of power
devices. Despite their initial commercialization recently, their wide adoption
in industrial applications is hindered by the limitation in reliability and
robustness, resulting in considerable over design, rendering device performance
far below the material limit. This project will develop a new generation of
robust, charge-balanced GaN HEMTs through innovation in the semiconductor
materials and device structure. Interdisciplinary research will be carried out
in materials, devices, fabrication processes, and circuit-level tests through
collaboration between Virginia Tech and the University of Southern California in
the United States, as well as University of Cambridge in United Kingdom under
the “NSF Engineering - UKRI Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
Lead Agency Opportunity (ENG-EPSRC)”. This US-UK collaborative project provides
opportunities for student education and international exchange, development of
cross-university teaching modules, and industrial collaboration for potential
technology transfer. This interdisciplinary, cross-continent project also
involves outreach activities for K-12 students and teachers, and promotes
educational activities related to microelectronics and power electronics
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
overarching hypothesis is that robust gallium nitride (GaN) high-electron-
mobility transistors (HEMTs) can be implemented by selective-area, nearly
defect-free embedding of p-type regions into the two-dimensional electron gas
(2DEG) channel, forming a novel charge-balanced super-junction structure. This
novel 2D-3D super-junction structure can not only enhance the device robustness
by managing the electric field and avalanche capability, but also allow
significantly higher 2DEG density while maintaining the normally-off operation,
thereby decreasing the device specific on-resistance and boosting its switching
frequency. Despite these promises, major gaps exist in the device physics of the
novel super-junction, interfacial material properties, and the dynamic
performance of super-junction HEMTs in power electronic circuits. Funded by the
“NSF Engineering - UKRI Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council Lead
Agency Opportunity (ENG-EPSRC)”, this project aims to address the scientific
knowledge gaps in four relevant areas through the US-UK research collaboration:
(a) to explore the design space and performance limits of the novel super-
junction HEMT device; (b) to probe new methods of selectively introducing p-type
dopants into the 2DEG channel to realize the super-junction functionality; (c)
to develop an in-depth understanding of the dopant profiles, carrier transport,
and trap dynamics in the nitride super-junction structure; and (d) to correlate
the nano/mesoscale materials and interface properties with the dynamic
characteristics and robustness of GaN HEMTs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.