* 2036842
* EAGER: (ST2) Engineering Biomaterials that Integrate in the Native ECM of Cells.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Wilson Wong, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Biomaterials are materials that interact with
biological systems, and are therefore an essential component for fundamental
biology studies, medical applications, and engineering tissues. However, current
biomaterials are designed to interface and interact with cells and tissues, and
cells cannot actively remodel and incorporate biomaterials into the final cell
generated tissue. Inspired by the Square-Table-2 meeting, this project proposes
to design Integrative Synbio-Materials (ISMs) as a novel class of biomaterials
that cells recycle and integrate into newly built tissue. The researchers
hypothesize that ISMs can lead to engineered tissues with novel properties. To
test this hypothesis, the research team aims to apply recently developed
synthetic biology approaches to incorporate non-standard amino acids in
extracellular matrix proteins, which serve as linker molecules to synthetic
biomaterials and as such introduce novel chemistry into engineered tissue.
Success from this project brings about a paradigm shift from ‘materials that
interface with tissues’ to ‘materials that integrate into tissues’ and provides
a new platform to study cell-extracellular matrix interactions in their native
tissue environment in vivo, to engineer tissues and organs, and to deliver
drugs. This research, conducted at the Biological Design Center at Boston
University, is tightly coupled to a strong education plan. The project trains
students at graduate and undergraduate levels, across the fields of synthetic
biology, tissue engineering, and material science, for productive careers in the
21st century scientific workforce. Students will have ample opportunities to
learn state-of-the-art technologies, present at international conferences, and
connect with research communities in the greater Boston area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in soft
biomaterials such as polyacrylamide and polyethylene glycol with highly tunable
biophysical properties, controllable degradation characteristics, and release
kinetics of biochemical signals have provided unprecedented insights in cellular
mechano-transduction and cell signaling. Despite these major advances, all
biomaterials share one common limitation; that is cells cannot actively remodel
and incorporate that material into the final cell generated tissue. Indeed, when
adherent to a material surface, cells degrade the material while depositing new
extracellular matrix (ECM) on the cell-material interface, but the biomaterial
itself is not incorporated in the de novo tissue matrix. Thus, as cells remodel
the cell-material interface, the biophysical or biochemical cues delivered by
the material to control cell behavior are progressively lost. This limitation
constrains the function of the engineered tissue that can be achieved. To
overcome this fundamental limitation of biomaterials, this project proposes to
develop Integrative Synbio-Materials (ISMs) as a novel class of biomaterials
that cells recycle and use to assemble their ECM. Taking advantage of new
insights in fibronectin remodeling, a ubiquitous ECM protein that is critical
for the assembly of tissues during embryonic development and after injury, and
the development of recoded E. coli strains that incorporate non-standard amino
acids in proteins, this project aims to engineer synthetically modified
fibronectin fragments that are tagged with azido residues, which provide
reactive sites for crosslinking with polymeric materials such as dextran. Using
synthetically modified fibronectin fragments as building blocks for ISMs, this
project pursues the hypothesis that synthetic control of ISMs, such as tuning
stiffness, is retained upon the incorporation of ISMs in de novo assembled ECMs.
When successful, this project brings about a paradigm shift from ‘biomaterials
that interface with cells’ to ‘biomaterials that integrate into the native ECM
of cells’. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Division of Materials Research (DMR) grant
supports research to develop Integrative Synbio-Materials (ISMs) as a novel
class of biomaterials that cells recycle and use to assemble their extra-
cellular matrix (ECM) managed by the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Program in
DMR of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS)
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.