* 2036233
* STTR Phase I:  A platform for the rapid discovery of human antibodies as therapeutics for infectious disease (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Bradley Poulsen, Altigg Therapeutics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 09/30/2022
* USD 255,595.00

The broader impacts of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project are to establish a novel and rapid drug-discovery platform aimed at
infectious diseases. An opportunity is to tap into an unexplored diversity of
human antibodies and develop them into therapies. This technology aims to
identify drug candidates and select therapeutic candidates quickly. The
established platform will be poised to counter emerging outbreaks and existing
stubborn pathogen such as drug-resistant bacteria. The priority is the current
COVID-19 pandemic, but this can be expanded to other potential pathogens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project will establish a novel discovery
platform of human antibody therapeutics to counter infectious diseases. The rise
of devastating new pathogens, such as SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) and antibiotic-
resistant bacteria, calls for alternative and rapid therapeutic approaches.
Traditional therapeutic antibody development generally involves animal models
or/and affinity selection systems. They are expensive and lengthy, requiring
multiple steps, including humanization, to mitigate immune neutralization. The
proposed method identifies human antibodies (IgG) targeting a pathogen of
interest in only nine days. The approach also capitalizes on an unexplored
diversity of human antibodies. The pipeline begins with a collection of donor
cells containing plasmablasts, which are modified to capture own-secreted IgG
allowing for the enrichment of the relevant cells. The cells are sorted in
single wells in a high throughput fashion. The process continues with high
throughput cloning, antibody expression, and a preliminary binding and
neutralization screen. The pipeline lasts nine days from cells to the initial
binding screen, identifying hundreds of antibodies of varying characteristics.
The initial screen is followed by further tests of binding kinetics and
neutralization assays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.