* 2036125
* STTR Phase I:  Polymer Surfactant Therapy for Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2022
* You-Yeon Won, SPIRO THERAPEUTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will be to develop a first-in-kind therapeutic
for treatment of Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) as well as
potentially other severe respiratory conditions that are characterized by high
rates of mortality, morbidity, and hospitalization time. ARDS causes
deactivation of the lungs’ surfactant, which is responsible for keeping the lung
structure inflated and dry. This causes inadequate blood oxygenation and mutli-
organ failure without invasive mechanical ventilation. ARDS is believed to
account for 7% of the world’s ICU beds and can be caused by many root causes,
including both direct lung injuries (i.e. bacterial/viral pneumonia) and
indirect lung injuries (i.e. trauma). In the case of the pandemic, current data
suggests that 14% of COVID-19 cases require hospitalization. Of these patients,
1 in 3 will develop ARDS, reducing their chance of survival to 60%. In a normal
year there are 3 million ARDS cases globally (220k US) that are highly resource
intensive (avg. $82k treatment cost), which presents a considerable financial
burden on patients and healthcare systems. A therapeutic treatment would reduce
patient deaths and frequency of chronic complications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will develop a different approach to ARDS treatment via a
synthetic Polymer Lung Surfactant (PLS) technology. This PLS technology
overcomes shortcomings of previously attempted therapies as it is engineered to
be safely used in the body, highly surface-active (lower surface tension),
water-soluble (prepared in injectable aqueous suspension), and resistant to
protein deactivation. Suspended in solution, PLS is evenly distributed in the
lungs of mechanically ventilated patients. When PLS reaches the alveoli, it
forms a gas-permeable micelle monolayer that mimics the function of human lung
surfactant without being deactivated. Doing so re-inflates the alveoli while
reducing fluid accumulation and inflammation so that blood oxygenation can be
restored. Building upon promising PLS safety/efficacy proof-of-concept data,
specific aim #1 of this project will optimize delivery parameters in mice that
have been induced with ARDS by differing root causes (infection vs. acid-
aspiration). Specific aim #2 will use iodine-labeled PLS to generate
distribution and clearance data in mice from delivery to several days post-
treatment. This data will be used to optimize key delivery and PLS parameters to
ensure that maximum efficacy is sustained for several
days.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.