* 2036982
* NSF2026: EAGER: Spatio-Temporal Design of Techno-Ecological Synergies for a World without Waste and Resilient Landscapes
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Bhavik Bakshi, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,943.00

With support from the CBET/ENG Environmental Sustainability program and the NSF
2026 Fund Program in the Office of Integrated Activities, the investigators are
researching the ecological capacity to provide goods and services in the face of
demands imposed by a technological society. To meet sustainability goals, most
engineers design and operate manufacturing processes to minimize resource use
and emissions, but they may not account, for example, for the capacity of a
watershed to provide fresh water to all users (including non-human users) or of
the atmosphere to absorb emitted CO2. Similarly, economists may exclude
consideration of the impact on ecosystems. The vision of this research is that
through appropriate design, human activities can explicitly account for the
provisions supplied by ecosystems, and can be designed to respect ecosystem
limits. The research seeks to provide a framework for designing industries and
ecosystems simultaneously to operate in a mutually beneficial or synergistic
manner. The resulting Techno-Ecological Synergies (TES) will rely on designing
ecosystems of the future, that in fundamental concept include the built
environment, to enrich the NSF2026 Idea Machine winning entries of a "World
without Waste," and "Large Landscape Resilience by
Design."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TES design will be formulated as an optimization
problem. Novel and innovative approaches for developing designs at relevant
spatial and temporal scales are proposed for solving the optimization problem.
One such innovation to be realized is the the development of physics-based
surrogate models with deep neural networks to capture the spatio-temporal
variation of pollutant concentration in a selected region for a point source
under various geographical, land cover, and meteorological conditions, embracing
uncertainty issues. Advanced and innovative stochastic and/or dynamic
programming methods will be employed to obtain TES designs. As a test case, the
developed TES approach will be applied to a power plant near Cincinnati and
vegetation on the surrounding landscape. For this case study, conventional and
TES designs will be compared in terms of their contribution to reducing waste at
the landscape and life cycle scales. To assess large landscape resilience for
conventional and TES designs, future climate change scenarios will be simulated
and landscape resilience compared for conventional and TES designs in terms of
regional water availability and air quality. This approach will assess the
benefits of seeking synergies with nature through the TES framework. The results
of this work are targeted to lay the foundation for further work toward the
convergence of disciplines including ecology, sociology, economics, public
policy, statistics, environmental science, and engineering. The aspiration of
the TES approach is to see, with time, practical implementation of TES on the
scale of industrial, urban, and agro-ecological landscape
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.