* 2036649
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-high throughput parallel optical links for chip-to-chip interconnects.
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,07/31/2021
* Bardia Pezeshki, AVICENATECH, CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2021
* USD 255,612.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to demonstrate a platform for increasing
computing power and decreasing power consumption in applications such as:
datacenter search, machine learning, cell phones, and personal electronics. By
addressing the key bottleneck of data interconnects at short length scales, this
project will enable new computing architectures that can learn, retrieve
information, and solve problems beyond the reach of conventional computing. The
impact will range from chip companies to electronic packaging, to the system
companies and ultimately to the users of computing services, from businesses to
individuals. Addressing this interconnect bottleneck will realize more powerful
personal computing that consumes less power, creates more efficient data
centers, and accelerates widespread adoption of new machine learning
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project addresses a key issue of moving data within and between
computing platforms. As the length of a datalink increases, the power
consumption and density drop. Generally electrical wires are used for length
scales less than a meter, and optics are used for high speed signals over a few
meters. This project will enable a new light source based on Gallium Nitride
devices, typically used in lighting and display applications. Through this
approach, optical signaling can be used at shorter distances, giving much higher
density and lower electrical power consumptions. The goal of this project is to
demonstrate an optical link with 10x to 100x lower power than electrical wiring
and 100x the density of traditional optical links.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.