* 2036256
* SBIR Phase I:  HiUGE Powered CRISPR Knock-In Library for Protein Tagging Across the Human Genome
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Akiyoshi Uezu, CASTAG BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2023
* USD 255,730.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project impacts the ability of drug developers,
translational investigators, and basic scientists to track proteins in living
cells. Current approaches are time-consuming, labor-intensive and low-
throughput. Investing in these approaches is therefore relatively high-risk for
most investigators and are most often employed only for proteins with well-
defined functions. This technology represents a rapid and scalable method for
protein labeling, allowing investigators to include a broader range of proteins
of interest (POIs) in a given study. By reducing the initial investment
required, both academic and industry investigators are likely to expand the POIs
included in a given study. Our expectation is that the scalability and
flexibility of this method will accelerate drug screening and development
activities, revealing more promising lead candidates. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will advance translation of the homology-independent universal
genome engineering (HiUGE) method, developed as a means of evaluating a broad
range of proteins in neural function and development. This project advances
research in developing a number of functional knock-in vectors, allowing
fluorescent proteins labeling (FluorTag), functional disruption (DisrupTag), and
downstream protein purification (MassTag). Pairing these vectors with the
genome-wide library under development during this project will allow the company
to rapidly provide cell lines expressing proteins of interest with customized
modifications, all under endogenous promoter control. The specific goal of this
project is to develop a scalable, high-throughput screening platform using the
technology to label every protein encoded by the human genome. Technical tasks
include: identify gene specific-gRNA sequences for all coding regions, searching
and prioritizing insertion sites both at the N- and C-terminal regions of all
proteins using defined criteria; develop a pilot scale screening library,
comprising cells with HiUGE insertion sites in 96 genes of interest; apply new
automation resources to scale for all 20,000 protein-encoding
genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.