* 2036800
* Collaborative Research: Fast Spectrally-Encoded Photoacoustic Microscopy for Multi-Parameter Bioenergetic Characterization of Heterogeneous Cancer Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Lihong Wang, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 01/31/2024
* USD 315,000.00

Compared to their normal counterparts, cancer cells have distinctive
bioenergetic (energy generating) functions related to cell metabolism and
tumorigenic (tumor causing) properties with significant cell-to-cell variations.
Thus, bioenergetic characterization at the single-cell level is necessary to
reveal the differing cancer cell energy producing pathways. Such understanding
is important for not only fundamental cancer research but also for accurate
cancer diagnosis and prognosis and for the development of personalized anti-
cancer therapies. In this project, a new high-speed and high-resolution
spectroscopic imaging technology and a high-density microwell array will be
developed. If successful, this project will lay a solid foundation to achieve a
significant method for studying cancer cell metabolism and heterogeneity.
Learning and training opportunities will be provided for graduate and
undergraduate students as well as Grade 7-12 teachers and students. Technical
translation and product development will be explored through teaming with
bioinstrumentation companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is
to achieve single-cell oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and extracellular
acidification rate (ECAR) characterization for a large population of cancer
cells. OCR and ECAR are closely related to the two main metabolic pathways in
cells, oxidative phosphorylation and glycolysis, and therefore serve as primary
indicators of their bioenergetic phenotypes. To date, electrical or fluorescence
methods have been developed to characterize the OCR of a small number of cells.
However, it is difficult to scale these methods up for multi-parameter
characterization of a large cell population. To accomplish this goal, a fast
spectrally-encoded photoacoustic microscopy will be developed to enable high-
throughput and simultaneous OCR andECAR characterization on a single measurement
platform. Specifically, the Hadamard transformation and optical switching with
digital micromirror device will be employed to enable fast tuning of the
excitation wavelength. A new water-immersible micro scanning mirror will be
developed to provide wide-field optical and acoustic co-scanning. Combining
these two new techniques will allow high-speed photoacoustic data acquisition at
multiple excitation wavelengths that are programmable or reconfigurable for a
specific target.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.