* 2036368
* Workshop on desiderata for a multimodal dataset for objectionable content detection
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Ioannis Kakadiaris, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2022
* USD 43,959.00

Kids and young adults are increasingly relying on electronic devices as their
main source of entertainment. During this screen time, users can watch movies,
videos, and play online games on a multitude of platforms. While many platforms
have parental controls, many of these app-specific filters have been found to be
unreliable and easy to deceive. Exposing kids and young viewers to objectionable
content has been documented to correlate with violent behavior and early
initiation of sex and alcohol usage in teenagers, and anxiety and fear among
children. Therefore, there is an urgent critical need to develop Artificial
Intelligence methods that can help detect objectionable content. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Developing this technology requires new research infrastructure in
the form of an extensive repository of consistently labeled movies and video
content that currently does not exist. Through the mini-workshop series, the
research team will lay the groundwork to design and create this new repository
of objectionable content. The resulting infrastructure will help advance
technology that will contribute to the crucial goal of providing a safer online
space for young users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.