* 2036226
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapid Development of a Protein Vaccine for COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Peter Leonardi, OMNICYTE, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 11/30/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a vaccine to prevent
infection from the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The proposed project is a novel vaccine
that activates multiple components of the immune system, potentially more
effective than other SAR-CoV-2 vaccines, and using a well-understood approach as
a protein-based vaccine.

This SBIR Phase I project will advance a protein vaccine based upon a platform
technology combining two functions, activating the immune system and targeting
it to attack to a specific pathogen or cell. The platform has a modular design
that allows it to be re-engineered, in a cassette-like fashion, to redirect the
attack to different targets. Applications for the technology include vaccines
against viruses and cells infected by viruses, as well as against specific
cancer types. The vaccine can be rapidly generated and easily re-engineered. The
focus of this project will be to produce this SARS-CoV-2 targeted protein
vaccine utilizing an immune-activating platform with the SARS-CoV-2 spike
protein inserted into the targeting domain of the platform. The will be followed
by studies to demonstrate the vaccine candidate activity in an in vitro model
and an animal model.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.