* 2036451
* SBIR Phase I: Mitigating the effects of isolation and absence of therapies through the delivery of cloud based digital treatments and remote patient monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Bennett Gatto, Active Therapy Systems LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the quality of life for the more
than 1 million Americans currently suffering from Parkinson’s Disease (PD) while
reducing the growing economic burden on the healthcare system. Outpatient
physical and occupational therapy, speech therapy, and mental health are key
components in the treatment and management of PD. Early intervention and
appropriate symptomatic management utilizing these therapies is essential for
best long-term outcomes; Inadequate and infrequent treatment, especially during
the COVID-19 pandemic, places a heavier burden on Person with Parkinson’s (PwP)
and their families and a greater financial burden on the healthcare system.
Delivering remote therapies and monitoring performance via the proposed in-home
therapy platform may demonstrate a reduction in symptoms or slowing of disease
progression, thereby helping to reduce costly, adverse medical complications and
improving the PwP quality of life. Data collected from regular in-home, daily
therapies may lead to improved standards of care and aid the research community
in the search for a cure. Once proven effective in the beachhead market of PD,
the technology could be trialed in the mainstream markets of Alzheimer’s,
Dementia, and the aging population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a prototype for an
automated therapy delivery and remote patient monitoring platform for those
suffering from Parkinson’s Disease (PD). This automated platform will provide
access to daily therapies for the Person with Parkinson’s (PwP) by facilitating
remote therapeutic exercise and social engagement via an in-home device that
monitors real-time functionality to adapt cloud based digital content to
optimize physical performance, cognition, and physiological response to exercise
and cognitive tasks. Such a therapeutic system should have similar levels of
efficacy as in-person therapy and treatment sessions, enabling participation in
the much needed therapies while simultaneously reducing the burdens placed on
the PwP, their families, and the healthcare system. The subjective report data,
physiological response data, and objective performance data collected throughout
each session will be summarized in a report for the PwP, their families, and
their caregivers or healthcare providers to improve the continued delivery of
treatment, clinical decision making, and health and safety of the patient. This
proposed technology will help to reduce the effects of isolation, provide access
to physical therapy and exercise treatments and improve the remote monitoring of
patients throughout the COVID-19 pandemic crisis and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.