* 2036207
* SBIR Phase I:  Wave: End-end Security for virtual reality and video conferencing applications (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Arunesh Mishra, PICOLO LABS INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2022
* USD 255,555.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from the ability for developers to
build massively collaborative and real-time cooperative video/virtual reality
applications without compromising end-end security. Lack of end-to-end
encryption has been a growing problem for consumers, educational institutions
and businesses collaborating remotely during the COVID-19 pandemic. This project
will advance the state-of-the-art by providing developers with the necessary
tools to create high quality synchronous collaborative virtual environments
where children, teachers, corporate professionals and even national security
personnel can safely engage in work-activity without risks of privacy loss or
security/data compromises. This will also benefit telemedicine where privacy is
paramount from a personal perspective and also from a legal standpoint. The
success of demonstrating end-end encryption for a high-performance application
will result in other remote-work collaborative tools being designed with end-end
security as a key feature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project solves the problem of maintaining
end-end security of content while allowing expressivity using a scripting
language by separating the data plane from the control plane for such massively
collaborative multimedia applications. The control plane can be programmed using
a web-friendly language that can be executed on any existing user-device such as
laptops/smartphones thus giving maximum portability to the app developers. The
data plane always stays end-end encrypted and can be manipulated using the
scripting language in a highly expressive manner. The system provides perfect
forward and backward secrecy by using a fast-group rekeying protocol to maintain
confidentiality, integrity and authenticity of the multimedia content. Research
and development on this project will lead to breakthroughs in multiple avenues
including the demonstration of a truly high performant decentralized end-end
encrypted application. This will spur the demand for end-end security for any
remote-work collaborative application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.