* 2036836
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Respiratory Ventilator for Clinical Care (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2021
* Karl Wassmann, SPERRY MEDTECH INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2021
* USD 255,382.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a transformational ventilator
design targeted at the unmet clinical need for low-cost (&lt;$3000), highly
functional, rugged, modular and low maintenance ventilators supporting advanced
ventilation modes. Current midrange ventilators cost between $8,000-20,000 with
high-end ventilation units costing up to $50,000. The proposed design uses
highly efficient and low-cost modern technologies with few moving functional
elements. Only four modules are employed, designed to connect together in a
quick-release, tool-less fashion requiring no service technicians to maintain.
The design ensures that the new ventilator will work in existing hospital and
acute care settings by (a) supporting networking of mobile devices for remote
monitoring, (b) networking to hospital information systems to integrate with
patient records and analytic systems, (c) supporting standard breathing patient
circuit tubing and intubation tubes, (d) inclusion of monitoring settings and
alarms, (e) supporting the use of hospital oxygen, oxygen in cylinders, medical
air and atmospheric air. The global mechanical ventilator market was valued at
$2.94 billion in 2019 and is estimated to reach $12.54 billion by 2027, driven
by the rising worldwide prevalence of respiratory diseases including Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) and asthma, as well as the COVID-19
pandemic. This new design will favorably impact clinical settings including
acute care facilities, in-transit systems, home health care and developing
countries. It is ideal for surge and scale requirements, such as stockpiling by
hospitals, strategic national stockpiles, mass casualty response and
humanitarian missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project leverages
applied engineering principles and understanding the mechanics of compressible
fluids. It leverages the use of computer-aided design and engineering, 3D
printing, networking and low-cost components in consideration of hospital
protocols. Novel innovations include: (a) positive displacement, volumetric air
motive system for air/O2 delivery, and (b) a multi-position single element
rotary selector valve for flow control of the air motive system. An inexpensive
bill of materials is achieved with minimal components for low weight (&lt;4
pounds not including battery backup), small logistics footprint, minimal
component failure points, ease of maintenance and rapid scale of
manufacture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.