* 2036801
* RAPID: Enzyme-free detection of SARS-CoV2 using a PAINT-based single-molecule microscopy assay
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Kun Huang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,993.00

The novel coronavirus that causes COVID-19 is composed of a spherical envelope
that surrounds a genome made of ribonucleic acids (RNAs). These RNAs control
viral replication and have distinct regions for each coronavirus strain. Most
rapid detection tests for COVID-19 amplify three unique RNA regions with a
protein called an enzyme. The activity of enzymes greatly increases the
sensitivity of COVID-19 detection, but have disadvantages of requiring cold
storage, short shelf life, and potential for false negative results due to the
loss of enzymatic activity. This research develops an enzyme-free COVID-19 test
that uses the binding of stabilized deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecules that
are locked into place along the novel coronavirus genome. The novel coronavirus
can be visualized using a micrscope when another marker DNA molecule constantly
docks and undocks from the DNA attached to the coronavirus genetic material. The
project will deliver a sensitive and stable test for rapid detection of
COVID-19. A major goal of this project is to develop a flexible enzyme-free,
shelf-stable viral test that can be readily adapted for the current as well as
future viral outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop an enzyme-free detection method for SARS-CoV-2 with single-molecule
sensitivity that can detect single nucleotide polymorphisms of mutated strains
in the United States. To achieve this goal, viral capture coverglasses will be
engineered by covalently linking oligonucleotide (oligo) sequences that are
reverse complementary to the 70-nt leader sequence (LS) and sequences 5’ to key
regions of SARS-CoV-2 genome. Extracted viral RNA will be applied to the
coverglass to pull down all viral transcripts that bind to the LS capture
anchors. The specific regions for SARS-CoV-2 detection suggested by the Center
of Disease Control &amp; Prevention (CDC) will be used as target sequences to
design probes for small RNA detection via DNA-based points accumulation in
nanoscale topography (sRNA-PAINT). Single-molecule viral detection and
amplification of target regions will be achieved with sRNA-PAINT by deploying
highly specific locked-nucleic acid (LNA) oligonucleotide probes linked to oligo
“docking strands”. Amplification is enzyme-free, and instead, the signal for any
individual probe is amplified by the predictable binding and unbinding of oligo
“imager strands” to the docking strands of the probe. Imager strands have a
conjugated fluorophore and their binding is detected in thousands of images
taken over 15 minutes on a microscope using a sensitive camera. The detection
assay or kit will consist of an oligonucleotide (oligo)-linked capture
coverglass, COVID-19 -specific oligo probes, fluorescent oligo imaging probes,
buffers, and instructions on how to either deploy the assay on any microscope
with single molecule sensitivity or build one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.