* 2036737
* FMSG: Integrating Artificial Intelligence in Chemical Vapor Deposition for In-situ Predictive Crystal Growth Manufacturing.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Mikael Lindvall, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2022
* USD 532,250.00

In electronics, large crystal of silicon is used as the basis for semiconductor
computer chips and switching devices for electric grid applications. The
efficiency of electronic devices is dependent on the perfection of the crystals
as it offers better control of electron flow without loss. Different types of
semiconductor crystals, like diamond, can outperform silicon but are essentially
unavailable for use. The current project proposes to use artificial intelligence
on the data generated and collected during crystal growth to predict parameters
instead of trial and error for growth of defect free crystals. The use
artificial intelligence will assess the data generated during the growth process
itself, the current state of crystal growth, and predict the growth results.
Development and integration of deep learning artificial intelligence
architectures in the Chemical Vapor Deposition process will make growth
predictions more accurate and add defect assessment to the prediction for
manufacturing of diamond material System. Outcome of the project will accelerate
the development cycles and reduce costs for manufacturing processes which will
be adaptable to a broad range of crystal growth processes for electronics.
Concepts developed in the project will be integrated into existing courses,
capstone projects will be designed for students, and education modules will be
developed for training operators. A course in data collection, handling, and
interpretation will be developed for vocational workers to understand, adapt,
and team with artificial intelligence augmented manufacturing machines in the
work environment. The course will be disseminated to manufacturing community by
partnering with the Automation Alley, an industry manufacturing
consortium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will design and develop a
holistic artificial intelligence platform to solve the problems of traditional
approaches for growth of large-scale crystalline diamond material system. The
approach will focus on increasing the resolution of image collection and
training the program to resolve problems with spatio-temporal data, including:
(1) checkerboard artifacts, (2) lack of photo-realism, and (3) inability to
prevent feature loss, while maintaining a large frame resolution. Further, the
artificial intelligence architectures developed for this project will be merged
into solutions for frame prediction based on input time series parameters like
temperature and defects to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy metrics in growth
state prediction. The large scale and defect free diamond material system is one
of the most challenging and holds the promise of revolutionizing power device
technology. The enhanced predictive capabilities proposed in this project
derived from higher resolution images and incorporation of microscope defect
data will enable in-process control of the evolving growth process for diamond
and will lead the way for fully automated process control of crystal growth
processes for manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.