* 2036695
* SBIR Phase I:  Smart Shunt Valve to Treat Hydrocephalus
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Tyler Wanke, MADISON SCIENTIFIC, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2021
* USD 255,977.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a smart cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
shunt system to improve the treatment of hydrocephalus, called “water on the
brain”. Despite being the most common pediatric brain surgery performed
worldwide, 40% of CSF shunts fail within the first year and nearly all fail
within 10 years, leading to increased patient morbidity as well as unnecessary
revision surgeries. In fact, adverse events related to shunts arguably account
for the majority of pediatric neurosurgical complications. Further, multiple
hospitalization and revision surgeries cost the global healthcare system at
least $2 billion annually from intermittent emergency room admissions, imaging,
care of complications, and other factors associated with failed shunts. The
current solutions do not account for individual patient physiology and changing
conditions. The proposed solution will intelligently sense intracranial pressure
(ICP) and drain CSF as needed, improving patient care and associated health care
costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to develop a comprehensive shunt diagnostic and therapeutic
system that senses ICP and customizes drainage in real time in an integrated
modular system. An ICP sensor will collect and communicate real-time pressure
signals to a processing microcontroller that can control a valve. The system
will communicate with external receivers for physician/patient monitoring and
control. The objectives of this project include developing the electrical (ICP +
communication modules) and mechanical (valve systems) sub-systems of the device
and demonstrating proof-of-concept of an integrated shunt system. To demonstrate
feasibility, the device will undergo testing using an artificial human brain
ventricle platform, developed to mimic ventricular
physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.