* 2036549
* CAREER: Understanding Latinx Students' Stories of Doing and Learning Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Carlos Gómez Marchant, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 05/31/2025
* USD 526,978.00

Although the Latino population throughout the United States continues to
increase, various researchers have shown that Latino students are often not
afforded high quality learning experiences in their mathematics classrooms. As a
result, Latino students are underrepresented in higher level mathematics courses
and careers involving mathematics. Having a better understanding of Latino
students' perspectives and experiences is imperative to improving their
opportunities to learn mathematics. Yet, little research has made central
Latinos students' perspectives of learning and doing mathematics, especially
over a critical period of time like the transition from elementary to middle
school. The goal of this study will be to improve mathematics teaching and
learning for Latino youth as they move from upper elementary to early middle
school mathematics classrooms. The project involves three major parts:
investigating the policy, media, and oral histories of Latino
families/communities to understand the context for participating Latino
students’ mathematics education; exploring Latino students’ stories about their
experiences learning and doing mathematics to understand these students’
perspectives; and creating documentary video portraitures (or composite cases)
of participants stories about learning and doing mathematics that can be used in
teacher preparation and professional development. Finally, the project will look
across the experiences over the duration of the project to develop a framework
that can be used to improve Latino students’ mathematics education experiences.
This project will provide a window into how Latino students may experience
inequities and can broaden mathematics educators’ views on opportunities to
engage Latino students in rigorous mathematics. The project will also broaden
the field’s understanding of how Latino students racial/ethnic and linguistic
identities influence their experiences learning mathematics. It will also
identify key factors that impact Latino students’ experiences in learning
mathematics to pinpoint specific areas where interventions and programs need to
be designed and implemented. An underlying assumption of the project is that
carefully capturing and understanding Latino students’ stories can illuminate
the strengths and resilience these students bring to their learning and doing of
mathematics. This is a Faculty Early Career Development Program project
responsive to a National Science Foundation-wide activity that offers the most
prestigious awards in support of early-career faculty who have the potential to
serve as academic role models in research and education. It was submitted to the
Discovery Research K-12 program, which seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics by
preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of innovative
resources, models, and tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
characterizes and analyses the developing mathematical identities of Latinx
students transitioning from elementary to middle grades mathematics. The
overarching research question for this study is: What are the developing stories
of learning and doing mathematics of Latino students as they transition from
elementary to middle school mathematics? To answer this question, this study is
divided into three phases: 1) Understanding and documenting the historical
context by examining policy documents, local newspaper articles, and doing focus
group interviews with community members; 2) Using ethnographic methods over two
years to explore students’ stories of learning and doing mathematics and
clinical interviews to understand how they think about and construct arguments
about mathematics (i.e., measurement, division, and algebraic patterning); and
3) Creating video-cases that can be used in teacher education. Traditional ways
of teaching mathematics perpetuate images of who can and cannot do mathematics
by not acknowledging contributions of other cultures to the mathematical
sciences (Gutiérrez, 2017) and the way mathematics has become a gatekeeper for
social mobility (Martin, Gholson, &amp; Leonard, 2010; Stinson, 2004). Focusing
on Latino students’ stories can illuminate teachers’ construction of equitable
learning spaces and how they define success for their Latino students. The
central hypothesis of this project is that elementary Latino students’ stories
can identify how race and language are influential to their mathematical
identities and how school and classroom practices may perpetuate inequities.
Finally, the data and video-cases will then be used to develop a conceptual
framework for understanding the development of the participating students’
developing mathematical identities. This framework will provide an in-depth
understanding of the developing racial/ethnic, linguistic, and mathematical
identities of the participating Latino students. The educational material
developed (e.g. video documentaries, discussion material) from this project will
be made available to all interested parties freely through the project website.
The distribution of these materials, along with further understanding of Latino
students' experiences learning mathematics, will help in developing programs and
interventions at the elementary and middle grade level to increase the
representation of Latino students in STEM careers. Additionally, identifying the
key factors impacting Latino students' experiences in learning mathematics can
pinpoint specific areas where interventions and programs still need to be
designed and implemented. Future projects could include the assessment of these
programs. This project will also inform the development of professional learning
experiences for prospective and practicing teachers working with Latino or other
marginalized students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.