* 2036061
* SBIR Phase II:  Monitoring and management of infant cranial development at the point-of-care
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Fereshteh Aalamifar, PediaMetrix, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alastair Monk
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,178,925.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project includes the support of newborn and infant
health services at the point-of-care (i.e., in pediatrician offices and at
home). This project will develop quantitative imagining and machine learning
technology that will allow pediatricians to evaluate and monitor the infantâ€™s
head development during well-child visits and/or remotely. If a child is
diagnosed with head deformations, early and effective therapy can be initiated.
Thus, a major impact of this project is significant reduction of the number of
children with cranial deformations who remain untreated and are exposed to
potential health risks. Improved clinical management of these conditions will
potentially lower the associated healthcare costs and improve patient outcome.
Our technology will be packaged as a smartphone or tablet app, enabling access
to lower-resourced communities and patients without access to specialized
clinics, as well as enabling care in periods of social distancing and reduced
clinical services. This project will ultimately increase awareness of the risks
of head deformations and improve pediatric health
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will develop quantitative imaging and machine learning
algorithms that accurately measure the cranial shape and size using photos of
the infant head taken with a smartphone. These parameters are commonly used to
monitor child development, and in the diagnosis and treatment planning of common
conditions with head deformations. In this project, we will fully automate the
measurements using neural networks and maximize accuracy with regression models
accounting for endogenous variables, such as sex and age. To generate accurate
head shape measurements even during operation by novice users, our new
algorithms based on machine learning will automatically select better images to
detect and classify the type of cranial deformation. By addressing errors
related to novice use of the tool, such as correcting for variations in the use
of the camera, the technology will ensure compliance and accessibility to
operators with variable technological skills. Furthermore, we will advance
reconstruction of the three-dimensional cranial shape utilizing modern smart
device technologies. This approach can handle object motion and can be
implemented directly on a smartphone/tablet to compute full three-dimensional
shape analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.