* 2036164
* FMSG: Shape-programmable elastic-plastic tubes as building blocks for origami
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Sachin Velankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 12/31/2023
* USD 495,372.00

The art of origami converts two-dimensional sheets such as paper into complex 3D
shapes. In recent years, engineers and scientists have adopted origami for
practical applications including deployable structures for the military or NASA,
self-folding robots that can be microfabricated in thin sheet form, and
actuators that respond to stimuli such as changes in temperature or acidity.
This Future Manufacturing Seed Grant (FMSG) project will develop the new concept
of tube origami in which complex 3D shapes are realized by bending tubes rather
than sheets. This award supports fundamental research on the design and future
manufacturing of tube origami, at a scale hitherto unexplored. Numerous
potential applications for tube origami are anticipated, e.g. reducing the
environmental impact of processes such as composite manufacturing or allowing
eco-friendly techniques such as 3D printing of concrete to be adopted more
broadly. This project will maintain US leadership in advanced manufacturing,
promote scientific progress, and increase national prosperity. It will foster
multi-disciplinary collaboration between investigators with diverse expertise in
plastics processing, computational mechanics, and polymer science. The research
will support the training of two graduate students at the University of
Pittsburgh, and several undergraduate researchers at the University of
Pittsburgh and the Penn State University. Both institutions are committed to
recruiting underrepresented minorities into research. The investigators will
conduct outreach at undergraduate and pre-college level on the translation of
origami art towards origami engineering to attract diverse students towards STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of elastic-plastic tube origami is
based on two ideas. The first is that the difference between elastic versus
inelastic deformation in a composite can be exploited to drive shape changes.
The second is the concept of using bending of tubes (rather than bending of
sheets) to create origami. This project will improve the scientific
understanding of the bending mechanics of elastic-plastic composites and apply
that knowledge to implement tube origami. The chief experimental tasks in this
project are to manufacture bilayered elastic-plastic tubes by coextrusion,
create surface "defects" on the tube using lasers, and quantify the bending of
the tubes in response to pressure. The chief computational tasks are to develop
3D finite element simulations to create a predictive model for the deformation
and use such simulations for rational design of the defect patterns needed to
approximate any desired sequence of bending. This Future Manufacturing research
is supported by the Divisions of Materials Research, Mathematical Sciences, and
Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.