* 2036193
* Field Testing of Concrete Buildings for Damage and Collapse Assessment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Halil Sezen, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 370,998.00

Many existing buildings in the United States are in danger of partial or
complete collapse after one or more columns fail during low probability or
extraordinary events such as blast, earthquake, fire or impact. In this award,
multiple data collection systems will be used to monitor the damage progression
and dynamic behavior of two reinforced concrete parking garage structures while
several columns are physically removed from the structures prior to their
scheduled demolition on the Ohio State University campus. Data from drones, a
stereo camera data collection system, and various sensors will be used to
capture the movement and change in dynamic response of the structures after each
column loss. There is limited experimental research on collapse because it is
difficult to construct and test full-scale building specimens in the laboratory,
and such large-scale testing is expensive. This project will advance current
structural damage and collapse assessment procedures using the collected
experimental data, thus filling a critical gap in current state of knowledge.
The research results will be disseminated through publications and presentations
and transferred to the community through interactions with professional
organizations developing technical documents and guidelines for building
collapse assessment and structural design. Project data will be archived and
made publicly available in the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-CI.org). This award
will contribute to NSF's role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Program (NEHRP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advancements in data fusion and
machine vision-based methods enable automatic detection of damage and monitoring
of dynamic response of structures. The experimental data collected by drones,
cameras, LiDAR, displacement sensors, and strain gauges will be fused to capture
the change in dynamic characteristics of the test structures after each column
loss. Three-dimensional (3D) load redistribution within a building is poorly
understood because of lack of test data and the difficulty in analyzing this
phenomenon from field observations. This project will: 1) develop simplified
structural models to characterize stability and load redistribution mechanisms
after one or more columns are suddenly lost in a building, 2) introduce data
fusion techniques for damage detection and monitoring, and 3) develop 4D or
time-dependent 3D mapping of the buildings to advance engineering understanding
of dynamic performance and collapse mechanism of
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.