* 2036232
* SBIR Phase I:  WeatherHive: High Resolution Environmental Sensing Using Nanodrones
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,08/31/2022
* James Peverill, GREENSIGHT AGRONOMICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2022
* USD 255,996.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to advance an improved system to sense and map atmospheric conditions
using nano-drones that are the size of small birds; these systems have benefited
from recent innovations in miniature power electronics and flight control
sensors. The proposed project leverages the safety, cost and portability
advantages of these small form factor aircraft in a system of coordinated drones
flying in formation to measure wind, temperature, humidity and gas
concentrations. Each flight of the swarm can cover hundreds of square miles,
creating a high resolution 3D map of atmospheric properties. This enables the
study of wind currents and gas movement for applications including detection of
urban gas leaks, smog movement, and forest fire detection. Satellite
measurements can be validated and improved through aerial measurements. This
research will benefit public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project will advance new software to analyze and optimize nano-drones. This
project will expand the understanding of miniaturized (under 100 g) drone
performance and enable the development of advanced nano-drones to carry out
valuable sensing missions. This project will: (1) validate an optimization
framework with laboratory test data; (2) develop a novel, portable drone docking
station allowing for easy launching, landing and charging of hundreds or
thousands of drones by a single operator, eventually enabling fully automated
use for continuous monitoring applications; and (3) develop visualization and
analysis tools to facilitate data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.