* 2036267
* STTR Phase II:  Multi-functional, Scalable Graphene-Based Protective Coatings for High Energy Density Lithium-Ion Cathodes
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Mark Hersam, VOLEXION, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2023
* USD 993,951.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is to enable improved safety for next
generation lithium-ion batteries, used in many applications, such as
electronics, electric vehicles, and other specialty applications. With a
projected growth over 10% annually over the next decade, the lithium-ion cathode
material market is expected to exceed $30 B by 2030, creating a significant
commercial potential. This project will develop a coating to improve the
durability, capacity, and low-temperature performance of lithium-ion batteries;
it will be deployed industrially in a modular and flexible fashion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase II project proposes to develop and
validate an industrial manufacturing prototype of a graphene-based coating
technology for rapid commercialization of emerging high-performance cathode
materials. The resulting innovation will demonstrate the commercial viability of
the graphene functionalization to address key technical issues facing the next-
generation Ni-rich high energy density cathodes such as chemical instability,
narrow operating conditions, and high cell impedance growth. This technology
provides a comprehensive solution to precisely target these pain points through
integration of nanotechnology with traditional lithium-ion battery systems. The
overarching goals of the proposed research activities include (1) development of
fully continuous-flow graphene-based coating precursor production; (2)
implementation of pilot-scale roll-to-roll graphene-based coating process for
Ni-rich cathode microparticles; (3) development and validation of alternate
coating pathways for early validation, and (4) pouch cell prototyping efforts
for commercial validation of increases in cycle life, chemical stability, and
rate and temperature performance. This project will advance the technology for
seamless integration into existing battery manufacturing
lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.