* 2036503
* SBIR Phase I:  COGNITIVE INTELLIGENCE CAPABILITIES IN REAL-TIME EDGE COMPUTING AND DISTRIBUTED INTERNET OF THINGS (IOT) PLATFORMS
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Prasenjit Bhadra, RANIAL SYSTEMS INC
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 01/31/2023
* USD 248,900.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to demonstrate the cognitive runtime
capabilities of edge native Internet of Things (IoT) platform that offers
significant gain in incremental operational intelligence, real-time monitoring,
and autonomic functions. As the edge computing capabilities infiltrate into
industrial IoT application domains to overcome the limitation of centralized
computing (latency, bandwidth, and single point of failure), constrained
hardware (compute and storage) resources, and data availability. The proposed
technology may adjust with the changing cyber-physical environment, extend
situational awareness, protect against cyber security threats, minimize the cost
of scaling network and cloud infrastructures, and deliver extreme responsiveness
within mission critical ecosystems such as smart grid surveillance, remote
patient monitoring, autonomous vehicles, and defense weaponry
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will research a cognitive internet-of-things (IoT) runtime that
enhances process automation and analytical capabilities of edge native M2M/IoT
solutions. The recent trends of edge computing have created service
opportunities catering to real-time use cases closer to the operating
environment. The most common predefined rule-based logic and structured
intelligence on edge nodes fails to deliver scalability, autonomy,
interoperability, and intelligent control operations. The artificial
intelligence (AI) / Machine Learning (ML) models usually perform better on cloud
or multiclause server infrastructure in a batch mode. This invention closes the
existing gap and further advances the distributed edge computing capabilities by
introducing Cognitive AI models that introduce semantic learning with
incremental data from within embedded runtime and develop reasoning through
interactions within the connected environment. The research and development on
Per-to-Peer collaboration across the edge nodes overcomes the limitations of
constrained resource and executes workflows. The runtime architecture simulates
the human nervous systemâ€™s anatomical layers and systematic coordination of
neuro-motor operations. The proposed design patterns of analytical models and
distributed intelligence will introduce a realistic implementation of smarter
decision support systems on the edge that could adapt to ever changing
operational contexts and introduce diverse intelligent operations through
collaborative learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.