* 2036037
* Protein Regulators of 3D Genome Architecture: Dynamics, Mechanism and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Anders Hansen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 01/31/2024
* USD 760,000.00

The research project will contribute to our understanding of 3D genome folding.
Proper regulation of gene expression is essential in all biological organisms.
In mammals, most genes are regulated by distal enhancers that can be located far
away from their target genes on the linear genome. Perhaps for this reason,
mammalian genomes are folded into 3D domains that ensure enhancers interact with
the appropriate genes through space. This research will provide key insights
into an understudied potential regulator of 3D genome domains. The project will
create interdisciplinary training opportunities for a graduate student and a
post-doctoral associate, supporting their development as scientists in academia,
biomedical industry and/or related careers. Additional broader impact will be
achieved through integration of the imaging aspects of the project with an
undergraduate course at MIT (20.309), summer research opportunities for
undergraduates from underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines and through
outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CTCF is the best-known insulator
between enhancers and promoters in mammalian cells. CTCF, together with the
cohesin complex, fold the genome into chromatin loops and loop domains. However,
not all loops have CTCF at their anchors, and since CTCF is expressed in all
cell types, it is currently difficult to explain why loops differ between cell
types. Moreover, several studies have provided evidence that other DNA-binding
proteins are strongly enriched at loop anchors. The research will study such a
candidate looping factor, ZNF143, in detail. Acute depletion followed by Micro-C
will reveal its role in 3D genome organization and looping. Live-cell and super-
resolution microscopy will reveal its dynamics, target-search mechanism,
residence time, and provide quantitative constraints on 3D genome models. Taken
together, the research will expand knowledge of critical genome organizing
factors beyond CTCF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.