* 2036802
* FMNet: NYC Future Manufacturing Collective
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Shuran Song, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2025
* USD 526,000.00

Extensive use of sensors, computers and software tools in product design and
manufacturing requires traditional manufacturing education to evolve for the new
generation of cyber-manufacturing systems. While universities will continue to
provide education to build a fundamental knowledge base for their students, the
widening gap between the education delivered and the skills required by industry
needs innovative solutions to prepare the workforce for future generations of
manufacturing. The New York City Future Manufacturing Collective (NYC-FMC) will
develop a network of multidisciplinary researchers, educators, and stakeholders
in New York City to explore future cyber manufacturing research through the lens
of the worker's relationship to an increasingly complex and technologically
driven environment and set of processes. The NYC-FMC will advance related
technologies as well as the underlying systems, processes, and organizational
conditions to which these interfaces are connected, to change and drive the
roles of people in manufacturing. NYC-FMC will organize a variety of activities,
including an internship program for students to obtain exposure to industrial
environments by engaging major manufacturing based corporations, producing a
newsletter to define the state-of-the-art in manufacturing technologies and the
new manufacturing ecosystem, and organizing two manufacturing-focused symposia
each year. The program will build a coalition of multidisciplinary faculty from
NYC universities, industry executives and technologists, investors,
entrepreneurs, public sector and other relevant manufacturing ecosystem
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NYC-FMC will take a convergence approach
to generate novel ideas, frameworks, and hypotheses to catalyze future research,
partnerships, and industrial innovation in manufacturing and cyber-physical
systems. The network convened by RLab, a multi-university center administered by
New York University (NYU) Tandon School of Engineering, will rely on faculty
leadership at NYU and Columbia University, as well as a broad network of
researchers from other NYC institutions, in the areas of manufacturing, computer
vision, robotics, machine learning, virtual and augmented reality, human
behavior and cognition, economics and other relevant areas. Executives and
technologists from industry, including large manufacturing concerns with a
connection to the greater NYC region and beyond and startup companies in the
Brooklyn Navy Yardâ€™s New Lab, will provide stimulus from the private sector and
help create conditions to advance education and research goals. This coalition
will build a novel education and workforce training program framework to create
a learning and feedback loop between researchers, industry partners, and the
workforce focused on the future cyber-manufacturing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.