* 2036542
* STTR Phase I:  The Coupling of COVID-19 Respiratory Droplet Adsorption and Photocatalysis through Metal Organic Frameworks
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,03/31/2022
* OSMAN OZDEMIR, framergy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2022
* USD 247,457.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is the prevention of the spread of SARS-CoV-2
(COVID-19) through airborne droplet isolation and destruction. Living in a post-
pandemic world means that the virus must be mitigated in our surroundings. The
proposed technology offers a method for viral removal and inactivation, and it
is expected to offer protection against emergent strains and spread of other
future viruses. The proposed technology is already being used to improve the
energy efficiency of heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems,
which have been shown to be a major concentrators of the virus. The chemistry as
a coating can be rapidly applied to any negative air pressure devices, such as
masks (respirators and surgical), and air purifiers, making cluster indoor
locations safer for inhabitants and workers. The proposed technology can
inactivate viruses using visible light, offering cost and safety advantages over
ultraviolet (UV) inactivation, as UV is not safe for skin exposure. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This STTR project will develop a metal-organic framework (MOF)-based
respiratory droplet adsorption coating, which, when activated, will
photocatalytically destroy COVID-19 and other airborne contaminants. The project
proposes to couple the water adsorptive capacity of nanostructured titanium
metal organic frameworks with their photocatalytic oxidation capability to
destroy COVID-19 in situ to make indoor spaces safer. The project will advance a
coordination polymer-based chemistry which can render COVID-19 inactive through
microdroplet isolation and photocatalytic decontamination. Based on their highly
tunable priorities and catalytic properties, metal-organic frameworks (MOFs)
constitute an effective solution to capture COVID-19 micro-droplets and treat
them for their viral content. Preliminary test results have showed that that
MOFs can photocatalytically render COVID-19 inactive but there are still
stability risks to mitigate. The high valence titanium-based MOFs can address
the chemical stability challenges of MOFs, which can eliminate the technical
hurdles associated with long term stability, cyclic harvesting of micro-air
droplets at low relative humidity and their integration into existing heating,
ventilation and air conditioning systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.