* 2036249
* STTR Phase I:  Rebooting Artificial Intelligence Inference with a New Configurable Computing Fabric
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Arif Iqbal, CROSSTALK LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 01/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve data harnessing and real-time
intelligent decision making. The proposed technology is a new reconfigurable
computing platform capable of performing a variety of Artificial Intelligence
(AI) tasks in a distributed and parallel manner to deliver the best performance
at a lower cost. The end products are AI accelerator chips that can be
integrated in Accelerator Cards or as co-processors to be applied in both server
and edge computing solutions to accelerate AI tasks. The general market need is
particularly acute for data center and cloud computing industries where major
pain points are performance bottlenecks and high costs due to custom chips or
reliance on graphic processing units. The core value propositions of the
proposed technology are faster compute, programmability at run-time, and easier
integration with existing software to enable execution of popular machine
learning frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase (SBIR) Phase I project centers around a novel computing approach
where computing and memory elements are parallel and distributed, and
interconnection between computing elements is flexible. The project develops an
integrated circuit chip that can be reconfigured at run-time to behave as a
custom application-specific integrated circuit for each running Artificial
Intelligence (AI) application to deliver the optimal performance. It will
overcome the memory bottleneck that traditional computing technologies face
where data needs to be continuously loaded to and from memory. The proposed
technology also addresses the adaptivity challenge for evolving AI models and
datasets. The proposed activities include a chip fabrication using a 28nm
commercial semiconductor foundry process, extensive benchmarking of the new
technology for scalability, adaptability to data size and shape, and research on
a software interface to execute codes developed by existing machine learning
frameworks in the new chip. The prototype chip is expected to demonstrate
distributed and parallel computing capabilities along with dynamic
reconfigurability. The benchmarking work is anticipated to reveal at least an
order of magnitude improvement over more conventional graphics processing unit
based approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.