* 2036849
* FMRG: Digital Light Manufacturing for the Circular Economy
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Jay Keasling, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2025
* USD 3,706,112.00

As products change over time, so do the processes that manufacture them. At the
beginning of the twentieth century, most consumer goods were made from natural
fibers, wood, ceramics, and metal. As the century progressed, petroleum-based
plastics became the preferred materials for most consumer products. Replacing
petroleum-based plastics in the economy is a serious challenge, and converting
renewable raw materials to recyclable products is critical. One goal of this
project is to synthesize monomers (the building blocks of polymers) from biomass
sugars. Another goal is to design monomers that make polymers that are easy to
recycle. The third goal is to demonstrate a digital light manufacturing (DLM)
process that produces high-quality 3D-printed parts using those monomers. The
ultimate objective is to cycle the monomers through the product and back to
monomers, creating a circular path for the material, thereby reducing waste.
Also, interactive activities will be developed for Kâ€“12 and public audiences to
demonstrate the circular material flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemically
recyclable photopolymerizable cycloolefin resins with properties tailored for
DLM will be designed. The ability to form reversible polymer bonds will guide
monomer design. Enzymes and microbial cells for biomanufacturing DLM monomers
from renewable feedstocks will be developed based on polyketide synthases
(PKSs). DLM processes for photo-polymerization of cycloolefin resins will be
developed and improved. Photocatalyst systems, resin rheology, and
instrumentation will be co-developed to digitally manufacture precision parts
from circular cycloolefin resins. An extensive suite of mechanical tests will be
carried out on structures printed from candidate resin formulations for both
hard and elastomeric 3D-printed products, based on volumetric 3D printing via
tomographic reconstruction. The rigidity, strength, and fracture toughness of
3D-printed cycloolefin resins will be benchmarked against leading conventional
photopolymer resins, to guide material and process selection and maximize their
impact on future manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
supported by the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering Program (ENG/CBET/CBE),
the Synstems and Synthetic Biology Program (BIO/MCB/SSB) and the Chemical
Catalysis Program (MPS/CHE/CAT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.