* 2036484
* SBIR Phase I:  Architectural Epidemiology: Leveraging Machine Learning and Spatial Data at Scale to Understand Health Outcomes
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,09/30/2022
* James Peraino, SPATIO METRICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 09/30/2022
* USD 255,882.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the ability to leverage architecture as a new
tool for advancing health and wellbeing. A growing body of evidence demonstrates
that hospital architecture systemically affects patient health, operational
efficiency, and patient satisfaction. However, architects often lack the tools
to reliably predict how design choices will impact building operations. Often
hospitals and clinics designs fall short with building owners not able to
achieve organizational metrics and goals, and patients can see poorer quality of
care, increased medical errors, and even higher mortality rates. The commercial
impact will stem from a software platform that equips architects with no-code
workflows necessary to deploy data-driven design while managing project
timelines and internal costs. Although the Phase I project focuses on healthcare
architecture, the broader impact will be that architects will be able to design
all buildings to optimize health, productivity, and organizational
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project will enable development of 1) algorithms that generate structured
architectural data capturing spatial qualities that affect occupant health, 2)
data visualization interfaces for exploring and validating spatial data and
health data jointly, and 3) statistical and machine learning models for
identifying meaningful relationships between architectural characteristics and
health outcomes across large-scale datasets. These tools will be tested and
evaluated by conducting a proof of concept study with a large health system. The
goal of the study is to evaluate the efficacy of untested statistical machine
learning methods to identify meaningful relationships between architecture and
health outcomes. The proposed research will provide new types of insight into
architecture's role in affecting health outcomes, providing a novel approach to
data-driven design. Though the focus of this proposal is on architectural data,
the principles explored will push boundaries of current limits by 1)
incorporating qualitative and quantitative data in machine learning models, 2)
assessing new modes of interpretability via data visualization, and 3) advancing
methods for working with sparse but rich datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.