* 2036684
* SBIR Phase I:  Assistive Robots for Personal Care and COVID-19 Protection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Michael Dooley, LABRADOR SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 03/31/2024
* USD 255,756.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project advances the state-of-the art of an emerging
class of vision-based, autonomous navigation technologies to open new
possibilities for low-cost/high-performance personal assistive robots. The
robotics solution enables mobility-impaired individuals to have more agency over
their environment and enjoy a higher quality-of-life. This helps address the
severe shortage of caregivers for the elderly and post-acute care patients by
empowering individuals to maintain their independence, extending the impact of
caregivers, and reducing the cost of care in both home and facility settings.
Additionally, by providing affordable and reliable isolation support in COVID-19
care settings, the proposed solution can help decrease the financial burden and
increase the public health outcomes associated with COVID-19 disease management.
The core robotics solution has an immediate addressable market of 11 million
high-needs users in the U.S. alone, with projected revenues of roughly $1.65
Billion five years after product launch. Further commercialization opportunities
come from licensing parts of the developed navigation technology for other
robotics applications and developing an ecosystem of complementary products
around the core robotics solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to enable a new generation of
assistive service robots that are comparable to commercial robots in
performance, but significantly more affordable for individual use and personal
care applications. The innovation adopts emerging visual positioning
technologies from Augmented Reality to enable robust navigation for mobile
robots using low-cost, consumer-grade electronics, while addressing a key
limitation of visual positioning systems namely, that external lighting
conditions and other changes in an environment can dramatically impact their
performance. The innovation addresses these challenges via a combination of
hardware and software that learns and stabilizes the highest value visual
elements of the environment to maintain persistency across lighting conditions
and long periods of time â€” a development critical to making assistive robots
cost-effective for adoption at a large scale. Research objectives include: fully
developing and integrating the visual persistency system, to achieve accurate
and replicable robot navigation performance across a representative range of
lighting conditions and visual characteristics of the target operating
environments and benchmarking the resulting solution against state-of-the art
technologies, to demonstrate its superior performance (i.e., it can successfully
localize in at least 90% of cases where other solutions
fail).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.