* 2036186
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Phylogenomics with the Fossil Record: Sea Urchins as a Model Clade for Macroevolutionary Research
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Gregory Rouse, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 03/31/2024
* USD 673,107.00

Spine-covered, globular sea urchins are iconic marine animals common in kelp
forests and coral reefs, where they are often the main consumers of algae and
other organisms. By contrast, sand dollars are extremely flattened urchins that
generally live buried in sandy seafloors, feeding by picking tiny particles of
food from the sediment. Multiple lines of evidence suggest these two groups are
closely related, originating from an ancestor whose body form and ecology were
broadly similar to those of modern sea urchins. This suggests a striking
contrast in evolutionary pathways: while some lineages have barely changed over
hundreds of millions of years, others have innovated dramatically. Identifying
the mechanisms that underlie these different trajectories is necessary to
understand the processes generating and maintaining biological diversity.
However, doing so requires accurate reconstructions of events that took place in
the deep past, and integrating genomic, morphological, and paleontological
information. The project highlights these charismatic animals as models for
studying evolutionary change in a variety of outreach modes including
undergraduate research programs, teacher workshops, and displays in public
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on developing phylogenomic
resources to improve our knowledge of evolutionary relationships among living
sea urchins, sand dollars and allies (collectively known as echinoids). Given
the clade’s outstanding fossil record, these data will be combined with
morphological and stratigraphic information using a total-evidence dating
approach, allowing all major lineages of living and fossil echinoids to be
placed in a common, time-calibrated tree of life. Using phylogenetic comparative
methods, the project will reveal evolutionary processes associated with the
origins of both irregular echinoids and sand dollars, two major events in body-
plan innovation. Analyses will rely on a large-scale dataset of echinoid body
measurements to explore changes in evolutionary rate and modularity, and
correlate shifts in these metrics with known events of developmental innovation
and ecological specialization. The contributions of ecological, developmental
and morphological traits to speciation and extinction dynamics will be assessed
using state-dependent models of diversification. Finally, ontology-informed
ancestral state reconstructions will help identify the number of independent
origins (and losses) of the sand dollar morphotype, as well as the relative
timing of these events. By combining recent developments in phylogenomics and
phylogenetic paleobiology, this project will establish echinoids as a model
clade in macroevolutionary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.