* 2036362
* SBIR Phase I:  Quantum cutting downconversion layers for improved solar PV performance
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Jared Silvia, BLUEDOT PHOTONICS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2022
* USD 255,927.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to accelerate the deployment of solar power
in the United States. The technology can potentially make solar panels up to 16%
more efficient and result in up to 10% lower costs. This enables solar power to
potentially become more economically viable across larger parts of the United
States. This technology can serve the existing 110 GW solar panel market. Global
commercialization of the technology can increase solar energy production by
14,000 TWh and reduce carbon emissions from the power sector by 6 billion
tonnes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project develops a light conversion material that combines a light
absorber material, a wide bandgap inorganic perovskite, with a highly efficient,
quantum cutting near-IR emitter, a ytterbium dopant. The material is applied to
existing solar panel components using a rapid vapor deposition process to create
drop-in replacements, avoiding changes to the panel production process.
Traditional silicon solar panels poorly convert ultraviolet light into
electricity, generating substantial waste heat and degrading panels. The light
conversion materials developed here utilizes that traditionally wasted light,
thereby boosting overall panel efficiencies. This project will confirm the
feasibility of the technology for solar applications by building coupon solar
modules, measuring power performance improvements, and confirming intrinsic
device stability through environmental stress tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.