* 2036109
* Novel mammalian cell-based devices that sense and respond
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Laura Segatori, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 01/31/2024
* USD 425,741.00

Cells can be engineered to respond in observable ways to environmental stimuli.
These cells can be embedded into devices that can quantify the signal generated
by the cell response. The goal of this project is to develop cell engineering
strategies to improve the design of cells that respond to specific cues. This
will enable the design of devices for a variety of applications from diagnostic
to therapeutic. This project will also provide educational and training
opportunities to students belonging to underrepresented groups. Specifically,
training, research, and mentoring opportunities will be offered to high school
teachers and students from the Greater Houston area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Receptor engineering has created innovative approaches to
endow cells with seemingly endless sensing capabilities. Most of this has been
accomplished by rewiring native ligand-receptor interactions or evolving non-
native or de novo designed receptors linked to orthogonal transduction signaling
modules. The performance of current ligand-based sensors – in terms of system
control and dynamic properties – is strictly dependent on the mechanism of
transduction. This may not recapitulate accurately the features of the cellular
response to the ligand and the intended function of the cellular device. To
address this issue, synthetic biology strategies to engineer cellular devices
that generate user-defined outputs will be explored. This approach could
dramatically change the way cellular devices that sense and respond to the
environment are designed. The resulting strategy can be applied to virtually any
process associated with a transcriptional response. This would eliminate the
need to rewire ligand-receptor interactions or evolve synthetic receptor-based
devices, and may be used in combination with existing ligand-receptor based
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.