* 2036176
* Novel first-principles methods for studying thermoelastic properties of materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Angelo Bongiorno, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2024
* USD 301,068.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational
research activities aimed at developing novel methods to calculate thermoelastic
parameters of materials, such as the coefficient of thermal expansion, and
linear and non-linear elastic constants at different temperatures and pressures.
Materials expand or contract when subjected to changes of temperature and/or
pressure. The changes in the material's volume upon heating or induced by
external mechanical forces have an atomistic origin, as they emerge from the
quantum motion of atoms, their spatial arrangement, and the nature of the
chemical bonds between the atoms forming the material. Calculating the material
coefficients related to changes in volume as a function of temperature and
pressure is of both fundamental and technological importance. For example,
calculating the coefficient of thermal expansion of materials is crucial for
designing reliable technological devices operating at variable temperatures, and
predicting the values of elastic constants of minerals over extended intervals
of temperature and pressure is essential to interpret seismic data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will develop novel, general, and
computationally efficient methods to calculate thermoelastic parameters by using
accurate and parameter-free atomistic descriptions of a material. The PI will
apply the new methods to study the thermoelastic properties of minerals of
geological relevance and metal alloys for structural applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the training and education of
graduate and undergraduate students. The PI will develop a simulation-based
physical-chemistry course for undergraduate students. Innovative strategies will
be adopted to attract minority students to attend the course and conduct
undergraduate research in the PI's lab. In addition, the PI will offer two-week
long summer programs for high school students aimed at showcasing computer
simulations as means to learn, explore, and do
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports computational research activities aimed at developing and applying
methods to calculate thermoelastic parameters of materials from first
principles. Coefficients of thermal expansion and elastic constants are
important materials parameters. Novel and efficient first-principles methods for
routine calculations of these thermoelastic parameters are needed to compensate
the lack of experimental data, to study thermoelastic behaviors of materials
under extreme conditions that are unattainable experimentally, and to enable the
high-throughput screening of useful mechanical parameters at relevant
environmental conditions, such as the ideal strength of metal alloys for
structural applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will
develop novel, general, and computationally efficient methods relying on the
quasi-harmonic approximation. These methods will allow calculation of the
coefficient of thermal expansion, and both second- and, most notably, third-
order elastic constants of a material at finite temperature and constant volume.
Furthermore, thanks to the use of numerical extrapolation techniques, the novel
methods will allow the obtainment, at virtually no extra computational cost, a
full thermoelastic characterization of a material in the neighborhood of an
arbitrary reference state. In this project, these methods will be used to
predict the equation of state and elastic constants at high pressures and
temperatures of low-symmetry minerals of geological relevance, and to study the
thermal expansion properties and ideal strength at finite temperature of
selected high-entropy metallic alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports the training and education of graduate and undergraduate students. The
PI will develop a simulation-based physical-chemistry course for undergraduate
students. Innovative strategies will be adopted to attract minority students to
attend the course and conduct undergraduate research in the PI's lab. In
addition, the PI will offer two-week long summer programs for high school
students aimed at showcasing computer simulations as a means to learn, explore,
and do science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.