* 2036867
* FMSG: Biologically Assembled and Recycled Construction and Structural Materials (BRICS)
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Robin Gerlach, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 499,516.00

Cement and concrete building materials are ubiquitous in the built environment
but require high energy, time, labor, and material resources to manufacture.
Cement manufacturing necessitates high temperature processing, and is associated
with 5-9 percent of anthropogenic carbon emissions. Concrete, which includes
cement and fine and coarse aggregates, requires increasingly scarce materials.
Most cement and concrete building materials cannot be reused or recycled. In
this Future Manufacturing Seed Grant (FMSG) project, the investigators will
develop reusable and recyclable modular building materials that are produced by
microorganisms via a processes known as biomineralization and biocementation.
Graduate and undergraduate students will participate in this project and gai
interdisciplinary training in ecomanufacturing, civil engineering, material
science and microbiology. High school teachers will also be engaged in the
research project and will develop classroom activities based on biocemetation.
K-12 classroom materials will be widely disseminated. In addition, instructional
materials in ecomanufacturing will be developed and disseminated to a local
community college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will pursue the first
steps in a new paradigm for the eco-manufacturing of building and infrastructure
materials that overcomes the high material, time, energy, and labor needs of
traditional concrete manufacturing. They will use microbes to construct,
reversibly interlock (enabling re-use), break down and recycle modular building
materials (MBMs). These MBMs could be assembled to build load-bearing structures
and infrastructure. When the structures are no longer wanted, the MBMs could
either be separated and then interlocked again in a different structure or
broken down and recycled for the next generation of MBMs. In this Seed Grant,
the investigators will explore four primary challenges to identify the potential
for microbes in eco-manufacturing building materials: (1) Constructing MBMs
using fungi and/or bacteria, (2) Reversibly interlocking the MBMs using
biomineral glues, (3) Breaking down the MBMs to their components using fungal
metabolisms, and (4) Recycling the components into new
MBMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation Division of the Engineering Directorate,
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the
Biological Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.