* 2036690
* SBIR Phase I: Artificial Intelligence (AI) Enabled 3-Dimensional (3D) Imaging for COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,09/30/2021
* Cristian Atria, nView medical Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve COVID-19 treatments by providing
imaging information to assess the severity and progression of the disease. Chest
computed tomography (CT) has been shown to be sensitive to COVID-19 via the
observation of ground-glass opacities and is being used on patients with acute
symptoms. Practical considerations such as high radiation to the patient and
cross contamination risk from moving the patient for imaging must be taken into
account in the decision to image with CT. A 3D imaging solution that is low
cost, low radiation, and mobile could provide advantages and bring quality of
care while integrating efficiently in the hospital workflow. Along with
addressing the current crisis, the usage of this solution to address other
respiratory diseases would secure strong commercial potential for this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project seeks to develop and validate an artificial intelligence
(AI)-enabled 3D imaging reconstruction algorithm that can be used to assess the
severity and progression of respiratory diseases such as COVID-19. Current chest
imaging technologies can either provide adequate image quality or efficient
imaging of the lungs, but not both. Two major advances could make the imaging
more efficient while also providing the required image quality. Scatter modeling
has been shown to be successful in improving image quality when reconstructing
from few radiographs; Preliminary data shows how Machine Learning (ML) can be
integrated to enhance efficient imaging to provide higher quality images. A 3D
image creation algorithm that models X-ray scatter and uses ML to reconstruct 3D
images from rapid radiographs will enable using 3D imaging for respiratory
diseases including COVID-19. This algorithm will be validated on cadaveric
models to assess if an AI-enabled imaging system that is mobile, that can be
used bedside, and that is easily draped for sterile utilization is
feasible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.