* 2037504
* Revealing Soil Hydraulic Properties
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Robert Horton, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2024
* USD 495,359.00

Understanding of water storage and movement in soil is critically important to
solve a wide range of agricultural, engineering, and environmental problems. The
soil hydraulic properties that control water storage and movement are highly
variable in time and space, and difficult to measure with existing technologies.
This research seeks to develop models that use more easily-measured soil thermal
and electrical property values to estimate soil hydraulic property values. These
models can be used with existing measurement technologies by scientists and
engineers working to address a wide range of national and global challenges
related to food, energy, and environmental security. The project will also
provide training opportunities for a post-doctoral scholar, and both graduate
and undergraduate student researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil hydraulic
properties control transitions in soil water content, thereby driving myriad
processes in the terrestrial hydrologic cycle. Capability to measure and predict
soil hydraulic properties is thus critically important, yet remains a major
limitation for the hydrologic sciences. Owing to relatable influences of soil
structure on hydraulic, electrical, and thermal properties, it is hypothesized
that more-easily measured soil electrical and thermal properties can be used
together as surrogates to determine hydraulic properties. The proposed
investigation seeks both to better understand fundamental relationships among
soil hydraulic, electrical, and thermal properties for intact soils, and to
develop approaches for in situ estimation of soil hydraulic properties from
surrogate electrical and thermal property data. Thermo-time domain reflectometer
sensors will be used to measure soil electrical, thermal, and hydraulic
properties of intact and repacked samples from field sites in North Carolina and
Iowa, as well as for in situ measurements in the field. The collected dataset
will support modeling efforts for the research team as well as the broader
research community. If successful, the proposed work will immediately enable in
situ hydraulic property determinations that are not currently possible with any
existing approaches. And because the fundamental measurements are thermal and
electrical properties, the basic approach can also potentially be extended to a
range of sensing platforms. The project will include both graduate and
undergraduate research experience (REU) training opportunities, and a short-
course for non-affiliated researchers on the measurement of soil thermal and
electrical properties. The proposed effort aims to advance discovery and
understanding for fundamental hydrological processes while promoting teaching,
training, and learning for diverse students and other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.