* 2037429
* Building Accessible Pathways for a Broad Workforce of Mathematics and Science Teachers
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Gouranga Saha, Lincoln University
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 07/31/2021
* USD 49,997.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) supports conferences and workshops that seek to increase the research and
education capacity of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
students and faculty at HBCUs. Lincoln University in Missouri, in partnership
with the University of Missouri â€“ Columbia, will hold a workshop to address
issues of STEM teacher recruitment, retention, and lack of diversity. University
faculty and administrators, principals, superintendents, and teachers will
participate in the two-day student conference on May 19-20, 2021 at Lincoln
University. Plans include changing the meeting to a virtual format, if needed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference activities will be guided by three goals:
1) to provide structure and guidance for an online alternative certification
program for mathematics and science teachers; 2) to develop a multi-pronged
recruitment plan for the alternative certification program; and 3) to identify a
viable research collaboration between Lincoln University and the University of
Missouri related to the alternative certification of mathematics and science
teachers of color. The conference will have substantial impact on the
partnership and collaborations between mathematics and science educators at
Lincoln University and the University of Missouri. The inclusion of state
representatives, as well as various school and community stakeholders, at the
conference can lead to broader impacts across the state of
Missouri.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.