* 2037598
* LIA: Collaborative Research: Biogeography, Population Genetics, and Ecology of two Common Species of Fleshy Red Algae in McMurdo Sound
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Filipe Alberto, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 03/31/2024
* USD 96,632.00

Climate change is changing the number of sea-ice free days in coastal polar
environments, which is impacting Antarctic communities. This study will evaluate
the change in macroalgae (seaweed) communities to increased light availability
in order to predict if macroalgae will be able to spread to newly ice-free
locations faster than invertebrates (e.g., sponges, bryozoans, tunicates, and
polychaetes) in shallow underwater rocky habitats. Study sites will include
multiple locations in McMurdo Sound, Ross Sea, Antarctica. This study will
establish patterns in plant properties, genetic diversity and reproductive
characteristics of two species of seaweeds, Phyllophora antarctica and Iridaea
cordata in relation to depth and light. Long-term changes will be assesed by
comparing to results from a survey in 1980. This will be the first study in the
region to estimate the potential effects of climate, in particular reductions in
annual sea ice cover and resulting increase in light intensity and duration, on
shifts in macroalgal communities in McMurdo Sound. Three-dimensional
photogrammetry will also be used to evaluate benthic community structure on the
newly discovered offshore Dellbridge Seamount. Visualization from the video
footage will be shared with web-based interactive applications to engage and
educate the public in polar ecology and factors causing changes in marine
community ecosystem structure in this important
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is evaluating macroalgae biogeography
in Antarctic coastal waters near McMurdo Sound, a relatively understudied region
that is experiencing large changes in fast sea ice coverage. The population
ecology and genetic diversity of nearshore shallow and deeper offshore benthic
macroalgal communities of Phyllophora antarctica and Iridaea cordata will be
assessed for percentage cover, biomass, blade length, and reproductive
characteristics at seven locations: Cape Royds, Cape Evans, Little Razorback
Islands, Turtle Rock, Arrival Heights, Granite Harbor, and Dellbridge Seamount
in McMurdo Sound, Antarctica. The team is also assessing differential
reproductive successes at different depths and comparing results to populations
surveyed in 1980. The genetic diversity of the two species is being estimated
using a combination of whole genome sequencing and species-specific
microsatellite genetic markers. Samples from this study will be compared to
samples collected from other regions in Antarctica such as the South Shetland
Islands and Antarctic Peninsula. In addition, a macroalgal assemblage and 3D
models of the community structure will be generated using photogrammetry from
the newly discovered Dellbridge Seamount that is located 2 km offshore in
McMurdo Sound. With the addition of photogrammetry and 3D visualization to this
research, web-based applications will be used to engage and educate the public
in subtidal polar ecology, population genetics, and the importance of Antarctic
science to their lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.