* 2037360
* RAPID: Investigating Challenges to Matriculation and Completion for Underrepresented STEM Graduate Students during the COVID-19 Pandemic
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Suzanne Ortega, Council of Graduate Schools
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 12/31/2021
* USD 236,486.00

This RAPID project aims to empirically examine obstacles to the matriculation,
persistence, and completion of underrepresented minority (URM) students in STEM
graduate programs during the COVID-19 pandemic. The underlying assumptions of
the project are that URMs may experience greater economic hardship and erosion
in motivation to complete a graduate degree during crises. To address this
problem, the Council of Graduate Schools will collaborate with the Council for
Opportunity in Education and the Council of Historically Black Graduate Schools
to collect and analyze data to document the critical decision points for URM
students and establish baseline information about their graduate school
aspirations and attitudes toward completion during the pandemic. The project
will produce results that can inform graduate student advising and support
structures to address the current challenges and guide interventions to broaden
participation in STEM graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will investigate four research questions: (1) What are the obstacles to the
matriculation of underrepresented graduate students in the Fall 2020? (2) What
are the obstacles to the retention of underrepresented students currently
enrolled in STEM graduate programs? (3) What are the challenges for sustaining
graduate school aspirations among URM rising college seniors following the
COVID-19 pandemic? and (4) In an environment where experiential learning
experiences have been disrupted by the pandemic, what strategies are being used
to prepare URMs for graduate school success? Quantitative and qualitative data
will be collected from undergraduate pipeline program directors, graduate deans,
and other key stakeholders through surveys and focus groups. Data will be
analyzed using both simple descriptive and multivariate regression techniques,
and the results will be shared broadly with the graduate education community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research competition of the EHR Core Research program. ECR supports
fundamental STEM education research that addresses issues relevant to STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
professional workforce development,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.