* 2037832
* EAGER-QAC-QSA: Variational quantum algorithms for transcorrelated electronic-structure Hamiltonians
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Akimasa Miyake, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Miyake of the Center for Quantum Information and Control at the University of
New Mexico is supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models, and
Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry, to study new designs
of simulation and algorithms for quantum computing. Quantum computers are
promising to advance computational power and provide unmatched advantages in
code breaking and scientific simulations in fields such as quantum chemistry and
materials science. Quantum computing has progressed rapidly in recent years, and
the hardware development is nearing a level of sophistication which could allow
a proof-of-principle demonstration of quantum advantages. Miyake’s research team
develops methods of variational optimizations to solve the energetic
configurations of electrons, as they are of fundamental importance in physics,
chemistry, and material science. The project contributes to the knowledge base
of quantum information science and its cross-fertilization with different
research fields such as quantum chemistry and material science. It also advances
the objectives of two of 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF Investments: “The Quantum
Leap: Leading the Next Quantum Revolution” and “Growing Convergent Research at
NSF”. In order to inspire and train undergraduate and graduate students from the
departments of chemistry and material science, a tutorial session on quantum
computation and chemistry is arranged in conjunction with the Southwest Quantum
Information and Technology workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electronic-
structure Hamiltonians, made of the kinetic energies and Coulomb interactions of
electrons, are fundamental in physics, quantum chemistry, and material science.
It is highly desirable to understand how a quantum computer could provide
practical speed-up for the “strongly-correlated” problems major classical
algorithms currently struggle. In the near term, hybrid quantum-classical
approaches, such as variational optimizations, are particularly promising, as
they utilize a quantum computer only for essential parts of computation and
utilize fully classical side-computers to boost the overall computational
performance. A major challenge in the variational methods is how to set
variational parameters in an effective way and satisfy physical constraints at
the same time. The so-called Jastrow form to characterize dynamical correlation
is empirically successful to fulfill the Coulomb cusp condition originated from
electrons’ coalescence. However, it is not straightforward to encode as quantum
ansatz states as it breaks unitarity. To this end, by modifying the electronic-
structure Hamiltonians under a similarity transformation of the Jastrow term,
Miyake’s research team develops and analyzes variational quantum algorithms
based on this so-called transcorrelated Hamiltonians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.