* 2037883
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Experimental Facility with Geotechnical Centrifuges 2021-2025
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Daniel Wilson, University of California-Davis
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 4,094,883.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) is supported by
the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user national
facility to provide the natural hazards engineering research community with
access to research infrastructure that includes earthquake and wind engineering
experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure (CI), computational modeling and
simulation tools, high performance computing resources, and research data, as
well as education and community outreach activities. Originally funded under NSF
14-605 and NSF 15-598, NHERI has operated since 2015 through separate, but
coordinated, five-year research infrastructure awards for a Network Coordination
Office, CI, Computational Modeling and Simulation Center, and Experimental
Facilities, including a post-disaster, rapid response research facility.
Information about NHERI resources are available at the NHERI web portal
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). Awards made for NHERI contribute to NSF's role
in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National
Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). This award will renew the NHERI
Experimental Facility at the University of California-Davis from January 1,
2021, to September 30, 2025. Through this award, the University of California-
Davis will provide access to their experimental resources, user services, and
data management infrastructure for NSF-supported research and education awards.
This facility will provide users with access to geotechnical modeling resources
that include 9-meter and 1-meter radius centrifuges, both with shake tables.
Centrifuges enable the use of reduced-scale models to accurately capture the
responses of soil masses that are many times larger than is possible at full
scale on even the largest shake tables. The 9-meter centrifuge has the largest
radius of any centrifuge with a shake table worldwide, and can carry a soil
payload of 1550 kilograms. Performing experiments on detailed, reduced-scale
models, outfitted with large numbers of sensors, will enable major scientific
and engineering advances for a broad range of soil and soil-structure systems,
such as building foundations, bridge foundations, near-shore and off-shore
energy infrastructure foundations, underground structures, pipelines, ground
improvement technologies, wharves, embankment dams, and levee systems. Research
can be performed that will enable major advances in the ability of engineers to
predict and improve the performance of soil and soil-structure systems affected
by earthquake, wave, wind, and storm surge loadings. Research performed by the
facility's broad base of users will contribute to the economic competitiveness
of the United States, better infrastructure management, and improved well-being
of citizens through, for example, modified building codes, new seismic design
criteria, and partnering projects for major infrastructure systems. Experimental
data generated from research conducted at this facility will be archived in the
Data Depot on the NHERI web portal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together, the 9-meter
and 1-meter radius geotechnical centrifuges will provide the unique and
versatile modeling capabilities required for realizing major scientific and
engineering advances in predicting and improving the performance of soil and
soil-structure systems affected by natural hazard loadings. Available resources
at the centrifuge facility will provide the capability to construct soil and
soil-structure models with holistic system levels of complexity and obtain
measurements of complex local mechanisms through inverse analyses of data from
dense instrumentation arrays. The centrifuge facility will enable the formation
of basic science knowledge; the validation of advanced computational models from
the component to holistic system level; the validation of transformative
mitigation strategies; and the integration of research, education, and outreach
activities in the training of a diverse workforce. The facility will conduct
annual user workshops and will host Research Experiences for Undergraduate
students. The facility's user support will: (1) help users improve their
experimental investigations through personalized guidance and support at the
proposal, design, construction, testing, and interpretation phases of their
research; (2) maintain a parallel and uninterrupted workflow that maximizes
scheduling flexibility; (3) maintain, improve, and develop technical resources
for the facility; (4) integrate safety and risk awareness into routine
operational practices; (5) provide cybersecurity and data management; (6)
provide mentoring and technical training for research team members; (7) promote
research opportunities to key interest groups to broaden and diversify the user
base; (8) manage maintenance cycles to avoid impacting user schedules; and (9)
engage in key outreach activities with the national and international hazards
research communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.