* 2037398
* SenSE: Multimodal Biosensors  and Data driven Methods for Explainable Analytics  for a Proactive approach to Heart Failure Care
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* John Fisher, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Congestive Heart Failure affects nearly six million Americans, with 670,000
diagnosed annually. Heart failure is one of the leading causes of hospital
admission and readmission and death in the United States and one of the
costliest disease syndromes. A major portion of this high cost of care is
related to managing episodes of heart failure decompensation in the hospital.
These recurring hospitalizations reduces the quality of life of heart failure
patients, preventing them to lead productive and fulfilling lives. Ever rising
costs, growing population of aging adults with chronic conditions necessitate
new predictive, personalized and proactive approaches to cardiovascular health.
The standard care to heart failure management relies on readily observable
symptoms such as weight gain and labored breathing. Unfortunately, because these
symptoms appear late in the course of heart failure decompensation, intervention
is applied after hospitalization. In this proposal we pursue a proactive
approach to care supported by innovations in noninvasive multimodal sensor
systems paired with machine learning models for assessing the risk of heart
failure decompensation and supporting interventions to prevent hospitalization
in heart failure patients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this project are
(a) Design, fabrication and validation an easy to use sensor patch that combines
four key modalities to assess cardiac and lung function: Electrocardiogram
(ECG). Bio Radio Frequency(RF), Bio-Impedance, and Seismocardiogram( SCG) (b)
Learning of latent variable models for linking sensor measures to the risk of
developing decompensated heart failure events with contextual information from
electronic health records (EHR), and (c) Development of interpretable Deep
Learning models for combining EHR data with multimodal sensor data for risk
prediction and guiding therapy. The design of the sensor patch will explore new
techniques integrating signals from a wide range of frequency bands into a
single flexible board operating autonomously under a power budget. The joint
sensor models developed in this project for ECG, SCG, Bio- RF and Impedance will
provide insights into the noninvasive measures related to cardiovascular health
previously only available to invasive methods such as implanted sensors and
catheterizations. These non-invasive measures of cardiac health will be used to
develop a learning based data fusion model for inferring latent health status
quantified as decompensation risk. The project will result in interpretable deep
learning models for combining multimodal EHR data with multimodal sensor data
for early detection of compensated state and guiding medical interventions.
These models will account for the sparse and non-uniform sampling of patient
data in time, and employ learning of multi-modal embeddings for
interpretability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.