* 2037304
* SenSE: Artificial Intelligence-enabled Multimodal Stress Sensing for Precision Health
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Zhenan Bao, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

A shared objective of precision health and psychiatry is to precisely measure
relevant symptoms and sustain mental health with high precision. Best mental
health practices propose the need to identify the early signs of risk factors
such as stress. However, mental health research focuses primarily on late-stage
symptom assessment via self-report data such as surveys. As a result, clinical
practice for mental health mostly consists of reactive treatments. This grant
seeks to advance precision mental health by developing an Artificial
Intelligence (AI) -enabled platform for continuous and precise measurements of
stress. This platform leverages data from a skin-like wearable device that
measures cortisol, a stress hormone from sweat, and from sensing techniques
based on estimating muscle stiffness changes derived from “fight or flight”
stress response, by “repurposing” signals available in billions of existing
mobile and computing devices. These data streams will be combined using Machine
Learning (ML) algorithms for optimizing data collection, power consumption, and
accuracy. Since stress and its effect on mental health deterioration are
pervasive, the broader impact of this work could be enormous as well as the
basis for new research on precision health in psychiatry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to develop a
multimodal sensing platform leveraging AI/ML algorithms to optimize stress
prediction and hardware performance. The first step involves validating the
skin-inspired wearable for lab stress measurements, followed by redesigning, and
validating as a continuous in-the-wild device. It features a set of
physiological sensors for collecting heart rate variability (HRV) and
electrodermal activity (EDA) data, signals directly correlated with the
autonomous nervous system (ANS) response. Two types of sensors for continuous
measurement of cortisol level will be tested for high accuracy and selectivity.
However, processing and transmitting sensor data continuously in-the-wild
requires significant battery capacity. To address this issue, the second step
combines the wearable with passive biomechanical sensors and AI/ML algorithms to
optimize for continuous stress detection in-the-wild. Additionally, passive
sensors transform computer peripheral data (e.g., mice, trackpads, smartphone
screens) into parameters correlated to muscle stiffness linked to the “fight or
flight” stress response. For example, the system uses inverse filtering
techniques to approximate mass-spring-damper (MSD) models derived from mouse
displacements or force models derived from the area under the finger on a
trackpad. The system employs several AI/ML algorithms including a) compressive
sensing to optimize energy efficiency, b) autoencoder models to correct for
artifacts, missing data or sensor failures, c) active learning to discover
optimal collection times of stress events and labels, and d) cloud computing
powered data collection and processing to make predictions based on the best
available data. The intellectual merits of this work include 1) a multimodal
stress monitoring wearable that measures cortisol from sweat and other
physiological signals, 2) biomechanical sensing algorithms that repurpose
movement and touch data into muscle stiffness, and 3) AI/ML algorithms that
integrate this data to optimize wearable and smartphone power usage, learn ideal
sensing scenarios with high precision, improve privacy, optimize data labeling,
and optimize the early prediction of stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.