* 2037515
* PLUS ME: A Novel Professional Development Approach for HBCU STEM Faculty
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Carmen Rivera, GPRA Strategic Management, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,596,333.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities – Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) is designed to enhance the quality of both undergraduate STEM education and
research at HBCUs to broaden participation in the nation's STEM workforce. As
such, HBCU-UP provides support to principal investigators who are committed to
meeting the nation's accelerating demands for STEM talent through a number of
priority areas, including, increased research capacity of STEM faculty and
evidence-based leadership and professional development of faculty. Fielding
Graduate University, in collaboration with GPRA Strategic Management, Inc.,
addresses the HBCU-UP’s priority of supporting leadership and professional
development of HBCU faculty. More specifically, the PIs’ project seeks to
establish a leadership program that supports HBCU and HSI women of color in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project (1) gives rise to a leadership
development curriculum that attends to the projected changes in leadership
development; (2) generates a safe, brave leadership development space for
diverse academic STEM leaders; and (3) addresses a national imperative for
leadership that gives rise to better broadening participation outcomes. It
focuses on nurturing publishing habits, culturally authentic leadership, and
sources of wellbeing, for leaders at the intersection of race and gender. The
project utilizes a CHAT (Cultural-Historic Activity Theory) evaluative framework
to study changes in leader self-efficacy in individual participants while
examining enhanced capacity of participants to collectively lead reform in STEM
higher education. It will create a leadership development model that will
enhance the norms and traditions of conventional leadership training practices
to effect broadening participation in the administrative ranks of higher
education. This project not only implements a novel leadership development
approach that meets STEM women of color at their level of need, but it also
confronts the overarching ecosystem of STEM higher education at its own level of
need. By considering implementation of safe, brave spaces, the PIs will create a
novel leadership development model that easily crosses into and permeates the
norms and traditions of mainstream STEM higher education – advancing and
accelerating our nation’s broadening participation agenda to unprecedented
levels of success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported in part by the
NSF’s Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI
Program), that aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity
at HSIs. Additional funding was provided by the NSF’s Alliances for Graduate
Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program. AGEP supports research and
collaborative partnerships to increase the number of faculty in STEM who are
African Americans, Hispanic Americans, Native American Indians, Alaska Natives,
Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.