* 2037026
* FMRG: Manufacturing ADvanced Electronics through Printing Using Bio-based and Locally Identifiable Compounds (MADE-PUBLIC)
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2026
* Elizabeth Ainsworth, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2026
* USD 7,650,001.00

This Future EcoManufacturing research grant will enable a future intelligent,
scalable, and democratized manufacturing paradigm that allows for distributed
printing of low-cost, biodegradable, and recyclable electronic devices using
locally identifiable resources, such as bio-based materials derived from plants.
These electronic devices are critical components in the rapidly evolving
Internet of Things (IoT). The distributed manufacturing can lower overall device
costs (by saving transportation costs) and make the supply chain more resilient
during disruptions (e.g., during a pandemic). This project will demonstrate as a
prototype the distributed printing of a lithium-ion battery (LIB) - powered
chemical sensors using plant-derived inks. The printed devices will be used for
monitoring growth conditions of hydronic plants that are used to derive the
inks. The same platform can be used to print many other sophisticated,
biodegradable/recyclable electronic devices using bio-based materials through
customization and active learning. Through partnership with community colleges,
Manufacturing USA Institutes, and manufacturing incubators, the project aims to
educate, train, engage, and excite diverse student audiences and the public on
the future sustainable manufacturing through several new, tailored initiatives,
such as a cross-institutional certificate program, printable electronics
hackathon and DIY initiative, and citizen science competition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to enable a manufacturing
supply chain from precision agriculture/hydroponics to advanced biodegradable
and recyclable electronics. The project will lead to major science advances in
three domains: precision growth of plants, manufacturing of tailored bio-based
inks, and sustainable production of printable electronics. As a convergent
research program, the project will further lead to value-added transferrable and
scalable scientific advancements, including novel artificial
intelligence/machine learning (AI/ML) algorithms for manufacturing, a framework
for designing sustainable and systematically optimized manufacturing processes,
and techniques for incorporating heterogeneous data into manufacturing data
systems while automatically refining the models. Learned models will correlate
plant phenotypes and growth conditions with cellulose and lignin extraction,
connect ink formulation with desired ink properties, and associate printing
parameters with electronic device performance and quality. The project will lead
to an open-source biomaterials-based electronics manufacturing data
infrastructure (BEMDI) that fosters innovation through building a community of
innovators, educators, and industry partners interested in manufacturing bio-
based printable electronics. This Future Manufacturing research is supported by
the Divisions of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI),
Biological Sciences (BIO), Emerging Frontiers and Multidisciplinary Activities
(EFMA), Materials Research (DMR), Electrical Communications and Cyber Systems
(ECCS), Engineering Education and Centers (EEC), and Mathematical Sciences
(DMS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.