* 2037416
* CNS Core: EAGER: Building Leadership Capacity and Support for Women of Color Faculty
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Stephanie Adams, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,173.00

Engineering affects the health and vitality of a nation unlike any other
profession, and the future of engineering is inextricably connected to
broadening the participation of underrepresented groups at the highest levels of
society. This project provides and promotes leadership development amongst the
most underrepresented population of faculty and administrators in higher
education, Women of Color (blacks or African Americans, Hispanics or Latinos,
and American Indians or Alaska Natives). Approximately 50 mid- to senior- level,
women of color, computing and engineering faculty have been identified to
participate in this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will occur in
three phases in each of the two years. The first phase of this project focuses
on helping women of color, computing and engineering faculty understand who they
are as potential leaders, via a set of leadership development assessments. The
second phase brings these women together with senior colleagues and certified
facilitators to learn about leadership strategies and tools; to assist
participants in interpreting the results of their individual assessments; to
develop a personal, leadership development plan; to facilitate discussion on
case studies related to leadership and management; and to describe the role race
and gender play for women in leadership positions and organizational
advancement. The third phase builds a strategic alliance across a subset of
historically underrepresented and often overlooked members of the computing and
engineering professoriate to encourage and support their advancement into STEM
leadership positions. Upon completion of this project there will be a cadre of
women of color leaders equipped and prepared to step into academic leadership
positions (i.e. Department Chair/Head, Dean, Provost, President) or a senior
research/technical leadership role (i.e. Director of an Institute or Research
Center). Additionally, the project will have created a network of mid- and-
senior women of color who can provide support to one another as they advance
through higher educationâ€™s administrative ranks. This work, and subsequent
projects modeled like it, are critically important to increasing the proportion
of leaders who are women and positioning them for
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.