* 2037996
* EAGER-QAC-QSA: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: QUANTUM SIMULATION OF EXCITATIONS, BRAIDING, AND THE NONEQUILIBRIUM DYNAMICS OF FRACTIONAL QUANTUM HALL STATES
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Pouyan Ghaemi, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2023
* USD 165,086.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research on the studies of dynamics of fractional quantum Hall states using a
quantum computer. Recently, we have witnessed extensive development in building
quantum computing devices. These advances have allowed efficient calculations of
the properties of molecular systems of a few electrons, beyond the capabilities
of classical computers. On the other hand, interactions among macroscopically
large numbers of electrons lead to the emergence of novel states of matter such
the fractional quantum Hall effect, which arises when electrons confined to two
dimensions are placed in a strong magnetic field. Interestingly, it has been
shown recently that there are connections between fractional quantum Hall states
and quantum gravity. The understanding of these novel phenomena requires study
of the quantum dynamics of many-particle states when driven out of equilibrium.
Experimental and numerical investigations of such states are particularly
challenging, motivating a completely new approach. The PIs will develop quantum
algorithms to simulate and study these concepts using near-term quantum
computing devices. This project will create a new table-top setup to explore
questions ranging from quantum dynamics to gravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational component of the activity will provide opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, particularly from underrepresented groups,
to learn about quantum computing and gain hands-on computational experience with
quantum circuit design using Google's open-source
packages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research on the
nonequilibrium quench dynamics and the excitations of fractional quantum Hall
states using superconducting qubits. Recent advances in quantum computing
devices have motivated using them to simulate quantum states. Given the long-
standing challenges in studying correlated many-electron phases, it is
compelling to explore the possibility of using quantum computers to investigate
these states. This project examines fractional quantum Hall states by developing
efficient quantum algorithms that can be implemented on near-term quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fractional quantum Hall states are significant
examples of quantum phases, where topological order arises from strong electron-
electron interactions. The understanding of fractional Hall states is primarily
based on insightful trial wave functions, conformal field theory methods, exact
diagonalization, and the density-matrix renormalization group. Despite extensive
efforts, very little is known about the many-body excitation spectrum and the
far-from-equilibrium dynamics of these systems. Notably, there has been a new
understanding of novel geometric properties of fractional Hall states, which
relates them to concepts in gravity. Advances in quantum computing and quantum
simulations provide a new avenue to study fractional Hall phases out of
equilibrium. In this research, the PIs pursue two particular
directions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1- Quantum algorithms to generate dynamical
quantum braiding and observe its signatures in fractional Hall phases. Even in
natural quantum Hall systems, controlled generation of topological excitations
and observation of quantum braiding have proved quite challenging. This project
opens the door to using quantum computers as an experimental platform for
realizing quantum braiding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2- Generating and observing
signatures of geometric high-energy excitations, such as the putative emergent
graviton in fractional quantum Hall states. To this end, the research utilizes
the simulation of nonequilibrium geometric quenches of fractional Hall states on
quantum computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will use the network available
at City College to involve high-school, undergraduate, and graduate students
from underrepresented groups in the efforts to develop quantum algorithms. The
PIs engage undergraduate students in this research, allowing them to gain
authentic experience and independent research credit toward graduation. In
particular, both PIs will use publicly available resources from Google AI lab to
train the students in using software packages to design quantum algorithms and
visualize them in terms of quantum gates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.