* 2037231
* 2021 REU Site Workshop:  Looking Forward
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ian Billick, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This workshop will engage program directors of the NSF Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Sites program in discussions on the implementation of the
REU Site program. The REU Site program provides opportunities for undergraduate
students from across the country to conduct research in an area of their
interest and to develop their skills to become leaders in a STEM field. The REU
program provides opportunities for students, especially those coming from
schools with limited research activity or those from underrepresented groups, to
learn about how research is conducted and to understand the scientific basis of
their research. Students train under the mentorship of selected faculty, learn
state-of-the-art lab techniques and instrumentation, and acquire quantitative
skills that prepare them for a future career in STEM. The development and
training of undergraduates is vital to a robust U.S. economy and to maintaining
continued global competitiveness in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory will
organize the workshop which will be held in September 2021. The goal is to
provide a venue for REU Site program directors to share best practices on
implementing an REU program and to discuss important issues associated with
undergraduate research training. Program directors funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure will meet for three days to discuss many topics, such
as ways in which student identity as a scientist can be enhanced, effective
communication of science, and issues on gender and ethnic/racial diversity,
responsible conduct of research, effective mentoring, recruitment and selection
of students, and careers in STEM. A report that captures the discussions will be
posted at www.bioreu.org website and disseminated to the REU
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.