* 2037864
* SII Planning: Spectrum-Agile Cognitive Communications for Terrestrial and Space Applications
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Christos Christodoulou, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This award is a planning grant for the Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National
Center for Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center). The focus of a spectrum
research SII-Center goes beyond 5G, IoT, and other existing or forthcoming
systems and technologies to chart out a trajectory to ensure United States
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum. Ten
researchers from six universities (Carnegie Mellon University, Iowa State
University, Purdue University, University of Kansas, University of New Mexico
and Wichita State University) and two government laboratory scientists with
diverse background are coming together in this project with the goal of
consolidating their on-going spectrum-related Research and R&amp;D efforts under
an NSF SII-Center umbrella, to broaden the scope to address Grand Challenges in
spectrum allocation, usage and utilization through coordination with
collaborators, partners, beneficiaries and stakeholders. The proposed Center has
three unique attributes: a. Particular focus on beyond terrestrial
(space/satellite) communications, b. Exploration and integration of higher
spectrum bands (e.g. W/V bands), and c. Protection of passive spectrum users and
scientific missions. The project also includes a comprehensive broader impact
component including curriculum innovation and outreach to under-represented
groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major activities of the project are the
following: Centerâ€™s research will not only focus on terrestrial systems, but
also space and satellite communications in higher-frequency spectrum-bands.
Moreover, the Center research will specifically focus on both active and passive
spectrum users from scientific missions such as those in astronomy, GPS,
navigation and telemetry. Through partnerships with low-population density rural
communities and native American pueblos, the Center will focus on developing
innovative spectrum solutions for areas that lack broadband wireless access
(BWA) due to unique regulatory, cultural, economic and market issues. Having
established one of the few W/V band communications links anywhere in the world
and having access to radio quiet sites such as the Long Wavelength Array (LWA)
as a testbed, the Project Team brings unique spectrum-related research
capabilities. The Center will focus on three R&amp;D priority areas that can
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of spectrum utilization through (1)
spectrum agility, (2) near real-time spectrum awareness, and (3) adaptive
spectrum decision making, which were recommended to the President by the Office
of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) in May 2019. In collaboration with our
partners from government labs, the Center will contribute to global
standardization and infrastructure enhancement for integrating future W/V band
satellite and 5G/6G terrestrial wireless communications that will allow the US
to lead the world in spectrum technology, utilization, and commercialization.
The University of New Mexico is one of only two Hispanic-Serving Carnegie VH
(Very High research activity) classified Research Universities in the nation. As
such, establishing this SII-Center will broaden the participation in science of
Hispanics and other under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.