* 2037403
* Special Project - Developing Virtual Content for STEM Career and Technical Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Joshua Webb, Eastern Iowa Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 865,868.00

Students enrolled in advanced technology education programs need to develop
industry relevant hands-on skills and competencies to be considered for entry
level jobs as skilled technicians. Thus, technical education must serve all
students, including those who are working or caregiving and those who have
transportation or other limitations to learning on campus. In addition,
technical education must also serve high schools and colleges that cannot afford
the expensive hands-on equipment needed for this training. This project will
develop Augmented Virtual Reality content for three different STEM Career and
Technical Education programs. It is expected that these resources will enable
students to learn hands-on skills from any location with adequate internet
access. These resources are also expected to have benefits beyond broadening
access to education. It has been demonstrated that students who use AVR can
learn to do a task more than twice as fast as students who use only traditional
methods. This increased pace of learning is particularly noted for STEM tasks.
Thus, the AVR resources developed by this project may also be used to improve
the learning outcomes of in-person learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Eastern
Iowa Community College Augmented and Virtual Reality (AVR) Department has
experience in developing applications that use AVR technologies to enhance
traditional pedagogical practices in college and workforce education. The AVR
program is both an education program for postsecondary students interested in
learning how to use AVR technologies and an internal software development unit
in which developers work on College-commissioned AVR projects. This project will
bring together students and college AVR experts to work with business and
industry subject matter experts to develop approximately thirty AVR modules for
STEM-related career and technical education programs in Automotive Technology,
Diesel Technology, and Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning Technology.
The completed AVR modules will be used by students via Oculus Quest headsets.
Project evaluation activities will assess the impact of the AVR modules on
student learning outcomes, including the development of hands-on skills. The
outcomes of students learning through AVR will be compared to those learning in
person. The AVR modules will be available without charge on the College website
and disseminated in STEM-related career and technical education fields so that
high school and community college students across the country can achieve
authentic hands-on learning remotely. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.