* 2037155
* EAGER: Re-engineering Agrobacterium for T-DNA delivery to chloroplasts
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Pal Maliga, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,534.00

Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) is the best characterized model plant and is
used to study all aspects of basic science. A notable exception is that studies
involving plastid genome engineering are carried out in tobacco, the only
vascular plant species in which plastome engineering is routine. Recently, high-
frequency plastid transformation in Arabidopsis was achieved by using plants
hyper-sensitive to spectinomycin, the selective agent used in chloroplast
transformation. The current bottleneck of plastid transformation in Arabidopsis
is the difficulty of obtaining fertile plants from transplastomic tissue culture
cells. Tissue culture limitations in Arabidopsis nuclear gene transformation
were overcome by using Agrobacterium to directly transform the female
gametocyte, and identification of nuclear transgenic events by germinating the
resulting seedlings on a selective medium. Our goal is to re-engineer
Agrobacterium for T-DNA delivery to chloroplasts to directly transform the
plastids in the female gametocyte. Side-stepping the tissue culture process will
eliminate the need for specialized expertise to practice plastid transformation
in Arabidopsis. Therefore, research proposed here will lead to widespread
applications of Arabidopsis plastid genome engineering which, combined with the
available extensive genomic resources, will have a major impact on basic science
and applications in biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Agrobacterium T-DNA
delivery has always been to the nucleus due to the presence of nuclear
localization signals (NLSs) on the VirD2 virulence protein. VirD2 is an
endonuclease that excises the T-DNA at a 25-nucleotide sequence. During the
T-DNA transfer, it is physically linked to the VirD2 protein and the complex is
translocated to the plant cytoplasm via the Type IV secretion system (T4SS). A
truncated VirD2, containing 204 amino acids of the N-terminus is sufficient for
T-DNA delivery to the nucleus, as long as an alternative T4SS signal is provided
at the C-terminus and alternative NLSs are provided at the N-terminus. The goal
of the two-year EAGER proposal is to prove the feasibility of re-targeting VirD2
to chloroplasts. We will re-target a truncated VirD2 to chloroplasts by removing
all NLSs and providing T4SS signals at the C-terminus and chloroplast targeting
Transit-Peptide (TP) sequences at the N-terminus. The success of retargeting
will be shown by excision of target sequences by a VirD2- recombinase fusion
protein that creates a permanent footprint in chloroplasts. VirD2 delivery will
also be shown in a split GFP assay, in which a short (13 amino acid) peptide
fused with VirD2 will complement a truncated GFP protein that fluoresces upon
delivery of the VirD2 fusion protein. Follow-up experiments will accomplish
Agrobacterium-mediated chloroplast-transformation by construction of
Agrobacterium strains lacking wild-type Vir proteins that could interfere with
chloroplast targeting, and development of new vectors that will ensure T-DNA
delivery to chloroplasts in the female gametophyte.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.