* 2037827
* Developing online teaching tools for field ecology and data science through an EREN-NEON partnership
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Allison Parker, Ohio Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Charlotte Roehm
* 06/30/2023
* USD 86,735.00

This award to Ohio Wesleyan University facilitates adaptation of ongoing and new
projects by the Ecological Research as Education Network (EREN) into online
learning modules. The modules will integrate data generated locally by students
and instructors with NEON data, providing the foundation for the learning
experiences. Field-based ecological research experiences across diverse
locations will be enabled, mitigating the severe impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
on undergraduate education, specifically ecological field research experiences.
The modules will be widely disseminated to increase their accessibility, use and
impacts, including building students’ skills and competencies in data management
and analysis. The project also presents a strategy to engage with early career
faculty and faculty from underrepresented groups through the relationships that
both EREN and NEON have built, supported by the wide distribution to increase
use of the modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award leverages the relationship
that EREN has developed with undergraduate institutions that serve as primary
conduits for preparing undergraduate students for STEM careers. Thus, the
training modules will facilitate the preparation of the next generation of
research scientist, promoting the development of the intellectual foundation,
and the technical and analytical skills needed for success. The project takes
advantage of the networks and collaborations developed through EREN and is
augmented through partnering with NEON scientists. EREN’s experience enabling
collaborative field ecology projects, distributed across multiple sites and
targeting mostly undergraduate institutions is complemented by NEON’s high-
quality, standardized data from 81 field sites across the United States. This
partnership between EREN and NEON will enable the development of novel
collaborative research projects driven by NEON data. The impact of the modules
will be enhanced through wide distribution, use in webinar training sessions,
and the publishing of written materials on the EREN and NEON websites. Plans to
strengthen the interactions with future, in-person workshops will help to
consolidate and sustain the collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.