* 2037771
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Experimental Facility with Large-Scale, Multi-directional, Hybrid Simulation Testing Capabilities 2021-2025
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,09/30/2025
* James Ricles, Lehigh University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 3,239,138.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) is supported by
the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user national
facility to provide the natural hazards engineering research community with
access to research infrastructure that includes earthquake and wind engineering
experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure (CI), computational modeling and
simulation tools, high performance computing resources, and research data, as
well as education and community outreach activities. Originally funded under
program solicitations NSF 14-605 and NSF 15-598, NHERI has operated since 2015
through separate, but coordinated, five-year research infrastructure awards for
a Network Coordination Office, CI, Computational Modeling and Simulation Center,
and Experimental Facilities, including a post-disaster, rapid response research
facility. Information about NHERI resources are available at the NHERI web
portal (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). Awards made for NHERI contribute to
NSF's role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the
National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). NHERI Experimental
Facilities will provide access to their experimental resources, user services,
and data management infrastructure for NSF-supported research and education
awards. This award will renew the NHERI Experimental Facility at Lehigh
University from January 1, 2021, to September 30, 2025. Through this award,
researchers will have access to the facility's experimental resources to perform
accurate, large-scale simulations in multi-directions to study the effects of
natural hazards on civil infrastructure, including the effects of soil-
foundation-structure interaction under wind and earthquake hazards. The research
performed at the facility will promote advances in community natural hazard
resilience, as the experimental data and related computational models will be
used to validate new structural concepts for design and retrofit that will
advance the performance of infrastructure systems during natural hazard events.
Data acquired from research conducted at the facility will be valuable in
developing a deeper understanding of the key physical responses,
vulnerabilities, and factors that influence the resilience of civil
infrastructure and communities. The facility will create opportunities to
develop a diverse workforce through natural hazards engineering research,
educational activities, and professional practice. The education and outreach
programs will target a diverse audience at all levels and attract students into
science, engineering, and technology, while also reaching out to promote,
educate, and inform the engineering community about new discoveries and
advancements in performance-based natural hazards engineering. Experimental data
generated from the research conducted at this facility will be archived in the
Data Depot on the NHERI web portal. The facility will conduct annual workshops
for prospective users and will host Research Experiences for Undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental resources, which include a
multi-directional reaction wall, strong floor, servo-controlled hydraulic
actuators, and advanced testing algorithms, will support large-scale, multi-
directional testing. This includes real-time hybrid simulation (RTHS), which
uses physical models of the least-understood parts of the system in the
laboratory, along with computer-based numerical models of the rest of the
system, to enable the definition of the “system” to be expanded well beyond the
size of typical laboratory physical models. The performance of large-scale
components and systems subject to multi-directional demand from natural hazards
can be readily assessed through the application of one of more of the testing
techniques provided by the facility that includes: (1) hybrid simulation (HS),
which combines large-scale physical models with computer-based numerical
simulation models; (2) geographically distributed HS (DHS), which is a HS with
physical models and/or numerical simulation models located in different
laboratories and connected through the Internet; (3) RTHS, which is a HS
conducted at the actual time scale of the physical models and events, such as an
earthquake, a wind natural hazard, or multi-natural hazards; (4) geographically
distributed RTHS (DRTHS), which combines DHS and RTHS; (5) dynamic testing (DT),
which uses high speed servo-controlled hydraulic actuators or other methods to
load large-scale physical models at real-time scales through predefined force or
displacement histories to characterize their dynamic response; and (6) quasi-
static testing (QS), which uses hydraulic actuators to load large-scale physical
models through predefined force and/or displacement histories to characterize
their static response. The high-quality, system-level experimental data acquired
at the facility through the use of a broad array of instrumentation and advanced
sensors will provide a valuable and unique resource for the natural hazards
community to develop and validate high-fidelity computational models, leading to
advances in the knowledge and understanding of civil infrastructure response to
natural hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.