* 2037776
* I-Corps: Resilient Energy Solutions for Home Health Care
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2020
* Giri Venkataramanan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an energy assurance solution based on a microgrid technology that
may be used for electricity outage mitigation from planned and unplanned outages
(disasters). The technology is particularly aimed at increasing energy
resilience of medical equipment, communication services, and critical businesses
through proactive adoption of plug-and-play energy hubs by individuals and
businesses to maintain electricity during major infrastructure failures without
entirely relying upon public service investments that become scarce and over-
extended. In the United States, there are at least 3 million individuals that
depend on electricity for in-home medical care equipment like ventilators, CPAP,
nebulizers, electric wheelchairs etc. The demographics of these populations
generally cut across various ethnic groups, income levels, education levels,
rural/urban divides, etc. The potential of a global impact of this solution is
significant. Combining the recent trend of care delivery at home with an aging
population may drive the need for energy resilience at a personal or at home
level making the proposed solution relevant and necessary.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a small-scale energy hub
that operates as a microgrid for critical infrastructure at a home or building
level. At the core of the hub is a microgrid controller that is based on self-
organizing technology and is managed by an internet-of-things grid management
platform. The self-organizing controller and the platform are able to convert an
existing electrical network (battery packs, home networks, building systems,
etc.) into a smart(er) grid. This allows these smart grids to provide resilience
against central grid failure, mitigate communication failures, integrate
multiple energy sources, and provide for autonomous operation. The controller
maintains grid stability in a scalable and distributed fashion without the need
for central control. The proposed technology will work with all energy networks
(battery packs, microgrids, vehicle-to-grid, etc.) that integrate devices or a
network of devices that have nominal amounts of storage (such as batteries).
This allows homes and businesses to power critical loads in a stable fashion
without relying on central controls making it resilient against grid outages.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.