* 2037374
* RAPID: Bioinformatic Search for Epitope-based Molecular Mimicry in the SARS-CoV-2 Virus using Chameleon
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Giri Narasimhan, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2022
* USD 238,798.00

Cross-reactive immunity is a process by which an individual who was vaccinated
by an unrelated vaccine or who has recovered from an infection from an
unconnected pathogen in the past is seemingly protected against an infection by
SARS-CoV-2. A key step for an individual to mount a successful immune response
to a pathogenic infection is for a human antibody to recognize and bind to a
specific epitope (fragment) from an antigenic protein from the infecting
pathogen. Cross-reactivity by molecular mimicry may occur when an antibody
fortuitously binds to an epitope from SARS-CoV-2 because of a structural
similarity at the binding interface with the epitope for which it was intended.
If verified, a rapid repurposing of drugs and vaccines designed for the other
pathogens can be quickly validated and applied to the current pandemic. This
project plans to use bioinformatic techniques to investigate how molecular
mimicry may play a role in cross-reactive immunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
software pipeline will use the high-performance computing resources in the
Chameleon cloud computing platform to run computationally-intensive molecular
dynamics simulations within a machine learning framework and help identify
occurrences of molecular mimicry in SARS-CoV-2. The pipeline can be divided into
two main parts. The first part involves extracting useful features from
structures of known complexes available from public databases such as Protein
Data Bank (PDB). The second part involves building machine learning models from
these features so that molecular mimicry, if present, can be detected in SARS-
CoV-2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The machine learning framework will result in
reusable models of molecular mimicry and is expected to assist in vaccine
development. If successful, the project can potentially (a) explain global
disparities in hospitalizations and death rates; (b) lead to quick repurposing
of drugs to fight the current pandemic; (c) be replicated for other pathogens;
(d) lead to faster vaccine development; (e) impact development of novel
bioinformatic strategies for the current and future
pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interdisciplinary team with expertise in
computational biophysics, bioinformatics, machine learning, evolutionary
biology, infectious diseases, computational epigenetics, glycobioogy, high-
performance computing and software engineering will drive this project. All
results will be made available through the project website at:
http://biorg.cs.fiu.edu/lemom, including examples of molecular mimicry, software
for replicating the experiments, and performance benchmarking results on
Chameleon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.