* 2037582
* Collaborative Proposal: Linking the topographic features of bio-inspired undulated cylinders to their force reduction properties using critical points
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Raul Cal, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 239,508.00

As a fluid moves around a cylindrical or similarly shaped structure, the flow
organizes into coherent vortices, which shed from alternate sides of the body
producing a vibrational force. This vortex-induced-vibration is an undesirable
consequence with far-reaching effects in engineering design, from long
cylindrical mooring or transmission lines to structural supports of bridges, as
well as many other applications susceptible to fluid flow. This project
investigates potential methods to mitigate the unsteady vortex pattern and
associated vibrational force by adding undulations along the cylinder. The
specific geometry is inspired by the whiskers of seals which have shown that an
alternating undulation pattern along the surface significantly reduces the
vortex-induced-vibration under certain flow conditions. Of particular interest
is how the wake behind the undulated structures can be modified and how it, in
turn, would impact a system of closely packed structures. This has a variety of
potential applications from hydrodynamic sensor arrays, the design of wind
turbine farms, or the study of weather patterns over non-uniform forest canopies
and mountainous terrain. The educational components will include multiple
undergraduate research projects and K-12 outreach programming integrated into
existing dissemination mechanisms at University of Wisconsin-Madison and
Portland State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores the
fundamental fluid mechanisms of flow over undulated cylinders and arrays of
undulated cylinders inspired by the unique topography of seal whiskers. Causal
links between the geometric features of the undulations, the resulting flow
features, and the force and frequency response of the cylinder will be
quantitatively identified by critical points and other key markers within the
wake in terms of momentum and energy transfer. Building upon the single-cylinder
data, a framework for wake-wake and wake-structure interactions will be
developed and tested for small and large array configurations. Both simulations
and wind tunnel experiments will be utilized in a complementary and
collaborative research plan that spans a large range of flow conditions and
configurations. This will be accomplished through particle-image-velocimetry for
detailed wake measurements as well as direct numerical simulation and large-eddy
simulations for time-resolved forces and quantification of mechanisms in the
near-wake region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.