* 2037821
* I-Corps:  Plasmonic Microarray Chips for Microbial Identification
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Quan Cheng, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enhance
the development of plasmonic microchips that enable microbial analysis in
complex samples. This technology can have broad application in laboratory
research, water quality assessment, food safety, and human health screening. The
simplified sample preparation is advantageous for time sensitive testing, and
the improved performance offers a technical feasibility for identifying
microbial strains and bacterial contaminants using inexpensive bench-top mass
spectrometric instruments. The method can be further adopted to identify viruses
based on their lipid corona. This technology eliminates issues experienced with
older, laborious techniques and accelerates the understanding of microorganisms’
impact in real-time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores metal-
enhanced plasmonic properties on microarrays for bacterial identification.
Manipulation of metal layer structures offers fluorescence imaging localization,
high throughput analysis, and enhanced Matrix-Assisted Laser
Desorption/Ionization (MALDI) - Mass Spectrometer (MS) performance. The
technique is based on lipidomic profiling on microchips, where sample location
is pinpointed with fluorescent imaging for more accurate mass spectrometry
analysis. The microchip is transferable to other technique platforms for
identification of a range of components including metabolites and lipids at the
single cell level that may lead to swift microbial
identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.