* 2037470
* Build and Broaden: TCU Participation in Indigenous Language Science
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Mizuki Miyashita, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,997.00

This project aims to strengthen the environment for collaborative research in
Indigenous language science created by the Collaborative Language Planning
Project (CLPP) funded by an NSF planning grant [BCS-1800820]. Research in
Indigenous languages responds to the Native American Languages Act (NALA),
passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, which called for stakeholders including
Native American activists to act together to “preserve, protect and promote the
rights and freedom of Native Americans to use, practice and develop” these
languages. The NALA can be reinforced by ethical and well-planned research
conducted by researchers and stakeholders from Native American communities.
However, such research is often led by outside researchers. With a community-
based research (CBR) approach, this project will broaden participation in
language research from underrepresented institutions – specifically, tribal
colleges and universities (TCUs) in the state of Montana: Aaniiih Nakoda
College, Blackfeet Community College, Chief Dull Knife College, Fort Peck
Community College, Salish Kootenai College, and Stone Child College. The
activities consist of (i) a national conference for language researchers and
language workers from communities and academia, (ii) on-site workshops for TCU
scholars, and (iii) a convening among researchers, community stakeholders and
TCU scholars about language science. The project will build capacity at the TCUs
by providing training venues for TCU scholars to develop research skills in
linguistics, language acquisition and related fields in ethno- and health
sciences and will lead to the designing of research projects in language
science. The trainings and discussions will improve participants’ understanding
of linguistic structures, support the development of more sophisticated language
research at TCUs, and promote the CBR approach, and the incorporation of the
research results will contribute to the communities’ language revitalization
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project’s linguistic training includes
methods for observing complex language data, organizing data based on form and
function, finding patterns and essential problems, addressing issues, and
solving problems. The participants will discover unique properties of their
community languages, which are notably distinct from English, expand their
knowledge by learning how to consult available linguistic literature, identify
underresearched areas in the language, and develop research projects to further
our understanding of language in general as well as specific linguistic
theoretical notions and frameworks. These activities will lead to a set of
research questions, and direct outcomes of this project will include research
agendas developed by the Indigenous scholars and stakeholders, some of which
will be carried out in collaboration with outside researchers. The participants
will also be introduced to technological tools in order to develop skills that
can be applied to their research interests in language-related fields. The
process of investigating and formalizing potential research projects in language
science may reveal interesting data on language use in terms of structures
(phonology, morphology, syntax, and semantics) and pragmatics. Since many
Indigenous languages spoken in the U.S. show diverse ways of encoding human
experience and complex thoughts, investigating these languages is key to
advancing our understanding of the relationship between language and
cognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.