* 2037741
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the rules of honest signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Geoffrey Hill, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 324,379.00

Red feather coloration in the House Finch and other songbirds serves as an
honest signal of individual condition. This finding is both well documented and
quite remarkable. It is far from obvious why the hue of feathers reveals the
individual quality or what prevents low-quality birds from cheating this system.
A series of recent breakthrough studies brings us to the doorstep of
understanding honest signaling via red feather coloration. We now know key
enzymes and transporters responsible for the production and accumulation of red
plumage pigments. In the proposed research, a team of scientists with expertise
spanning animal physiology, cell biology, and genomics will use both whole
animals and cell culture to study the molecular and biochemical mechanisms of
coloration. The investigators will examine and compare these processes in House
Finches in good or poor condition to deduce the specific mechanisms that promote
or inhibit the production and accumulation of red pigments and hence, control
plumage coloration. Understanding the biochemical and cellular rules that govern
carotenoid coloration in songbirds is important not just for a better
understanding of this central process in nature but because carotenoid pigments
play a key role in cellular homeostasis in humans. A better understanding of
carotenoid systems in birds will inevitably lead to a better understanding of
ourselves. The investigators will share these insights and support STEM
education through an ornithology summer camp program, curricula development and
training workshops for public school teachers, and middle and high school
student visits to investigator laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
biochemical, genetic, and evolutionary processed that either prohibit or enable
honest communication of information in the context of mate choice remain poorly
understood. The proposed research will focus on uncovering fundamental rules of
honest signaling by integrating subcellular, cellular, and whole-organism
approaches. In birds including the House Finch, high-quality males produce
feathers with brighter and redder carotenoid coloration than do low-quality
males. Understanding how the condition of individuals affects the function of
these genes and hence color expression is the focus of proposed work. The
Resource Tradeoff Hypothesis proposes that stress causes loss of red coloration
because carotenoids must be diverted away from ornamentation so they can
function as antioxidants or immune system enhancers. Alternatively, the Shared
Pathway Hypothesis proposes that oxidation of yellow dietary pigments to red
ornamental pigments depends on core cellular processes, and particularly
cellular respiration in mitochondria, that are sensitive to organism function
and environmental conditions. These hypotheses make contrasting predictions
regarding the cellular and environmental conditions that will affect ketolation
and hence production of red coloration, and we will employ both whole animal and
cell culture experiments to test these predictions. The proposed research holds
the potential to significantly advance understanding of the ubiquitous links
between stress, individual condition, and carotenoid coloration. The experiments
that we propose will provide important new insights for how, at a mechanistic
level, carotenoid color serves as a signal of condition and hence key insights
into a fundamental rule of lifeâ€”how to keep signaling
honest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.