* 2037632
* I-Corps:  An Air Purification System for Reducing Indoor Volatile Organic Compounds
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Chengde Wu, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that the
project can potentially reduce hospital bills on indoor air quality related
illness, reduce carbon emissions, and improve the indoor work environment.
People spend most of their time indoors, making it critical that we address
indoor air quality. In a broader view, this air depolluting system improves the
indoor environment in three aspects: reducing volatile organic compounds (VOCs),
improving the illumination of buildings by natural light (daylighting), and
lowering carbon emissions. Reducing indoor VOCs benefits occupantsâ€™ health and
well-being, especially for vulnerable groups such as asthma patients. A study
conducted at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory estimated that improved indoor air
quality can save $6-14 billion from reduced respiratory disease, $1-4 billion
from reduced allergies and asthma, $10-30 billion from reduced sick building
syndrome related illness, and $20-160 billion from direct, non-health related
worker performance loss. This system can also lead to noticeable productivity
gains by improving daylighting quality. A study found that students under better
daylighting showed improvement in test scores, for example, they were 20% faster
in math and 26% faster in reading. Improving daylighting also reduces energy
consumption in artificial lighting and thus lowers carbon emissions. Successful
application of this system in commercial buildings is expected to contribute to
national energy savings in the building sector up to $30 billion and 280 tons of
carbon dioxide reduction. In short, this system is expected to improve the
health of building occupants, increase productivity, and reduce carbon
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project develops a novel air
depolluting system coated with a thin layer of titanium dioxide nanoparticles,
one of the most effective photo-induced catalysts to remove air pollutants. The
system is designed to be installed in interior spaces behind windows in contact
with indoor air while receiving UV-A rays coming through windows. The efficiency
of titania breaking down VOCs primarily depends on three parameters: the dose of
effective UV rays, contact surface area, and airflow. The efficiency
monotonically increases as any one of the three parameters increases. The
primary challenge is that improving one parameter can negatively affects the
other two. To maximize overall VOC reduction, a multi-objective optimization
algorithm is used to balances UV ray incident angles, contact surface area, and
airflow. This air depolluting system is a completely passive system which means
that it does not contain any mechanical/electrical device and does not require
power to operate, which lowers initial costs and minimizes
maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.