* 2037815
* NSF/FDA SIR: Assessing the Photocytotoxicity and Photochemistry of New Emerging Fluorophores
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Huang Chiao Huang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2022
* USD 91,860.00

Fluorescence imaging is a popular biomedical tool used in basic science and
clinical practice such as disease diagnosis and surgery. The agents used in
fluorescence imaging can exhibit some degree of phototoxicity (damage due to
light). In recent years, there has been an increasing number of fluorescence
imaging products reviewed by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, and the
issue of phototoxicity is of significant interest. The lack of established,
well-validated test methodologies and scientific expertise on the topic of
fluorescent agent phototoxicity risks the clearance of products with toxic
potential, or conversely, excessive iteration with sponsors on testing of benign
agents, leading to unnecessary delays in product marketing. Therefore, the goal
of this one-year NSF/FDR Scholar in Residence project is to establish
standardized methods for evaluating phototoxicity of emerging fluorescence
imaging products in living cells. Through proper dissemination and incorporation
of gained knowledge, the project will be able to vastly improve the likelihood
that safe and effective fluorescence imaging products are translated into
clinical use in a timely manner. The planned research will be seamlessly
integrated with educational, mentoring, and outreach activities to advance the
cross-disciplinary program in the field of biophotonics and regulatory science.
The results will be disseminated broadly through journal publications,
conferences, and workshops held jointly at FDA and UMD. This work will be
presented at conferences on biomedical optics, molecular imaging, and
photobiology. The findings will be presented to regulatory reviewers in Center
for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) to make informed regulatory
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall purpose of this project is to
generate knowledge and testing tools as a foundation for improving regulatory
evaluation of photo-cytotoxicity in emerging fluorescence imaging combination
products. The project is motivated by the need for standardized safety test
methods in the emerging "combination product" reviewed in the Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research (CDER) and Center for Devices and Radiological Health
(CDRH), and a better scientific understanding of factors influencing fluorescent
agent safety. The project will systematically characterize the photosensitizing
properties of established and emerging fluorophores in cell-based systems.
Biologic effects will be correlated with basic photochemical and photophysical
parameters to fully understand the mechanisms underlying the photosensitization.
Studies are designed to achieve two research objectives: (1) quantify photo-
cytotoxicity of established and emerging fluorophores using 3T3 Neural Red
Update (NRU) and other testings and (2) establish standardized best practices
for evaluating the phototoxicity of fluorophores. The primary outcomes of this
project will be a battery of test methods – protocols for standardized assaying,
data acquisition, and processing – that represent best practices for evaluating
the phototoxicity of emerging fluorescence imaging agents in cells.
Additionally, biologic effects will be correlated with basic photochemical and
photophysical parameters to fully understand the mechanisms underlying the
photosensitization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.