* 2037331
* RAPID: Societal Trust and Health amidst COVID-19, and an Evaluation Framework for the Societal Experts Action Network (SEAN)
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Dave Marcotte, American University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2023
* USD 199,933.00

Too often, decision-makers in government and business have been unable to
extract actionable information from scientific studies. As a result, the
potential public benefit from that knowledge is blunted. The Societal Experts
Action Network (SEAN) is a unique effort to bridge that gap and improve
transmission of actionable insights from the social, behavioral, and economic
(SBE) sciences to decision-makers who can benefit from the knowledge. SEAN is
part of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM)
focus on COVID-19. In coordination with the NASEM Standing Committee on Emerging
Infectious Diseases and 21st Century Health Threats, SEAN provides SBE data and
recommendations on social, behavioral, and economic (SBE) matters to decision-
makers and the public. One of SEAN’s key goals is to rapidly gather and
communicate actionable scientific evidence to public officials and other leaders
who are managing the pandemic and working toward
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will 1) utilize survey data gathered
under SEAN’s auspices to examine societal trust and its relationships to health
outcomes, and 2) create a framework for an evaluative assessment of SEAN. It
will create original scientific evidence using COVID-19-related survey data and
will provide an evaluation of the effectiveness and impact of SEAN’s
COVID-19-related communication activities. The first part of this project will
analyze survey data associated with the SEAN COVID-19 survey archive to
understand the critical role that trust in authorities (medical, scientific,
government, media) plays in critical health behaviors by members of the public.
COVID-19 represents a grave threat to America’s public health and the well-being
of its populace. It is predicted that government officials at the federal, state
and local levels who are trusted by members of society to inform them about
COVID-19 play a large role in the lay public’s behavioral responses to the
disease and, ultimately, their positive health outcomes. In the second part of
this project, the research team will work with SEAN leadership, to plan a
thorough, external evaluation of SEAN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.