* 2037545
* Classical and Quantum Algorithms for the Principled Quantification of Infrastructure Safety
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Kaden Hazzard, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 04/30/2024
* USD 460,000.00

This NSF grant will develop novel quantum algorithms to quantify the odds of
failure of critical infrastructure systems, such as power grids and water
networks, by using and simulating quantum computers. The use of existing quantum
devices already extends beyond physics to materials, chemistry, optimization,
and machine learning among other fields. However, this grant will create quantum
algorithms for a new area of application, namely that of critical infrastructure
engineering, which includes power transmission grids, to ultimately support
risk‐informed decisions when resources are limited. As quantifying
infrastructure performance is notoriously challenging today due to the
increasing complexity of engineered systems, this grant responds to various
calls for research and implementation from the National Academy of Engineering
and the National Science Foundation, by exploiting the emerging advantages of
quantum information processing over classical computing. The execution of this
grant is possible through an interdisciplinary team spanning civil and
infrastructure engineering, algorithmic logic, algebraic optimization, and
quantum physics. The team’s disciplinary diversity also facilitates broad
training, outreach, and dissemination beyond the primary field of infrastructure
safety to tangibly advance quantum computing applications as anticipated by the
National Quantum Initiative Act signed recently into law. The team will also
seed a new workforce of algorithmicists for engineering and science, through
funded graduate and undergraduate students, while reaching out to quantum
technology enthusiasts, industry professionals, and high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying critical infrastructure safety, reliability
and resilience is essential to inform operations and steer interventions under
uncertainty with limited resources. However, most methods to quantify such
network metrics rely on numerical simulation and heuristic optimization today.
While these approaches do offer insights to infrastructure stakeholders, they
are unable to handle, in a principled way, challenging conditions such as
rare‐event reliability estimation or optimal restoration decisions for
increasingly complex infrastructure systems. The team addresses these challenges
with various novel strategies for infrastructure safety assessment. First,
instead of adopting widely used numerical simulation for network reliability
estimation, the team focuses on exact methods that count system configurations,
as enabled by powerful symbolic logic tensor networks (TNs). These TNs help
expand the size frontier of solvable problems while offering quality guarantees.
Second, to leverage relentless progress on quantum hardware, the team will
transform TN algorithms into their quantum versions to count reliable network
configurations and search for optimal restoration sequences. Third, the team
will test algorithms, classical and quantum, relative to best‐performing
methods, across different quantum hardware platforms, simulation tools, input
resolution levels, and infrastructure topologies, including realistic power
transmission grids. This testing campaign will reveal the settings for quantum
circuits that best impact computation time, solution quality and other features
that support infrastructure safety assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.