* 2037490
* Build and Broaden: Promoting Access to Graduate Education in Social Sciences (PAGES)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Alicia Ibaraki, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 08/31/2021
* USD 110,199.00

Graduate school admissions processes often fail to identify all the relevant
factors that might predict success in graduate school. The aim of this
conference is to identify some of the most promising ways to increase fairness
in graduate admissions. The goal is to develop more holistic evaluation
strategies. Factors to consider in admissions include research opportunities, or
lack thereof, application process mentoring, and life challenges. Some
undergraduate institutions, and some minority-serving institutions, cannot
provide the research opportunities to help their students be competitive
applicants for research oriented graduate programs. In addition, the over-
reliance on standardized tests often exclude under-represented scholars. More
holistic application processes might identify graduate school applicants who
have learned time-management processes via maintaining school, work, and home
responsibilities. This project will survey graduate programs, followed by a two-
day virtual conference, with an emphasis on understanding the undergraduate
research pathway for psychology students. Results regarding how to make the
application process more transparent and efficient will be disseminated. In
addition, practical tips for increasing research experiences and collaborations
across diverse minority-serving and research-intensive institutions will be
developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When the diversity of the academy does not
reflect the diversity of the general population, there is a tremendous loss in
innovation, perspectives, and potential knowledge generation. In 1993, the
American Psychological Association resolved to “place a high priority on issues
related to the education of ethnic minorities.” More than 20 years later,
African Americans, Latinx, and Native Americans remain underrepresented in all
levels of academia. Within higher education, admissions practices that rely
heavily on standardized testing can perpetuate that under-representation.
Standardized tests advantage students with financial means who can afford to
take the test multiple times or pay for expensive preparatory classes. Many
universities are temporarily waiving standardized testing requirements due to
barriers related to the COVID-19 pandemic. That provides a window of opportunity
to reimagine graduate admissions. The goal of this project is two-fold. Scholars
and administrators involved in the admissions process will work to develop an
alternate system of graduate admissions that utilizes multiple possible
predictors of graduate school success. This will be accomplished through a
virtual conference, in which data regarding current admissions practices will be
evaluated. Second, recognizing that undergraduate research experience is
critical to not only graduate admissions, but also success in graduate school,
this conference will develop a regional partnership to increase the number of
high quality research opportunities available to underrepresented students,
particularly those at minority-serving institutions with fewer research
resources. This will be done by facilitating connections between R1 institutions
and regional and minority-serving institutions, using the conference as an
initial launch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.