* 2037179
* RAPID: Exploring COVID and the Effects on U.S. Education: Evidence from a National Survey of American Households
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2021
* Morgan Polikoff, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2021
* USD 199,620.00

The COVID-19 epidemic has been a tremendous disruption to the education of U.S.
students and their families, and early evidence suggests that this disruption
has been unequally felt across households by income and race/ethnicity. While
other ongoing data collection efforts focus on understanding this disruption
from the perspective of students or educators, less is known about the impact of
COVID-19 on children’s prek-12 educational experiences as reported by their
parents, especially in STEM subjects. This study aims to understand parents’
perspectives on the educational impacts of COVID-19 by leveraging a nationally
representative, longitudinal study, the Understanding America Study (UAS). The
study will track educational experiences during the summer of 2020 and into the
2020-21 school year and analyze outcomes overall and for key demographic groups
of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since March of 2020, the UAS has been tracking
the educational impacts of COVID-19 for a nationally representative sample of
approximately 1,500 households with preK-12 children. Early results focused on
quantifying the digital divide and documenting the receipt of important
educational services--like free meals and special education services--after
COVID-19 began. This project will support targeted administration of UAS
questions to parents about students’ learning experiences and engagement,
overall and in STEM subjects, data analysis, and dissemination of results to key
stakeholder groups. Findings will be reported overall and across key demographic
groups including ethnicity, disability, urbanicity, and socioeconomic status.
The grant will also support targeted research briefs addressing pressing policy
questions aimed at supporting intervention strategies in states, districts, and
schools moving forward. Widespread dissemination will take place through
existing networks and in collaboration with other research projects focused on
understanding the COVID-19 crisis. All cross-sectional and longitudinal UAS data
files will be publicly available shortly after conclusion of administration so
that other researchers can explore the correlates of, and outcomes associated
with, COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is made by the DRK-12
program in the Division of Research on Learning. The Discovery Research PreK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics by preK-12 students and
teachers, through the research and development of new innovations and
approaches. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for the projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.