* 2037649
* Distributed Control of Uncertain Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Wenjie Dong, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 215,172.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The abundance of information and computational resources in
multiple systems enable enhanced operational effectiveness through cooperative
teamwork of multiple systems in civilian and military applications. Compared to
a single system that performs a solo mission, greater efficiency and operational
capability can be realized by a team of systems which operate in a coordinated
fashion. Cooperative control of multiple systems poses significant theoretical
and practical challenges. First, the research objective is to develop a system
which includes multiple subsystems rather than a single system. Second, the
communication bandwidth and connectivity of the team are often limited and the
interaction between systems may be unreliable. Third, computational resources of
each individual system will always be limited. In order to deal with these
challenges, distributed control of multiple systems plays an important role and
is one of effective control methods in solving cooperative control of multiple
systems. Distributed cooperative control of multiple systems has been studied
for decades. Early&lt;br/&gt;study focused on the cooperative control of
multiple linear systems and cooperative control of multiple nonlinear systems
with special forms. In this project, it is proposed to study distributed
cooperative control of multiple heterogeneous nonlinear systems with
uncertainty. To this end, three research problems are proposed, i.e.,
distributed output tracking control of multiple uncertain linear systems,
distributed output tracking control of multiple nonlinear systems, and
distributed output tracking control of multiple uncertain nonlinear systems. To
solve the proposed problems, two systematic controller design approaches will be
proposed with the aid of nonlinear control theory and distributed estimation
theory. In order to verify the effectiveness of the proposed research results,
experimental study will be conducted by implementing the proposed control laws
in the multi-robot testbed in the PI's research laboratory. Based on the
experimental results, the proposed distributed control laws will be improved
accordingly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
problems are challenging due to the nonlinear nature of each system and the
limited information of its neighbor systems. This project will solve the
distributed cooperative control problem of multiple systems with different
assumptions on the dynamics of each system and the communication among systems.
The intellectual merits of this proposal are: 1. two novel distributed
controller design approaches will be proposed for the proposed control problems;
2. Distributed tracking controllers will be proposed for the proposed problems
with the aid of the proposed approaches; and 3. the proposed controller design
procedures can be applied to the distributed cooperative control problems of
many practical control problems, such as flocking of mobile robots, formation
control of unmanned aerial vehicles, etc.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research in
this project has significant impact in civilian, homeland security, and military
applications where multiple systems work cooperatively. The proposed research
also has impact on the fields of biology, economics, physics, and computer
science. The research plan will be integrated into an education plan including
1) undergraduate and graduate education and 2) broader dissemination of the
research results. The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV) is a
predominantly Hispanic institute. The PI will mentor minority students and
female students through his research. The PI will develop a graduate course and
an undergraduate course which are related to this project. The research results
will be published in journals and conference proceedings. The PI will also work
closely with his industrial partners to transfer research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.