* 2037922
* Conference: Measuring the Success of Institutional Efforts at Hispanic-Serving Institutions
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Beth Mitchneck, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 05/31/2023
* USD 118,209.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this conference aims to develop and test a series of
measures to assess how HSIs achieve success in their efforts to serve their
diverse students and improve STEM learning. While many indicators assess
individual student retention and graduation, there is less consensus on how to
measure the systemic changes needed to improve student learning and graduation
rates. By bringing together practitioners from HSIs and scholars to co-develop
measures of institutional change at HSIs, we expect to develop and test a series
of measures to support work at a diverse set of HSIs, including community
colleges, Primarily Undergraduate Institutions, and research-intensive
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the project are to
operationalize a framework for servingness developed to conceptualize
institutional changes necessary to improve educational attainment for the
diverse student population at HSIs. The conference will specifically develop and
test measures of change for: research development and success; faculty
engagement with STEM curricular change and students; faculty success measures;
STEM undergraduate student success measures; community engagement; and diverse
cultural engagement and recognition. We expect that the identification and use
of change measures will assist universities in improving the likelihood of
student STEM degree attainment at HSIs. The work will be disseminated broadly
through conference participation, publications, and the use of the measures at a
diverse group of HSIs around the U.S. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.