* 2037894
* NSF/FDA SIR: Real-Time Simulations of Electrical Activity of the Heart and Augmented/Virtual Reality for Medical Device Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Flavio Fenton, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

There is a major transformation shift occurring in healthcare resulting from a
number of factors including, genome sequencing, patient-specific approaches, and
major digital technology advances. The FDA is responsible for the safety and
efficacy of all medical products in the US, and its Center for Devices and
Radiological Health (CDRH) is responsible for the oversight of ~175,000 devices
including nearly 100 novel Pre-Market Approvals (PMAs) per year. FDA, and CDRH
in particular, has been pro-active in regard to innovative technology as evident
by the release of “Guidance Documents,” Standards, and a major “Digital Health”
initiative. The Digital Health initiative includes “Software as a Medical
Device, Advanced Analytics, Artificial Intelligence, Cloud Computing,
Cybersecurity, Interoperability, Medical Deice Data System, Mobile Medical Aps,
and Wireless and Novel Technology. The goal of this one year NSF/FDA Scholar-in-
Residence project is to expand these efforts by: 1) catalyzing the ongoing
efforts of CDRH regarding Augmented Realty (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR); and 2)
develop a novel hardware and software ‘platform’ to address certain devices
incorporating BOTH AR/VR and real-time simulations. This new testbed will be
housed at FDA and include an “exemplar device” to represent the dynamics within
of a “cardiac electrophysiology test” performed in patients. As part of outreach
and public dissemination, the software developed for the VR/AR testbed will be
made freely available to the public. Developments for the testbed will include
an interactive, “walkable” 3D virtual museum and interactive educational
simulations about the heart for clinicians, their patients and the public in
general to visualize heart dynamics, arrhythmias and existing
treatments/therapies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to help
create an infrastructure critically needed by the FDA to evaluate and validate
in silico studies and VR/AR systems intended to explore new approaches for
visualization and manipulation of cardiovascular anatomies, including electrical
wave propagations and strategical planning of invasive procedures used in the
clinic as well as anti-arrhythmic drug design. While high performance computer
simulations of complex physiological and biological models and VR/AR
visualization of biological and medical systems have been done in the past, this
is believed to be the first time the two are merged to be simulated and made
interactive at the same time. The in-real-time testbed developed will allow the
FDA to study interaction of devices and simulations in the loop with patients in
the clinic. To achieve this goal, the research plan is organized under three
aims: (1) Incorporate interactive real-time simulations of complex mathematical
cell models in accurate realistic 3D cardiac structures, and develop a framework
for visualization and interaction with these models in VR and AR on a desktop
computer to eliminate the need for supercomputer simulations; (2) Develop a
large catalogue of electrophysiological and structural models to run under this
interactive VR/AR framework from aim 1; and (3) Develop online resources for
medical doctors, patients and general public, to explain the heart’s function,
heart arrhythmias as some of the methods currently used for control and
termination of arrhythmias using the VR/AR testbed. The infrastructure developed
will enable the FDA to be proactive and prepared to address the complex
regulatory issues introduced by these emergent advanced technologies, which is
particularly relevant for cardiac electrophysiological devices because the most
dangerous arrhythmias involve complex spatio-temporal patterns that are recorded
with limited spatial resolution using cardiac mapping catheters during a cardiac
electrophysiological test.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.