* 2037517
* SBIR Phase I:  Automatic Generation of Physics-Informed AI Models
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Hector Klie, DEEPCAST, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2022
* USD 275,613.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to democratize the model building process for multiple industrial
applications by: (1) making it easy to build models within hours instead of
weeks, (2) cut model building costs by 10x or more, and (3) significantly
mitigate risks by providing more accurate and interpretable models that are
constrained by underlying physical principles. This technology would unlock a
new generation of modeling workflows that are more scalable, have less
uncertainty, and improve the structural visibility and interoperability of
complex processes that are partially understood. As a result, companies would
have tangible ways to reduce modeling costs, streamline optimization and control
of operations and ultimately, achieve better decisions at economically viable
rates. More broadly, the proposed technology should inspire various innovations
and enhancements to products and services that strongly rely on physics
modeling. It is expected that tangible results would induce profound effects
across multiple sectors, including agriculture, environmental science, civil
engineering, manufacturing, aerospace, construction, logistics, and medicine.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will set the technical and business foundations required to automate and
expedite the construction of reduced physics models from data with minimal human
intervention. The goal for this project is to implement fast and reliable
mechanisms for: (1) mapping spatio-temporal data of the physical world into
structural network representations; (2) leverage the data from these network
representations to generate a suitable set of equations that explain the
underlying dynamics; (3) use advanced optimization techniques to find a list of
models that capture the best combination of network and equations matching the
observed data; and (4) orchestrate all these pieces into a single artificial
intelligence platform that automatically consolidates data and human
interactions for model building and visualization. Efforts in Phase I are
particularly focused on demonstrating that the resulting models are physically
sound and sufficiently robust for describing the dynamics of fluid transport and
diffusion based on different amounts of available data and
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.