* 2037368
* EAGER: Exploring impacts of scholarships, cross-institutional networks, and co-curricular activities on Navajo student and faculty leadership development
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2022
* JENNY NAKAI, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 10/31/2022
* USD 9,113.00

This project will examine the impacts of scholarship support, opportunities to
participate in network activities across institutions, virtual workshops, and
discussion of issues impacting well-being and persistence with peers and mentors
on retention and leadership development of students, recent graduates, and
faculty in geoscience, environmental science, and related STEM fields. The PIs
will support network building activities between the University of New Mexico,
Navajo Technical University, Dine College, and the Center for Diverse Leadership
in Science (CDLS). The project will support a new faculty fellows program and
early career fellows program with participants from partnering institutions.
Leadership development for faculty fellows will include committing to utilizing
more inclusive teaching and mentoring practices over the course of this grant
which would support Navajo student retention. To develop leadership capacity in
early career fellows, the PIs will engage in cross-cultural interaction, develop
a mentoring network, and provide opportunities for connection with students,
recent graduates, and faculty from multiple institutions and through CDLS.
Student retention and leadership development will also benefit from multiple
activities: 1) Financial support via stipends for students and recent graduates
from Navajo Technical University and Dine College, 2) Computing stipends to
support laptops and broadband internet access for participation in the network,
3) Opportunities for support through individual meetings with peer and vertical
mentors, and community talking circles on COVID, health and wellbeing, and
leadership, and 4) Opportunities for participation in virtual workshops and
research and outreach projects pertaining to environmental science and other
green STEM fields at each of the participating
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project responds to the COVID-19
historical conjuncture that has disproportionately impacted vulnerable
populations such as the Navajo Nation. The pandemic created an environment where
Navajo students have difficulty accessing essential as well as educational
resources. This is inhibiting their ability to be retained in geoscience,
environmental science, and other STEM fields where their diverse perspectives
and leadership is needed. This project will counter these barriers with
professional development opportunities and funding to directly support Navajo
students, recent graduates, and early career professionals. The PIs will focus
on faculty development that will support retention of Navajo students in STEM
while simultaneously hoping to boost retention rates of indigenous students in
geoscience, green STEM, and STEM more broadly, through experiential learning
opportunities, financial support, and mentorship. The virtual workshops and
leadership-focused talking circles will serve to support both early career and
faculty fellows to become champions for diversity in geoscience and other
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.