* 2037904
* NSF SII Planning: National Center for Spectrum Innovation
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Karan Watson, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This award is a planning grant for the Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National
Center for Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center). The focus of a spectrum
research SII-Center goes beyond 5G, IoT, and other existing or forthcoming
systems and technologies to chart out a trajectory to ensure United States
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum.
This project includes the planning activities needed to envision and articulate
a National Spectrum Innovation Center (the “Center”), a multidisciplinary,
multi-institution research and development collaboration led by Texas A&amp;M
University. The Center’s vision is to serve as a national hub for research,
education, policy, and public outreach needed to assure the on-demand
availability of dependable, affordable, high-quality spectrum access to all
users. Research and technology development will be necessary to achieving the
Center vision, but it will not be sufficient. Implementing a radical reshaping
of spectrum access and utilization will also require new economic models and
thoughtful changes in policy and regulation. It will demand changes in higher
education curriculum and pedagogy to support a future workforce capable of
meeting the needs of industry and of maintaining and innovating an intelligent-
spectrum infrastructure. And it will need to build public interest and
awareness, as well as account for the ethical dimensions of such an ambitious
undertaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award outlines planning activities for a
Center which is a multidisciplinary, multi-institution R&amp;D collaboration led
by Texas A&amp;M University. The proposed center is composed of four key working
groups: Technology, Education, Outreach and Policy. The Center’s technical
approach will leverage advances in materials and mathematics; high-frequency and
digital communication technology platforms; artificial intelligence and deep
machine learning; and analog and neuromorphic computing to develop technologies
that can dynamically allocate spectrum in real time across multiple,
simultaneous users. Intelligent spectrum management has the potential to
dramatically increase the capacity and efficiency of use of the radio spectrum.
Beneficiaries will be not only the major institutional stakeholders, but also
ordinary citizens, including many in currently underserved populations, for whom
affordable, high-speed wireless services could provide access to health care,
education, and economic opportunity. Work done under the planning grant will
position the proposed Center to be a major locus of national collaboration in
spectrum-related research, education, policy, and public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.