* 2037376
* Build and Broaden: The Inaugural Conference of the Atlanta Network for Race, Ethnicity and Politics
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Andra Gillespie, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2022
* USD 59,142.00

This project funds the inaugural meeting of a new national research organization
,the Atlanta Network for Race, Ethnicity, and Politics (ANREP), comprised of
political and social scientists living in and/or studying issues related to
racial politics affecting the Southeastern United States. The purpose of this
first meeting is to for attendees to critically evaluate workshop papers
addressing theoretically-motivated research questions about the 2020 U.S.
Presidential and Congressional elections and to provide professional development
support to help attendees ultimately publish their papers. In addition,
discussion will focus on institutionalizing the organizational framework and
plans for the group. The conference goals align with NSFâ€™s mission to help
advance the progress of science and the goal of diversifying the STEM community
as it supports research on and by Americans who come from underrepresented
racial and ethnic minority groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed conference
and network brings together scholars from Atlanta-area minority serving
institutions, including historically Black colleges and minority-serving
universities, with faculty from non-MSI research universities, to enhance
scholarship, training, and career development in the study of race, ethnicity,
and politics. The conference, held at Clark Atlanta University and Emory
University in June 2021, uses the 2020 U.S. elections as substantive foci, the
conference highlights research on and by African Americans, Hispanics, and Asian
Americans. After a national call for papers, the proposed conference showcases
12 papers in four substantive panels, as well as a professional development
panel on publishing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.