* 2037838
* SII Planning: WHISPERS: Wireless Hardware Innovations and Signal Processing for Enhanced Radio-astronomy and Scientific Spectrum Sharing
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,03/31/2022
* Randall Berry, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 03/31/2022
* USD 299,720.00

This award is a planning grant for the Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National
Center for Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center). The focus of a spectrum
research SII-Center goes beyond 5G, IoT, and other existing or forthcoming
systems and technologies to chart out a trajectory to ensure United States
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum. The
extraordinary growth of wireless communication, navigation, and radar systems
has resulted in a convergence of scientific, commercial, and defense interests
competing for access to RF and millimeter wave spectrum. There is mounting
pressure on regulators and stakeholders to find mutually beneficial ways to
share this spectrum, including bands where scientists have so far had unfettered
access. A partnership comprising such complexity and scale is a grand challenge.
The stakes are high and the opportunities unprecedented and potentially
transformative. The objective of this project is to lay out a strategic
framework and coalesce a comprehensive center-scale team that will engage and
harness the forces competing for access to this precious resource. This
project’s vision is to catalyze a vibrant community of world-class scientists
and engineers in academia, industry, government agencies, and regulatory
authorities, to create a hub for sustained research, technologies, and
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at the development of a
comprehensive plan for a national center which would help maintain and extend US
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of radio spectrum from
sub-6 GHz to well beyond 100 GHz. The project team is led by the University of
Virginia (UVA), with partners at Northwestern University (NU), the National
Radio-Astronomy Observatory’s (NRAO) Central Development Lab (CDL), and Virginia
Diodes, Inc. (VDI). They propose to employ machine learning techniques, develop
nonlinear receiving metrology tools, as well as approaches to spectrum
management designed to protect science applications in poor signal-to-noise and
signal-to-interference environments. Planning activities include research topics
such as hardware development and design, as well as partnerships for broadening
participation. This award will include education and workforce development, such
as the development of a spectrum engineering certificate, curriculum, citizen
science projects, and broadening participation efforts in spectrum through
partnerships with Historically Black Colleges and Universities and other
minority-serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.