* 2037171
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a Noninvasive, Wireless Telemedicine Flow Sensor for Patients with Hydrocephalus
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Anna Somera, RHAEOS, INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,423,961.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in developing a set of technologies for the
management and care of patients with hydrocephalus. Hydrocephalus is a common
condition, affecting 1 million Americans, and over 1 in 1,000 live births. It is
caused by the accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the ventricles of the
brain, and nearly always treated with the surgical implantation of a tube, known
as a shunt, to drain this excess CSF away from the brain and into a distal
absorptive site within the body. Unfortunately, shunts have extremely high
failure rates, approaching 100% over 10 years, and diagnosing shunt malfunction
is extremely challenging owing to a combination of varied causes, nonspecific
symptoms, and the absence of a technology to directly quantify shunt patency.
Consequently, shunt-related procedures and admissions significantly burden
patients, their caregivers and hospitals, costing the U.S healthcare system over
$2 billion annually. Additionally, the inability to monitor patients at home,
coupled with the potential for shunt failure and the uncertainty surrounding its
diagnosis disrupts patients’ quality of life, and frequently results in
unnecessary hospital admission and imaging. This project advances a wireless,
wearable sensor that can noninvasively measure flow through
shunts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will advance translation of a new sensor for shunts. The sensor
is based on advances in soft, flexible electronics and relies on measurements of
thermal transport to detect flow through underlying skin layers. When placed on
skin overlying a shunt, the sensor will measure both the presence and magnitude
of flow of CSF, and transmit these data wirelessly to a receiver, such as a
smartphone or tablet, where it can be viewed through a software application with
a graphical user interface (GUI). The project will be specifically aimed at
developing the technology for home use and will include features that support
long-term measurements, including a rechargeable battery, charging station and
cloud data support. The ability to routinely monitor patients with hydrocephalus
at home is currently unavailable, and if successful, our sensor will allow for a
deeper understanding of CSF hydrodynamics. These data will be used to develop an
algorithm to detect long-term trends, with a view to understanding, predicting,
and ultimately preventing shunt failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.