* 2037574
* Evolutionary genetics of an alternative molecular mechanism of hypoxia response in metazoans
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Felipe Barreto, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 598,439.00

Environments with decreased levels of available oxygen impose highly stressful
conditions for animals. Exacerbated by global climate change, hypoxia in ocean
waters has been rapidly increasing in frequency and severity, and this has
adversely affected populations of marine organisms, including common fishes and
crustaceans. In animals, hypoxia results in pronounced cellular physiological
responses that are controlled by a suite of master regulatory genes, called the
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) pathway. The HIF pathway has been widely studied
in many groups of animals and was hypothesized to be conserved in all species.
Very recent genomic analyses in marine crustaceans, however, revealed that
several common and abundant species have lost this set of genes, but are still
very tolerant to temporary hypoxic conditions. These species therefore have
evolved a different yet still unknown genetic mechanism of dealing with hypoxia.
Discovering and characterizing these novel cellular and genetic processes is the
main focus of this project and will provide a broader and more complete
understanding of how animals adapt to stressful environments. The researchers
will engage undergraduate students from first-generation or underrepresented
groups in STEM through multiple routes, including encouraging participation in
all stages of the project, from data collection to conference presentation and
publication, as well as coordinating various research and training workshops in
conjunction with the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
program at OSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How we understand the genetic and
physiological processes associated with how animals deal with hypoxia have been
learned from species with the HIF regulatory machinery. This project will
investigate alternative genetic mechanisms of hypoxia response in the intertidal
copepod Tigriopus californicus, which is one of the species recently shown to
have lost the HIF pathway, but which still exhibit robust tolerance to extreme
hypoxic conditions. A major goal of the work is to unmask what transcription
factors have evolved to fill the role of HIF-1 in its absence, and what
physiological responses are controlled by these new master regulators. The
location of open chromatin regions will be identified in copepods under hypoxic
stress, which will permit computational prediction of candidate transcription
factors. Quantitative and functional genetic experiments will use both natural
populations (capturing long term adaptation to environmental hypoxia) and lab
populations selected for increased hypoxia tolerance (short term adaptation with
strong selection). Among experimental approaches, whole genome sequencing will
be used to map loci associated with natural variation in hypoxia response as
well as to quantify the trajectory of allele frequencies during laboratory
evolution. Finally, recombinant inbred lines will be used to estimate gene co-
expression networks and to test correlations of physiological phenotypes with
hypoxia-response transcription modules. Findings of this project will likely
reveal important functions for previously unknown genes and new ways in which
genes and proteins interact to maintain homeostasis during low oxygen
stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.