* 2037782
* SII Planning: Broad Explorations on Spectrum Technologies for Navigation, Environment, Surveillance, and Transportation (BEST NEST)
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Seyed Zekavat, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This award is a planning grant for the Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National
Center for Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center). The focus of a spectrum
research SII-Center goes beyond 5G, IoT, and other existing or forthcoming
systems and technologies to chart out a trajectory to ensure United States
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum. The
PIs bring together an interdisciplinary team to explore research on spectrum
technologies for navigation, environment, surveillance, and transportation (BEST
NEST). The team consists of Worcester Polytechnic Institute’s (WPI) Center for
Wireless Information Network Studies (CWINS) and Data Sciences Research Group
(DSRG), in close collaboration with WPI’s Laboratory for Education and
Application Prototypes (LEAP), and THz labs; Georgia Institute of Technology’s
(GaTech) Electromagnetic Measurements in Communication and Computing (EMC^2) lab
and GaTech Propagation Group (GTPG); University of Maine’s Wireless Sensing lab
(WiSe-Net); and, Wayne State University’s Connected and Autonomous Driving (CAR)
Lab. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes plans to initiate the creation
of new cross-disciplinary curriculum to impact the training of the next-
generation workforce in the emerging area of spectrum management. The proposed
center will likely impact industries critical to US competitiveness in
navigation, environment, healthcare, surveillance, urban transportation, and
smart infrastructures. The proposed workshops called the Center Integration and
Development (CID) workshops will help establish, maintain, and strengthen
partnership among academia, industry, government and non-government
organizations through organized panels, focused group discussions and
brainstorming phases. The PIs plan to bring STEM students across multiple
universities together, while exploring to engage precollege students and broaden
the participation of underrepresented K-12 students. This award will fund
activities towards the development of a full center proposal. The PIs propose to
organize a series of CID workshops which will enable brainstorming, research
coordination and community engagement, partnerships, and education and workforce
development. The workshops will assess the multi-disciplinary areas of
foundations, hardware, networking, security, test, and measurement, and economic
and social mechanisms of spectrum technologies. The proposed BEST NEST will
examine the application of spectrum management for passive systems such as space
observatories, soil moisture sensing, earth exploration, and air traffic control
radars. BEST NEST will also focus on sensor communication-computation techniques
and protocols key to high speed, low power and efficient data acquisition,
routing, analysis, and processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.