* 2037830
* SII Planning:  Identifying  issues, opportunities, and challenges of emerging wireless spectrum innovations
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,04/30/2021
* Ramesh Rao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 04/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

This award is a planning grant for the Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National
Center for Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center). The focus of a spectrum
research SII-Center goes beyond 5G, IoT, and other existing or forthcoming
systems and technologies to chart out a trajectory to ensure United States
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum. The
need for wireless systems is exponentially growing, and future implications need
to be explored. Emerging issues, opportunities and challenges for use of highly
valuable spectrum and the definition of important and potential breakthrough
research agendas and new technologies need to be defined to meet new challenges
and achieve a safe, secure, and reliable mobile networked world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Led by the University of California, San Diego, the
assembled team includes team members from the University of Oklahoma, Stanford
University, the University of Wisconsin, New York University, Hughes Research
Laboratory, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Keysight Technologies, Qualcomm, MIT,
Lincoln Laboratory, Shared Spectrum Company, Verizon, and Google. Key areas the
team will explore include science users, air traffic management, communications,
radars, wide area radio frequency sensing including low-Earth orbit (LEO)
constellations, radio layer innovations with particular emphases on machine
learning and networking around small cells, implementation aspects of 6G and THz
band systems, and policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.