* 2037755
* EAGER: QSA: Approximating the Ground States of Non-Stoquastic Hamiltonians Using the Variational Quantum Eigensolver
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Tameem Albash, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,429.00

Quantum algorithms utilize the unique properties of quantum physics to perform
computational tasks, and for certain tasks they can do so more efficiently than
algorithms restricted to the laws of classical physics. Quantum computers that
can implement such algorithms are now publicly available, but these devices
remain limited in the size and length of computations they can perform, keeping
quantum algorithms with proven quantum advantages out of reach. Hybrid
algorithms that use both quantum and classical hardware have been proposed as
one approach to address this challenge, and this project aims to study the
viability of hybrid approaches in delivering a quantum advantage by performing a
systematic computational cost comparison with state-of-the-art classical
algorithms. If advantages are possible using near-term quantum computers, it
would dramatically enhance our ability to understand and predict complex systems
across the physical sciences. The project highlights the multi-disciplinary
nature of quantum computing and will train students to have a diverse toolbox to
tackle emerging challenges in the field. This approach is at the heart of the
project's efforts to develop a new curriculum to prepare a 'quantum-ready'
workforce to address the call of the National Quantum Initiative Act of
2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The task of approximating the ground state of many-
body non-stoquastic Hamiltonians, a class of quantum Hamiltonians that describes
many relevant model systems such as fermionic and sign-problematic Hamiltonians,
manifests itself in a range of disciplines, from high energy physics to quantum
chemistry. Current classical approaches for tackling this problem are
computationally prohibitive at relevant system sizes, and overcoming or
mitigating this computational bottleneck would enable new simulations of
important model systems with far-reaching impacts across the physical sciences.
To what degree present quantum hardware can achieve this remains an open
question. This project addresses this possibility by performing a side-by-side
comparison of the computational cost of hybrid quantum-classical variational
algorithms and state-of-the-art classical algorithms using well-defined problem
classes of non-stoquastic Hamiltonians of varying difficulty. A key objective of
this assessment is to understand the differences and similarities between the
optimization landscapes of the hybrid and purely-classical approaches, which may
provide insight into the conditions under which the hybrid approach can achieve
an advantage. The research combines lessons from spin glass theory, Hamiltonian
complexity, numerical simulations, and rigorous benchmarking experience in order
to make an assessment of the viability of achieving a quantum advantage on near-
term quantum hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.