* 2037836
* SBIR Phase I:  Drone Control in Turbulence via Reinforcement Learning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Ben Hightower, AIFLY VENTURES
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2022
* USD 255,882.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to improve drone control. Current controllers are effective in
specific environments but perform poorly in environments and flight conditions
such as turbulence, thereby narrowing the scope in which drones can be used.
This project will advance a plug-and-play solution in which users can focus on
higher-level tasks specific to their use case, like obstacle avoidance and route
planning. This new controller has broad applications in both commercial and
military settings: it enables stable flight across a wide array of environments,
expands the flight envelope in turbulent conditions, and allows for longer
missions due to increased control efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the problem of
drone control in turbulence through the development of a reinforcement learning-
based flight controller. The project will enlarge the design envelope for
quadcopters as well as provide a system and environment for testing
reinforcement learning algorithms that can be applied to other control problems.
Contemporary systems rely on Proportional Integrative Derivative (PID)
controllers as an essential part of stable flight. These PID controllers rely on
holistically tuned, static functions to convert maneuvering commands into
voltage changes across drone motors to meet the rotorâ€™s targeted rotation speed.
In lieu of statically defined PID equations, this novel controller uses a
reinforcement learning algorithm, which is a subset of machine learning where an
agent is trained to select actions that maximize a reward across an environment.
This technique has led to greater-than-human performance across a variety of
different control and game theory tasks, but little is known about how these
techniques fare when replacing PID control systems. The primary advantage the
development of a reinforcement learning controller would have over simpler PID
controllers is the ability for the user to view drone control at a higher level
of abstraction, thus mitigating the need to focus on the minutiae of flight
control for complex missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.