* 2037701
* I-Corps:  Software system that streams data from flight data recorders in aerial vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* JUNAID ZUBAIRI, SUNY College at Fredonia
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable the
aviation businesses to capture and analyze flight data in real-time for
increased efficiency and profits. Flight data recorders were first put into use
in 1947. They have since evolved into valuable tools for monitoring all aspects
of flight. Today, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) mandates the
recording of 88 parameters; Some operators are recording up to 2,000 additional
parameters. Current solutions to the challenges of real-time data acquisition
entail high satellite transmission costs and additional capital equipment
requirements. Therefore, commercial airlines continue using post-flight data
analysis, while many operators forego utilizing flight data altogether. The
proposed technology intends to change this scenario by offering a software
solution that can reside in equipment aboard an aircraft, transmitting data
using low-cost transmission methods. The technology may encourage wider use of
flight data and enable participation in Flight Operations Quality Assurance
(FOQA) programs. If a disaster happens at sea or over difficult terrain, the
proposed system could render expensive recovery operations obsolete since all
flight data recorder data would be available in the
cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project provides real-time data
acquisition for ground-based monitoring of flights, allowing for engine data and
pilot control inputs to be analyzed while an aircraft is in the air. Currently,
most flight recorder data are only analyzed days or weeks after a flight, when
the opportunity to address cost-saving efficiency and safety issues is long
past. With the proposed technology, flight crews and maintenance teams would be
able to make flight and safety adjustments based on streaming data in real time.
In addition, the new technology would encourage data mining in the aviation
industry to enhance aircraft performance, conserve resources, protect the
environment, and improve safety. The system runs on an aircraft server and
distributed main and data servers. The mode of transmission can be radio,
cellular links, satellite, or via other, emerging technology such as high-
altitude blimps. The amount and rate of data and the time window are highly
predictable, thus resulting in efficient planning of
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.