* 2037383
* SenSE: Multimodal noninvasive wearable sensors and machine learning for predicting critical glycemic events
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Gerard Cote, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Proposal Title:&lt;br/&gt;SenSE: Multimodal noninvasive wearable sensors and
machine learning for predicting critical glycemic
events&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF-2037383: Coté, Gutierrez, Erraguntla, McKay and
DeSalvo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The main
objective of this research is to develop a wearable sensor system that allows
people with diabetes to monitor their blood glucose (sugar) levels without
having to draw blood. The approach relies on measuring subtle changes in
physiological signals that occur when blood glucose deviates from its normal
range. Predicting these deviations is critical for diabetes management, as
hypoglycemia (low blood glucose) can have severe health consequences in the
short term, and hyperglycemia (high blood glucose) for the long term. The
signals are measured using six different sensors, all on a wearable arm band,
and are combined with machine-learning algorithms to predict sugar levels and
help keep patients in the normal blood sugar range. This wearable system could
eventually be used to predict and monitor other adverse health outcomes such as
heart problems (e.g., congestive heart failure or hypertension). This project
also provides research training to diverse students at the graduate and
undergraduate level. The research team will work with the university programs to
broaden participation in science and engineering. In addition, high school
students and teachers from underserved and underrepresented areas will be
involved to work on university-based laboratory research to excite them about
science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a multimodal wearable sensing
platform and machine learning algorithms that can be used to predict glycemic
events non-invasively. Managing diabetes requires balancing the long-term risks
of diabetes complication related to hyperglycemia (blindness, kidney failure,
amputation, stroke, and heart disease) and the acute risks of hypoglycemia
(seizure, coma, or death). At present, however, this can only be achieved with
continuous glucose monitors (CGMs), which are expensive, invasive, and typically
only prescribed to 5% of the patients with diabetes (type 1). Thus, the specific
aims of this project are to: 1) Develop a multimodal system of non-invasive
sensors including optimal placement and integration of six sensors; 2) Develop
predictive models of glycemic events including statistical and deep-learning
models capable of predicting future hypoglycemic events and characterize time in
hyperglycemic range; and 3) Characterization and validation with human subjects,
including two studies to be conducted in the clinic and at
home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.