* 2037658
* SaTC: EDU: Vertically-Aligned Hands-on Cybersecurity Curriculum Based on Adversarial Thinking
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Amit Jain, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Cybersecurity threats take a psychological and financial toll on individuals,
governments, and industry. Therefore, it is critical that academic institutions
produce a workforce capable of handling the nation’s increasing cybersecurity
challenges. Existing educational materials focus mainly on teaching
cybersecurity from the perspective of principles and concepts. However, it is
essential to develop materials that teach students how to think like an
adversary (attacker). The goal of this project is to address the cybersecurity
workforce shortage as well as gaps in available university-level cybersecurity
programs through the development of undergraduate cybersecurity education labs
focused on adversarial thinking. The three lab modules will be designed to be
stackable and adaptable and will be made available to the cybersecurity
community nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a
vertically-aligned undergraduate curriculum that ensures a logical progression
of materials as well as learning objectives that increase in complexity. The
modules will incorporate industry best practices and tools, and address both
relevant knowledge and hands-on practical skills to simulate real-world cyber
problems and environments. Game-theoretical and multi-role approaches will be
used to help students think more like an adversary. Module materials will
incorporate virtual machine images for lab activities, a student manual with
hands-on lab activities, instructional videos on how to deliver the lab lessons,
and an instructor’s manual with detailed rationale and instructions. In
addition, the module materials will include an assessment guide to evaluate how
the activities increase student awareness, adoption, and retention of new
knowledge. The modules will be deployed and evaluated at Boise State University.
The modules will also be integrated into cybersecurity courses at Northwest
Missouri State University and Illinois State University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy
Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and
privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program
aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan
and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing
social and economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.