* 2037752
* Collaborative Research: Was There a Shift Toward Small, Non-Fossilizing Plankton after the End of the Cretaceous Mass Extinction?
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Christopher Lowery, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 398,892.00

Phytoplankton, which live in the surface ocean, produce organic matter from
sunlight and carbon dioxide. This primary production forms the base of most
marine food webs and is a critical part of the global carbon cycle. In the
modern ocean plankton are being impacted by warming and ocean acidification.
Natural changes in ocean temperature and chemistry in the geologic past can help
us understand the long-term effects of stressors such as warming and
acidification. The Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-Pg) mass extinction event ~66 million
years ago was one such time of global change. Calcareous (fossil-forming)
nanoplankton were one of the dominant primary producers in the Cretaceous ocean.
However, 93% of species of this group went extinct at the K-Pg boundary, and
they were never again as dominant. Previous studies of the plankton response to
the K-Pg event have generally been limited to studies of species which leave a
physical fossil record. Thus, these studies provided only a partial view of
ancient plankton ecosystems. The proposed work will overcome this limitation by
using chemical fossils called biomarkers. These new data will be used together
with traditional physical fossils to reconstruct changes in the marine plankton
community following the K-Pg event. It has often been assumed that non-
fossilizing phytoplankton filled the gap left by the decline in calcareous
nannoplankton. This study will help test that hypothesis. Documenting the
changes in both non-fossilizing and fossilizing plankton will improve our
understanding of long-term changes in plankton ecology, and of how those changes
could alter the ocean carbon cycle. This project will train early career
researchers and undergraduate students, and will disseminate results to broader
audiences through outreach and educational activities in partnership with
organizations and programs in Austin, TX and Boulder,
CO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop datasets of lipid biomarkers,
calcareous nannoplankton, and planktic foraminifera from 5 sites in Tunisia,
Spain, and the US Gulf Coast. Three sites in Tunisia (El Kef, Elles, and El
Melah) represent a depth transect on a continental shelf (paleodepths of 200-500
m), Caravaca represents deeper water (~600-1000 m), while Brazos represent a
shallow shelf which will allow us to test regional variability between north
Africa and the US Gulf Coastal Plain. These data will allow tests of the
following hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;1. A low-diversity assemblage of non-fossilizing
phytoplankton bloomed in the aftermath of the K-Pg extinction, during the time
of low diversity calcareous nannoplankton “disaster” assemblages.&lt;br/&gt;2.
Subsequent recovery of calcareous nannoplankton diversity is associated with a
decline in non-fossilizing phytoplankton.&lt;br/&gt;3. Shifts in the
heterotrophic planktic foraminifera assemblages are tied to turnover in the
whole autotrophic plankton assemblage.&lt;br/&gt;4. The post-extinction
community of primary producers was dominated by smaller phytoplankton like algae
and cyanobacteria, and would have increased carbon recycling in shallow waters
and reduced carbon export to the deep sea.&lt;br/&gt;The study will improve our
understanding of the recovery after the end Cretaceous mass extinction and in
our overall understanding of the role of plankton ecology in marine ecosystem
change. Additionally, reconstructing the whole plankton ecosystem, and not just
the part that fossilizes, would represent a significant improvement of our
toolkit to investigate ancient oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.