* 2037828
* Measuring and Mathematically Modeling Ionic Transport in Auditory Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Alan Kay, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 03/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Throughout the animal kingdom, ears finely tuned for picking up vibrations in
the air allow animals to sense the world around them at a distance. The sensory
receptors that translate nanometer-sized movements into electrical events that
underlie hearing, have quite different shapes and locations in the ears of
vertebrates and invertebrates. Despite this, it is remarkable that all auditory
receptors rely on differences in potassium concentrations between cellular
compartments to power them, unlike other receptors that use sodium or calcium
gradients. This project will use sensory cells in fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
'ears', which are located within its antennae, to understand the processes that
lead to the development of such potassium gradients. Results from this research
will generate molecular tools for measuring potassium concentrations inside and
outside cells. In addition, the project will develop mathematical tools for
illuminating the operation of complex cellular systems, and, as part of the
broader impact objectives, it will also develop a set of experiments using
equipment from Backyard Brains, which can be performed in high school biology
classes and which will be designed to help students understand electrical
current flow in living organisms, an idea which presents a challenge for many
students. Summer workshops will give high school teachers the opportunity to use
the equipment, which will then be made available for them to use in their
classrooms. In addition, the project will expand the field of Computational
Biology/Neuroscience at the University of Iowa by training undergraduate and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to this proposal is the use of
scolopidia, the mechanoreceptors of Drosophila ears, as a tractable model for
studying the processes that establish potassium gradients. Scolopidia are
cellular ensembles, consisting of sensory neurons and supporting cells. One
support cell is the scolopale cell, a glial-like cell that envelops the sensory
dendrites, creating a space filled with receptor lymph, which has a high
potassium concentration. The project will use the powerful genetic tools
developed by the Drosophila community, to identify the nature and location of
ion transporters involved in generating potassium gradients. The project
proposes to develop novel genetically-encoded potassium indicators to determine
the ionâ€™s concentration in the scolopale space. In addition, mathematical models
that capture the dynamics of the coupled scolopale cell and its extracellular
space, and that shape the electrical properties of fly ears, will be built.
There is much to learn about the coupling of electrodiffusion processes between
cells, to clarify the understanding of several physiological processes in
cellular ensembles like epithelia. Since scolopidia are also found in mosquito
ears, the research could provide new insights to help combat this prominent
disease vector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.