* 2037918
* SII Planning: Creating a Visionary, Interdisciplinary, and Transformational National Center for Spectrum and Wireless Systems Research
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Pamela Cosman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,942.00

This award is a planning grant for the Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National
Center for Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center). The focus of a spectrum
research SII-Center goes beyond 5G, IoT, and other existing or forthcoming
systems and technologies to chart out a trajectory to ensure United States
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum.
Over the past four decades, worldwide growth of wireless systems has provided
tremendous societal benefit, enabling increased digital connectivity,
telemedicine, social media, improved weather forecasting and more. It has also
put significant and competing demands on many parts of the radio spectrum. To
meet these challenges, this project supports the Wireless Innovation and
Spectrum Evolution (WISE); which convenes former members of the Senior Executive
Service in the FCC and NTIA and university faculty from the University of
Colorado Boulder, the University of California San Diego, the University of
Pittsburgh, and the University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez. The WISE group will
develop a research agenda and partnerships through workshops and discussions.
Students will be supported to participate in these workshops and to develop
spectrum science modules for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the
center development process, stakeholders from academia, the federal government,
and industry will be engaged to identify key technology, policies and workforce
challenges to be addressed by the center. Six core research focus areas will
include: Spectrum Efficiency and Coexistence; Next Generation Radio Devices;
Spectrum Science; Modeling and Measurement; Wireless Systems; and Policy,
Economics and Privacy. The process of bringing researchers, policy makers, and
key stakeholders will result in the development of a vision and road map for an
integrated and successful Wireless Innovation and Spectrum Evolution
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.