* 2037775
* Bubble-mediated transport and aerosolization of microorganisms: implications for natural and manual aeration to adjacent communities
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Sarah Preheim, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 329,000.00

Aeration (the introduction of air bubbles into water) either through mechanical
systems or through wind/wave action represents a common way for oxygen to become
dissolved into water bodies. Such processes are important to prevent the
formation of “dead-zones”, areas where the oxygen concentration is too low to
support animal life. Because bubbles are lighter than water, they naturally rise
to the surface. Small particles like sediment, microbes, toxins, and organic
matter, as well as gases can be swept along with the bubble as it travels to the
surface. When the bubble bursts at the surface, bacteria and other particles and
gases can disperse through the air, increasing the chances of human exposure.
While we understand the power of bubbles to aerosolize particles into the air,
the underlying causes are poorly understood. The goal of this project is to
understand how environmental conditions such as bubble size, microbial cell
size, and water chemistry affects microbial transport and aerosol generation.
This goal will be achieved using both controlled laboratory experiments and
field study at Rock Creek (Pasadena, MD, USA), a low oxygen water body that has
a mechanical aeration system to prevent dead zone formation. This research is
based on the hypothesis that changes in bubble and microbial cell size, as well
as water chemistry parameters can be used to predict microbial aerosolization.
The public will be engaged in this research through citizen science projects,
increasing the scientific literacy of the Nation. Successful completion of this
research has potential to protect human and ecological health through prevention
and control of pathogens and toxin aerosolization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microorganisms live in an environment filled with air-
water interfaces, such as those found at the surface of a lake, around gas
bubbles from aeration, or in water pockets trapped in soils. The behavior of
microorganisms at these multiphase interfaces is largely understudied, in spite
of their importance in controlling air-water-soil mass transfer. The goal of
this research is to address these gaps in knowledge to understand how bubble
size, microbial cell size, and water salinity affects bubble-mediated microbial
transport and aerosolization. The research is guided by the hypothesis that
changes in environmental variables (bubble size, microbe size, salinity) will
result in differences in transport and aerosolization that can be predicted from
equations and relationship previously derived for model colloids. These
predictions will be tested across multiple scales using diverse microorganisms
ranging in size from viruses to eukaryotic algae under controlled laboratory
conditions to measure interfacial and small-scale transport. Field-scale
transport will be measured during mechanical aeration of a low-oxygen aquatic
environment (Rock Creek, Pasadena, MD). Interactions and bubble-mediated
transport and aerosolization will be quantified with state-of-the-art particle
tracking methods, flow cytometry, quantitative polymerase chain reaction, and
microbial community characterization. A diverse group of high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students will be trained in inter-disciplinary
research topics and the public will be engaged in the research through a number
of outreach activities. These experiments will result in quantifiable
relationships that can be used to understand how bubble-generating processes
will impact microbial dispersal within the water column and into aerosols, which
can be applied to microbial ecology or microbial risk assessment for novel or
worsening microbial threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.