* 2037963
* Life in Ice: Probing Microbial Englacial Activity through Time
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Heidi Smith, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 08/31/2024
* USD 481,268.00

Glacial ice cores serve as a museum back in time, providing detailed records of
past climatic conditions. In addition to chronological records such as
temperature, chemistry and gas composition, ice provides a unique environment
for preserving microbes and other biological materials through time. These
microbes provide invaluable insight into the physiological capabilities
necessary for survival in the Earth’s cryosphere and other icy planetary bodies,
yet little is known about them. This award supports fundamental research into
the activity of microbes in ice, and directly supports major research priorities
regarding Antarctic biota identified in the 2015 National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine report, A Strategic Vision for NSF Investments in
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Research. The broader impacts of this work are that
it will be relevant to researchers across paleoclimate and biological fields. It
will support two early career researchers, a graduate and an undergraduate
student who will conduct laboratory analyses, participate in outreach
activities, publish papers in scientific journals and present at conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will use previously collected ice cores to
investigate englacial microbial activity from the Holocene back to the Last
Glacial Maximum from the blue ice area of Taylor Glacier, Antarctica. The
proposal identified making significant contributions to 1) investing how
Antarctic organisms evolve and adapt to changing environment, 2) understanding
how microbes alter the preservation of paleorecord-relevant gas and trace
element information in ice cores, and 3) identifying microbial life in cores and
their activity in relation to dust depositional events. Two recently developed
complementary techniques (bio-orthogonal noncanonical amino acid tagging and
deuterium isotope probing) in combination with Raman Confocal Microspectroscopy
will be used to assess and quantify microbial activity in ice. During phase one
of the project, these methods will be optimized using deaccessioned ice cores
available at the National Science Foundation’s Ice Core Facility. In phase two,
ice cores in a time series from the Taylor Glacier will be analyzed for
geochemistry and microbial activity. Research results will provide a
comprehensive view of englacial microbial communities, including their metabolic
diversity and activity, and the effect of geochemical parameters on microbial
assemblages from different climate periods. Given the dearth of information
available on englacial microbial communities, the results of this research will
be of particular significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.