* 2037917
* I-Corps: An immersive virtual reality platform for remote physical therapy and monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Sri Kurniawan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an intelligent immersive virtual reality platform for remote
physical therapy and monitoring. The project's core technology examines
biomechanical analysis to facilitate telemedicine both in the clinic and at the
patient's home using a head-mounted display and hand trackers. This provides a
means for in-patient success metrics and full-body virtual guidance using a
remote virtual platform. Such technology may have the ability to enable greater
affordability, accessibility, and accuracy of physical therapy for patients and
therapists alike. Patient throughput potentially could be doubled through remote
visits in virtual environments and automated physical health documentation. In
addition, it is possible to target marginalized communities in "medical
deserts," where patient care is significantly limited by hospital capacity,
physical distance, doctors per population, and cost. With remote tools and
predictive physical therapy analytics, more individuals will receive access to
treatment regardless of socio-economic and demographic background. This
technology could lower hospital visits, enable therapy clinics to remain open
during shelter-in-place periods, decrease cost for patients and clinics alike,
and begin detecting exercise needs earlier to manage the pace of recovery by
each user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of an immersive virtual reality environment for gamified rehabilitation. The
experience provides a remote medium to monitor user pain, discomfort, mobility,
and biometrics during a prescribed exercise session. Pilot research has
developed the integration of artificial intelligence algorithms towards
predictive runtime analytics for exercise in immersive virtual reality, as well
as incorporating biofeedback (brainwave, heart rate, galvanic skin response) and
soft wearable robotics (force assistive cable-driven suits) for evaluating
virtual exercise games. In addition, research was performed with local
healthcare organizations in Santa Cruz, California, to assess this technology
towards providing patient success metrics and exercise interaction through
commercial head-mounted display virtual reality (VR) systems. This technology
has the potential to positively change a consumer's physical therapy experience
by significantly reducing traditional clinical and insurance costs, enabling
remote access for populations of low-socioeconomic backgrounds, alleviating
discomfort for patients, and increasing remote recovery insights
tenfold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.