* 2037472
* Strengthening and Expanding Partnerships and Access through the CMPS-MSI Scholars' Research Network
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Lorrie Frasure, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 08/31/2023
* USD 225,164.00

The Collaborative Multiracial Post-Election Survey (CMPS)-Minority Serving
Institution (MSI) Scholars’ Research Network aims to build and broaden the
participation of scholars from Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs), especially
those who are first-generation college students, and/or who identify as Black,
Latinx, and Native American Indian. This partnership between the longstanding
CMPS research project, housed at the University of California-Los Angeles, and
three MSIs (Diné College-Tsaile, Howard University, and the University of New
Mexico) will enhance the understanding of diverse populations in the U.S. and
some of the most critical social science research topics in the contemporary
U.S. Using the CMPS dataset collected after the November 2020 presidential
election as a research anchor, this project creates new avenues to build
research, publication, and grant writing expertise by supporting diverse groups
of MSI researchers to communicate and coordinate their academic research
efforts. This grant provides MSIs with graduate student research support and
research/grant writing workshops at each of the three MSI campuses. It also
provides funding for MSI scholars to attend the CMPS Scholars Research Network
Conference at UCLA and funding for MSI scholars who are CMPS National Advisory
Board Members, to attend the board meetings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to advance academic careers and aid graduate student and faculty
retention efforts through the support of research-based networks, mentorship,
and professional development of Black, Latinx, and Indigenous scholars at MSIs.
The activities supported by this grant, including small MSI working group
meetings and MSI researcher attendance at the CMPS Summer Research Workshop, is
to provide facilitated, intentional opportunities for MSI partners (faculty
leads and working group participants) to build and establish relationships with
scholars across the country and senior scholars in the social sciences. MSI
scholars will also have an opportunity to showcase their research projects to
encourage cross-institutional support and collaboration. The summer workshop is
an efficient and effective avenue for creating mentorship and professional
socialization opportunities, including co-authorship of papers, articles, and
grant proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.