* 2037519
* CAREER: Data-Driven Document Generation
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Alexander Rush, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Increasingly, machine-generated language is being used in everyday interactions,
from consumer applications such as intelligent assistants to accessibility tools
for simplifying complex documents. This CAREER project seeks to improve methods
for text generation to ensure they work consistently when producing documents
longer than a few sentences. The investigator will study machine learning-based
methods for text generation that aim to ensure that document structure is
consistent, that people and places are referred to appropriately, and that
factual information is correctly expressed. The award will additionally support
the development of open-source tools to make it easier for others to use and
extend these approaches for a variety of text generation application. This
research will be integrated into education through new methods for university
teaching of machine learning, mentoring for underrepresented students in
computer science, and outreach to primary-school students who may not have been
exposed to artificial intelligence and data science as an area of study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is on data-driven natural
language generation with deep learning. In recent years, the field has made
progress on using new machine learning methods to learn to generate text based
on human examples; however, this work is still far from human level particularly
when generating document-level text. This project will develop new machine
learning methods using deep generative models. These include learning and
controlling document structure with deep hidden Markov models, content
determination through generative reference and alignment, and aggregating
content into text through bottom-up selection. Each of these combines research
into machine learning methods with natural language analysis. The goal of the
project is to develop an open-source implementation of a text generation methods
that allow users to easily target new domains and assess the fidelity and
coherence of their system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.