* 2037290
* I-Corps:  A Mixed Reality Solution for Diagnosis and Recovery of Visual Function Losses due to Age-related, Degenerative Eye Diseases
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Alireza Tavakkoli, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development and translation of a head mounted display system that provides eye-
care professionals and patients with affordable, reliable, and convenient
technologies for diagnosing each individual patientâ€™s disease, predicting
progression risks, and designing effective vision rehabilitation protocols. A
spectrum of conditions including retina ganglion cell (RGC) degeneration, optic
disc edema, neovascularization, and retinal hemorrhaging affect the human visual
system and are associated with progressive vision threatening diseases such as
age-related macular degeneration (AMD), diabetic retinopathy (DR), ischemic
optic neuropathy (ION), and glaucoma. According to the National Eye Institute
(NEI), these eye diseases are expected to affect over 14 million patients in
2020. The main commercial potential of the proposed technology is in eye-care
(ophthalmology and optometry) as well as low-vision rehabilitation therapy. In
addition, 14 million patients suffering from many forms of vision-threatening
retina or optic nerve diseases will benefit from using the proposed technology
to improve their functions of daily living. Vision researchers and scientists
who study the human visual system will be able to use the product to advance
knowledge about the human eye and vision to improve the status of eye care in
the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a mixed-reality product that utilizes machine learning and computer vision to
model patient's perceptual-functional vision deficit. The deficits are measured
in a binocular manner, i.e. for each eye separately. This makes the proposed
technology capable of modeling the vision loss for each eye independently. By
utilizing these models the proposed device appropriately modifies the visual
stimuli to help patients recover lost visual function. The device also may be
used by the patient to undertake several functional vision assessments to
measure visual fields losses, color and contrast sensitivity, stereo-vision, and
acuity, at home. By performing these tests, the proposed device builds baseline
measures for each patient and monitors the status and progression of the
patient's vision loss over time. The results of these tests may be communicated
with the patient's eye care provider to determine suitable interventions when
the need arises. The product is based on recent research results integrating the
capabilities of taking video captures from two independent cameras and modifying
the visual stimuli for each eye independently. These functionalities may make
the proposed device an invaluable low-vision aid for patients who have lost
mobility and independence due to vision loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.