* 2037861
* I-Corps: Evolutionary Biology Platform for the Early Detection of Solid Tumor Cancers
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Hakima Amri, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a standalone, non-invasive pan-cancer diagnostic test to
eliminate the annual loss of more than 240,000 patients to late-stage cancer.
The detection of multiple cancers early and with a single test may capture part
of the $11.5 billion cost burden associated with existing diagnostic standards
that result in unnecessary follow-up tests, overtreatment, complications due to
late-stage treatment, and hospitalization costs from extended in-patient stays.
By enabling physicians to detect cancer early and further subtype disease, the
platform will allow for capabilities beyond detection, including treatment
matching, therapy monitoring, and biomarker discovery—contributing to the
broader health care goal of personalizing medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a diagnostic platform that
provides a dynamic molecular profile that maps the evolution of cancer in the
body. The technology relies on a novel classification of biomarkers produced by
both cancer cells and healthy cells. This technique analyzes the shared derived
traits of the proteins and metabolites that cells release into the blood as they
mutate and become cancerous, and further classifies these biomarkers in an
easily interpretable evolutionary model. The technology fundamentally advances
the understanding of the cancer “switch” by both recognizing and making sense of
the variety of causal factors that lead to cancer development. Preliminary data
suggests a high level of accuracy (&gt;95% sensitivity and specificity),
supported by peer-reviewed publications. This technology platform may provide a
comprehensive portrait of a patient’s disease state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.