* 2037695
* RAPID: Developing a universal modular platform to engineer coronavirus vaccine candidates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2022
* Angad Mehta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Chemistry
Division supports the studies by Dr. Angad Mehta at the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign to make live attenuated forms of the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) that require an unnatural
compound to reproduce. SARS-CoV-2 is the virus that causes coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19). Live-attenuated viruses have reduced abilities to cause
disease, but remain capable of providing immunity in humans. As such, live-
attenuated viruses represent one of the effective strategies for the development
of vaccines against wide-spread viral infections. The genomic RNA of the virus
must be modified with a methyl group in order to be copied by infected cells,
and this methyl group is added by enzymes using the natural compound
S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet). Dr. Mehtaâ€™s project engineers SARS-CoV-2
particles that use synthetic forms of AdoMet (called xAdoMet) for this critical
methylation step. The resulting engineered SARS-CoV-2* is a live virus in a
laboratory, where xAdoMet can be added as a required supplement. The SARS-
CoV-2*, however, cannot reproduce in normal cells, where xAdoMet is not present,
but can still result in an immune response in an infected patient. The impact on
society is that a unique platform is engineered for the development of vaccines
to address viral diseases, including the COVID-19 pandemic. The broader impacts
of this project include the strong cross-disciplinary training of graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of this study is to develop live
attenuated SARS-CoV-2 particles that are dependent on an unnatural version of an
essential cofactor for its replication that is added in a laboratory setting,
but not available in the infected host. SARS-CoV-2 requires S-adenosylmethionine
(AdoMet) as a cofactor for a critical methylation of the viral RNA by a methyl
transferase in order to translate its genes and replicate its genome. Through
this project, a strain of the coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2*) is engineered that
utilizes and is dependent on an unnatural analogue of AdoMet (xAdoMet) for the
critical methylation reactions. Such a virus requires supplements of xAdoMet in
a laboratory in order to replicate. Once injected into a host, this viral strain
can infect a cell and potentially induce an immune response in the host, but
cannot replicate in the absence of exogenous supplementation with xAdoMet. The
objectives are to synthesize a series of xAdoMet compounds; use the xAdoMet
compounds to engineer SARS-CoV-2* through directed evolution; and test the live
attenuated virus for induction of immune response in cell culture. The AdoMet-
dependent methylation mechanism is conserved in all known coronavirus pathogens
and, therefore, has the potential to serve as a far-reaching and modular
platform for vaccine development well beyond SARS-
CoV-2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.