* 2037947
* STTR Phase I:  Structure Property Relationship Studies for Designing Next Generation Nanocomposite Blood Bags
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* KUMAR CHALLA, XHEME INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2022
* USD 255,871.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project addresses the degradation, waste and shortage of
stored blood. This project proposes a blood bag capable of preserving the
overall health and vigor of stored blood, including rare blood types, and
extending the shelf life of blood and platelets. Donated blood begins to degrade
on day 11 and expires on day forty-two. Platelets expire within 5-7 days of
storage. By increasing the shelf-life of healthy blood, the proposed technology
decreases waste and addresses the shortage of blood supplies around the world.
The current global blood shortage is 30 M units per year, and 18 M units of
donated blood are wasted due to expiration. Globally, 400 M people with rare
blood types don't have consistent access due to the cost of frozen rare blood.
Degradation in red blood cells due to oxygen exposure and other factors begin as
early as days 11 - 21 after collection, impacting post-transfusion recovery by
increasing mortality, serious infections, multi-organ failure, thrombosis, and
the length of the hospital stay. Increasing the functional health of stored
human blood and extending its viability beyond forty-two days will dramatically
impact the health of patients around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project aims to develop new polymer nanocomposite-based plastics and
blood bags by using the anti-oxidative and antimicrobial activity of
nanoparticles within the composite plastic. The three main objectives of the
proposed Phase 1 project are to develop functional polymer nanocomposite
plastics and films, determine the effect of nanoparticles on human RBCs and
platelets in response to storage and to develop a prototype polymer
nanocomposite blood bag and test its efficacy to increase the shelf life and
functional health of human blood and platelets. The project applies
interdisciplinary tools to advance polymer nanocomposite bags while taking into
consideration stringent requirements of physicochemical and mechanical
properties for this unique application. The challenge is to balance the
essential requirements of a blood bag while ensuring the efficacy with no
leaching of nano materials during blood storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.