* 2037687
* EAGER-QAC-QCH: Hybrid Quantum Classical Algortithm for NMR Inference
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Eugene Demler, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Eugene Demler of Harvard University is supported by an EAGER award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to study Hybrid Quantum-Classical Algorithms for NMR Inference. The
Condensed Matter and Materials program in the Division of Materials Research
also cofunds this award. The proposal was submitted in response to the Quantum
Algorithm Challenge Dear Colleague Letter, NSF 20-056. NMR is one of the most
powerful analytical techniques available to medicine and biology. It is suited
for both in vivo and in vitro studies. Yet it is difficult to interpret the data
in NMR experiments. Spectral profiling of compounds is a complex pattern
recognition problem. Spectroscopic analysis and interpretation for NMR compound
identification is cumbersome and slow. It can be inconsistent across platforms.
It is generally hard to scale it to novel compounds, an important obstacle to
drug discovery and identification of mechanism of action. Therefore, compound
identification is a major challenge for implementing these technologies in
medicine, engineering, and science. Quantum correlations and entanglement rather
than traditional correlations define NMR spectra. Therefore, quantum approaches
to solve spectroscopic inference problems are well-suited to achieve a sought-
after quantum advantage. Eugene Demler is developing hybrid approaches that
combine the tools of data science, deep learning methods, with quantum computing
to address the problem of inference of spectral analysis. This work can have a
wide impact in many applications of NMR in medicine, science and engineering,
with an immediate application in metabolomics compound identification, which
focuses on profiling small molecules inside cells, organs and body
fluids.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NMR is one of the most powerful analytical
techniques available to medicine and biology, as it is suited for both in vivo
and in vitro studies. Yet it is difficult to interpret the data in NMR
experiments. One directly observes only the magnetic spectrum of a biological
sample, whereas the ultimate goal is to learn about the underlying microscopic
Hamiltonian and ultimately identify and quantify chemical compounds. Eugene
Demler is developing a hybrid approach that combines quantum computing, quantum
simulations, and classical machine learning to address the problem of NMR
inference. The novelty of this approach is in using quantum simulators to
compute spectra for hypothetical values of the Hamiltonians, and then using
classical deep-learning algorithms to optimize these parameters. Eugene Demlerâ€™s
work address the following specific questions: (i) Finding optimal protocols for
sampling NMR spectra on currently available quantum computing platforms with a
focus on ion chains and Rydberg arrays; (ii) improving hybrid algorithms through
finding more efficient methods of Trotterizing the Hamiltonian evolution; (iii)
improving the classical optimization procedure using LASSO regularization of the
variational Bayesian Gaussian method; (iv) establishing the theoretical limits
to quantum assisted NMR inference ; (v) collaborating with experimental groups
to provide a proof of principle experimental demonstration of quantum assisted
NMR inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.