* 2037464
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Promoting Diverse and Inclusive Leadership in the Geosciences (GOLD-EN)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Nancy Glenn, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 265,000.00

The Promoting Diverse and Inclusive Leadership in the Geosciences project will
develop and test a framework that incentivizes and rewards Inclusive Leaders in
the Geosciences through changes in faculty workload policy and annual
evaluations. The PIs will use a collective impact approach to engage the faculty
and student partners in the process. The framework will identify training
activities and evidence-based illustrative practices related to becoming and
growing as Inclusive Leaders. In order to create long-term systemic change, the
faculty workload policy and annual evaluation process will be amended to include
this framework. Department chairs and faculty will create these amendments
iteratively with support from the Dean and Provost at Boise State University.
This work will first be performed at Boise State and then tested independently
at Idaho State University (ISU) in order to ensure that it is adaptable to other
Geoscience units at other universities across the country. Through the
framework, PIs plan to provide a mechanism to institutionalize the importance,
value, and recognition of leaders in diversity and inclusion. Importantly, the
results and the adaptable framework will be available to other programs and
departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops the novel approach of
changing policy strategies to develop and support Inclusive Leaders in
Geosciences. By altering the department workload policy and annual evaluation
process governing rewardable actions, the PIs will identify different avenues
for faculty to be rewarded for becoming and growing as Inclusive Leaders.
Importantly, the process will include the student voice, thus incorporating what
constitutes inclusivity from a student perspective, as well as building a
pathway for future Inclusive Leaders. By both developing and testing the
strategies at two institutions, the PIs will advance knowledge in how to support
and sustain these leaders. This project seeks to develop novel approaches in 1)
valuing and rewarding individual faculty Inclusive Leaders, and 2) engineering a
road map for success that will be both long-lived and transferable to other
Geoscience departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.