* 2037900
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Experimental Facility with Large, Mobile Dynamic Shakers for Field Testing 2021-2025
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Kenneth Stokoe, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,897,907.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) is supported by
the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user national
facility to provide the natural hazards engineering research community with
access to research infrastructure that includes earthquake and wind engineering
experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure (CI), computational modeling and
simulation tools, high performance computing resources, and research data, as
well as education and community outreach activities. Originally funded under
program solicitations NSF 14-605 and NSF 15-598, NHERI has operated since 2015
through separate, but coordinated, five-year research infrastructure awards for
a Network Coordination Office, CI, Computational Modeling and Simulation Center,
and Experimental Facilities, including a post-disaster, rapid response research
facility. Information about NHERI resources are available at the NHERI web
portal (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). Awards made for NHERI contribute to
NSF's role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the
National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). NHERI Experimental
Facilities will provide access to their experimental resources, user services,
and data management infrastructure for NSF-supported research and education
awards. This award will renew support for the NHERI Experimental Facility
located at the University of Texas at Austin from January 1, 2021, to September
30, 2025. Through this award, researchers will have access to large, mobile
dynamic shakers and associated instrumentation for field experimental studies in
natural hazards engineering. These large mobile shakers can be used to study and
develop novel, in-situ testing methods for subsurface imaging and determining
in-situ soil properties, evaluate the vulnerability of existing civil
infrastructure to natural hazards, and optimize the design of future
infrastructure. These advances will result in communities that are more
resilient to earthquakes and other natural hazards. While small- to large-scale
laboratory testing can provide valuable research data, there remains the need to
field test a wide variety of infrastructure, as constructed, in its current
state. The facility's equipment will support in-situ testing and allow for
research tools to be developed in critical areas such as three-dimensional (3D)
subsurface imaging (with applications such as rapid levee evaluation and
void/cavity detection) and non-destructive testing (with applications such as
advanced soil liquefaction evaluation and soil-foundation-structure interaction
studies for buildings and bridges). Progress in these areas will lead the nation
to the next frontier of resilient and sustainable infrastructure, which will
benefit society and support continued economic, intellectual, and scientific
growth. Experimental data generated from research conducted at this facility
will be archived in the Data Depot on the NHERI web portal. The facility will
conduct annual user workshops and will host Research Experiences for
Undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The facility will enable
researchers to address three main challenges to making in-situ testing
advancements that, if accomplished, could transform the ability to rehabilitate
and build more resilient and sustainable communities. These three main
challenges are: (1) significantly improving the accuracy and resolution of
shallow-to-deep (greater than 1,000 meters) two-dimensional (2D) and 3D
subsurface imaging; (2) characterizing the nonlinear dynamic response and
liquefaction resistance of complex geomaterials in-situ; and (3) developing
rapid, in-situ methods for non-destructive structural evaluations and for soil-
foundation-structure interaction studies. While more heavily weighted toward
addressing earthquake hazards, the ability to solve these challenges will also
affect multi-hazard resiliency. For example, the challenge of performing rapid
2D and 3D subsurface imaging will apply directly to prioritizing rehabilitation
of the nation's existing levee systems, many of which are currently not
resilient to traditional flooding, hurricane storm surges, or earthquakes. The
next frontier of natural hazards research requires that engineers develop
practical solutions for complex problems, which will necessitate testing civil
infrastructure systems over a wide range of actual field conditions. This in-
situ testing can be accomplished using the mobile dynamic shakers and associated
instrumentation of this facility. Additionally, to develop more resilient and
sustainable communities, the facility will conduct outreach to engage and
cultivate a diverse and talented group of future engineers who can address the
challenges that face a rapidly growing population supported by aging
infrastructure at risk to natural hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.