* 2037636
* NSF/FDA Scholar in Residence Program on Physico-Chemical Characterization and In Vitro Biological Evaluation of 3D Printed Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Roger Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Non-Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Scholar-in-Residence project
will seek to better understand two new types of 3D printed bone replacements
that are based on an inert bioceramic material, zirconia, and a biodegradable
bioceramic material, calcium phosphate. Calcium phosphate is a compelling
material for bone replacement implants (e.g., synthetic bone grafts) since it
stimulates bone formation on the surface of medical device. A new type of
calcium phosphate material will be 3D printed, which contains a gradient between
(a) a form of calcium phosphate that rapidly releases bone-stimulating chemicals
and (b) a form of calcium phosphate that can serve as long-lasting interface
between an implant and the surrounding bone. Since zirconia surfaces with micro-
and nano-roughened features exhibit better bone integration properties than
smooth zirconia surfaces, a new type of patterned zirconia biomaterial will be
created by 3D printing and laser texturing. A collaboration between NC State
University and FDA researchers will seek to understand the relationships among
the bioceramic processing parameters, physical properties, chemical properties,
mechanical properties, and in vitro biological responses for the novel 3D
printed ceramics. The results of this project will reduce knowledge gaps related
to 3D printed ceramics and will lead to new types of synthetic bone grafts,
which will provide an improved quality of life for patients who suffer from
various orthopedic conditions. Science Saturday lectures and hands-on activities
will disseminate results from the project to elementary school students, middle
school students, high school students, and other visitors to the North Carolina
Museum of Natural Sciences. Information on recent advances in medical 3D
printing, including results from this project, will be disseminated to teachers
across the state of North Carolina via an online workshop
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will take advantage of the unique capabilities at NC State University
related to processing and characterization of novel biomaterials and at the FDA
related to biological characterization of novel biomaterials to systematically
evaluate fabrication, post processing (e.g., patterning and sterilization), and
the biological response to two new types of 3D printed bioceramics, patterned
zirconia and functionally gradient calcium phosphate. Phase I of the project
will involve understanding the physico-chemical properties of the 3D printed
patterned zirconia and functionally gradient calcium phosphate parts. For
example, scanning electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy will be used
to assess the reproducibility and uniformity of the surface features of the 3D
printed bioceramics. X-ray diffraction and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy will
be used to examine the microstructure and the presence of impurities in the 3D
printed bioceramics, respectively. Phase II of the project will involve the use
of nanoindentation and four-point bend testing to understand the mechanical
properties of the 3D printed bioceramics. Phase III of the project will utilize
FDA facilities to evaluate interactions between application-relevant cells
(e.g., bone marrow stromal cells and osteoblast-like cells) and the 3D printed
bioceramics through protein absorption, cell adhesion dynamics, cell morphology,
cell proliferation, and osteogenic differentiation studies. This proposal is
unique in that the PI team will systematically evaluate fabrication, post
processing, material characteristics, mechanical properties, and biological
response to two new types of 3D printed bioceramics. The data obtained in this
Scholar-in-Residence project will be relevant to the development of 3D printed
bioceramic medical devices and the improvement of international consensus
standards that facilitate regulatory decision-making for 3D printed medical
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.