* 2037788
* EAGER Collaborative Proposal: Building a Community of Mentors in Engineering Education Research Through Peer Review Training
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2023
* Karin Jensen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 05/31/2023
* USD 82,707.00

This Early-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project explores
mentorship of researchers in reviewing engineering education research (EER)
scholarship, leading to the development of training in peer review of journal
manuscripts and grant proposals. As a field, EER benefits from diverse
perspectives aimed at improving engineering education and challenging existing
models of professional formation of engineers, but there is a need to formalize
how scholars hone their own research and communication skills through reviewing.
We propose the EER Peer Review Training (EER PERT) program, leveraging the
knowledge and organizational structure developed in the Journal of Engineering
Education (JEE) Mentored Reviewer Program in which triads of mentees and mentors
(experienced reviewers) collaboratively write timely, constructive reviews of
JEE manuscripts. EER PERT participants include mentees, mentors, and mentor
coaches. Diverse participants will be selected through a competitive application
process and recruitment through personal and professional networks, including
HBCU and MSI networks. Coaches will monitor the quality of the mentoring
relationships within mentor/mentee triads through periodic surveys and meetings,
and will provide feedback to the project team. In parallel with developing and
implementing this training, we will study how reviewers develop mental models of
EER. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ongoing studies about the peer review process have
identified problems including lack of reviewer training, inconsistent and biased
reviews, and dearth of qualified reviewers. Poor quality peer reviews can lead
to poor quality scholarship; overly harsh, negative reviews can exclude diverse
voices in the community and stifle innovation. We will leverage a training
framework developed through the JEE Mentored Reviewer Program, in which
participants have described positive outcomes of expanded expertise, a greater
understanding of research quality, and shifting the dominant (negative)
discourses about peer review to a more positive view of knowledge production and
publishing. Taking a sociocultural perspective that recognizes the role of
social interaction in co-construction of knowledge and metacognition, we pose
these research questions: How do scholars develop schema for quality engineering
education research through collaboratively constructing peer reviews? What are
the similarities and differences between schema development for manuscript and
grant proposal review?The EER PERT program will enhance the quality of EER
manuscripts and proposals, and ultimately increase the impact of scholarship in
EER. The positive feedback loop created through developing scholarship review
skills within the EER community will maximize NSF investments in EER
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.