* 2037862
* Collaborative Research: Converging COVID-19, environment, health, and equity
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Maya Trotz, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 19,750.00

Environmental engineering and science is a highly diverse field that uses
knowledge of physics, chemistry, and biology to help protect human and
ecological health. Many environmental engineers and scientists are doing
research on COVID-19 to better understand of how to control the spread of the
disease, as well as providing safe food and drinking water. The goal of this
project is to hold a series of virtual meetings over six weeks bringing together
researchers to discuss their work on COVID-19 in an integrated manner. They will
also explore how inequities influence the outcomes and impact of their work.
Benefits to society resulting from this work result from open source learning
materials that show how different environments link to each other during the
pandemic, and how to address inequities in society to come up with better
solutions for sustainable communities. This meeting will feature a diverse
representation of environmental engineering and science researchers. To maximize
impact, the meeting will be open to anyone in the world, and all recordings will
be shared on websites and over social media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to host a series of meetings bringing together researchers from
environmental engineering and science and related fields to share knowledge and
discuss interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary linkages as they relate to
COVID-19 and the need for developing more healthy, just, and equitable
societies. The themes for the proposed sessions will align COVID-19 and the
Grand Challenges for Environmental Engineering in the 21st Century as outlined
in the National Academies of Sciences Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) study
which include: (1) sustainably supplying food, energy, and water, (2) creating
efficient, healthy, and resilient cities, (3) designing a future without
pollution and waste, (4) climate change mitigation and adaptation, and (5)
fostering informed decisions and actions. The meeting presents a new model of
participation in a combined asynchronous and synchronous multimedia online
learning environment. Presenters will be selected to reflect the diversity of
the Nation, with particular effort made to recruit presenters who are currently
underrepresented in STEM. Early career post-doctoral researchers and assistant
professors will be presenters and session chairs to foster career development.
Participants will be encouraged to register for the certificate portion of the
meeting which requires the successful completion of six quizzes related to each
session. A manuscript based on the meeting will be submitted to the journal of
Environmental Engineering and Science to share best practices for virtual format
for meetings and the convergence of environmental engineering and science
through COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.