* 2037535
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Managing Privacy and Environment for Used and End-of-Life Electronic Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Mingming Fan, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 05/31/2024
* USD 496,027.00

The COVID-19 pandemic accelerated the transition towards increased telework and
mobile working. This implies that personal devices and home networks have moved
from occasional to pervasive professional use, and can now be classified as
critical infrastructure. Managing the security of these networks is thus a
national priority. Progress towards the Internet-of-Things leads to consumers
owning an expanding array of devices privy to personal video, audio and other
information. End-of-life poses a large security risk if disposed-of devices
still contain sensitive data and end up in the wrong hands. Data security is
also important for sustainability: A consumer concerned about privacy may store
a device or recycle it, instead of selling for reuse. Many devices turned in for
recycling are not reused because the device and data cannot readily be cleared
for a new user. Decreased reuse has economic, social and environmental impacts.
Data security and end-of-use are thus fundamentally intertwined, but currently
poorly understood and managed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
integrated research and outreach activities to better understand and manage the
privacy of data on home devices. For a set of Internet-of-Things and other home
consumer electronics, consumers are surveyed on privacy and end-of-use
behaviors. Personally Identifiable Information stored on different devices is
assessed and analyzed for privacy risk. The usability of data wiping protocols
is evaluated to clarify how easy and effective it is to remove personal data
from different devices. The results from these activities leads to construction
of a model predicting security and end-of-use behaviors for different consumer
groups. This model is used to suggest effective interventions to improve privacy
and sustainability outcomes, e.g. improving the usability of wiping protocols or
educating consumers. Outreach is done to support decision-making, for example
research results are brough to stakeholders in industry and consumer groups
engaged in standard development. A consumer guide to security and end-of-use is
developed and distributed widely, e.g. through the iFixit website. K-12 summer
camps are held for high school students from under-represented groups.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be engaged in the privacy assessment
and usability evaluations. An exhibit on security and end-of-use is developed
for Imagine RIT, an annual event that brings tens of thousands of Rochester
residents to campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.