* 2037348
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: The Transformation of Essential Work: Managing the Introduction of AI in Response to COVID-19
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Sarah Fox, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2022
* USD 129,616.00

Millions of people deemed “essential workers” in the COVID-19 pandemic perform
manual labor, such as sorting, cleaning, garbage collection, and recycling. To
mitigate risks associated with this work, there is an accelerated push to
introduce artificial intelligence (AI) to safeguard the public and workers from
disease transmission. Yet, decades of human-computer interaction and
organizational communication research shows that the introduction of new
technologies into workplaces is not an easy transition; instead technologies
transform and displace existing work practices. This research project
investigates both beneficial innovations and liabilities arising in waste
management industries, as they deploy AI technologies in response to the
COVID-19 crisis. It develops a set of best practices for the coordination of
human labor and AI to address the pandemic, transforming the future of work. The
best practices will be presented as guidance on how to incorporate AI into
critical economic institutions to mitigate the negative effects of COVID-19 on
public health, society, and the economy. This guidance will regularly be
communicated to workers, industry leaders, and the public through an open access
toolkit, a workshop series, press releases, and social media. This will
potentially benefit essential industries that employ or serve tens of millions
of workers, including waste labor, shipping, manufacturing, retail, and food
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be conducted through a multi-
site ethnographic study, examining how two American waste management
organizations negotiate the introduction of automated technologies, in an effort
to mitigate risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. The first involves
automated “floor care” robots at Pittsburgh International Airport. The second
involves AI sorting systems in a single stream recycling plant, in Austin,
Texas. By studying two sites, the research team is expected to gain comparative
insight into how automation is introduced and attuned, according to
professional, regional, and institutional norms. Data collection will include
ethnographic fieldnotes, interview transcripts, and media materials. Extending
theories of technological diffusion and invisible labor, the research team will
qualitatively analyze the technology dissemination process, drawing insights
from the actions and perspectives of workers as they negotiate the changing
shape of their daily work. Through reflexive memos and “constant comparative”
coding, the research will identify patterns of action and build a set of
transferable observations. This is expected to yield (1) empirical findings on
factors that promote or hinder rapid technological introduction in response to
crisis, with specific insights on the human labor required to make automated
technologies work (e.g., calibration, troubleshooting, and maintenance), (2)
theoretical findings that contribute core understandings of the diffusion of
innovation and how workplace technologies are reinvented through use, and (3)
design recommendations for a variety of essential work
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.