* 2037753
* I-Corps: Platform that matches users with renewable energy suppliers while providing on-demand energy analytics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Geoffrey Heal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology for independent power producers who supply renewable
energy (solar and wind energy) to their customers. These energy producers need
to find consumers who want their products, which may be households or commercial
buildings. To date, producers have experienced difficulty in identifying
customers, which is thought to be due to high costs of customer acquisition
combined with high rates of customer turnover. Energy users also have difficulty
identifying renewable energy suppliers that are reliable and competitively
priced (especially as there are often difficulties in comparing terms proposed
in differently-structured contracts). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of a software platform that gives energy suppliers
access to a list of potential clean energy consumers that includes their usage
characteristics. The platform also gives the consumers a curated list of
suppliers who are reliable, competitively priced, and able to provide the
services that they need. The underlying technology is data analysis via machine
learning coupled with the application of artificial intelligence. The technology
provides energy users with the ability to analyze their energy consumption and
greenhouse gas emissions, and to benchmark their consumption against other
energy suppliers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.