* 2037572
* NSF/FDA SIR: Using Microbial Signaling Systems to Understand Relationship Between Microbial Growth an d Breast Implant Complications
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Jeseth Delgado Vela, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

Breast augmentation is one of the most popular surgical cosmetic procedures
nationwide, with over $1.1 billion spent on silicone gel implants in 2018.
However, breast implants are not lifetime devices and the longer patients have
breast implants, the higher the risk of complications. Recent studies show that
biofilms, microbial communities that grow on surfaces, are associated with these
complications. At the center of the discussion is BIA-ALCL (breast implant-
associated anaplastic large cell lymphoma/cancer) which recently triggered a
series of regulatory actions worldwide. Recent studies suggest that the higher
surface area of textured implants provide more opportunity for bacteria to
colonize into biofilms, which could stimulate a cascade of immune responses
including chronic inflammation, one of the possible pathogenesis of BIA-ALCl.
The goal of this one-year Scholar-in-Residence project is to study the impact of
a special set of molecules known to regulate bacteria activity, termed “quorum
sensing molecules," on BIA-ALCL. The project’s findings are expected to provide
information that aids in the review of new strategies to control and inhibit
bacterial infection in breast implants. These findings will also be integrated
into existing K-12 outreach activities occurring at Howard Middle School. This
proposed research will support a female graduate student from Howard University
engaged in highly interdisciplinary research and a new collaboration between
Howard University and the Food and Drug
Administration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on the impact of
quorum sensing (QS) molecules on BIA-ALCL. Microbial communities use QS
molecules to coordinate microbial community function. QS molecules are often
used to regulate biofilm formation and can be associated with a T-Cell response
in certain types of organisms, though current knowledge on immune response to QS
molecules is nascent. The research plan is designed to advance knowledge on the
link between microbial community quorum sensing capacity and malignancies. The
central hypothesis of this work is that QS can regulate biofilm formation in
textured implants. The investigators will employ bioinformatic, experimental,
and computational models to assess this hypothesis with three objectives: (1)
Conduct a review and bioinformatic analysis on breast implant microbiota, (2)
Develop a drip flow biofilm reactor system to evaluate how biofilms response to
molecular cues, and (3) Develop a computational model system to evaluate how
biofilms respond to material cues. The expected outcome is an understanding of
differences in the microbial structure and function as it relates to quorum
sensing capacity in implants of different patients. The bioinformatics analysis
could serve as a case study on how to utilize high-throughput tools to
facilitate regulatory review of permanent implants. The model system will
provide information that aids in the review of new strategies to control and
inhibit bacterial infection in breast implants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.