* 2037990
* Exact model for extremely correlated electrons in a magnetic field
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Jainendra Jain, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The study of interacting electrons is crucial to
understanding of the properties of metals, semiconductors, and superconductors,
which form the foundation for today’s technology. This award supports
theoretical and computational research and education focused on interacting
electrons confined to two-dimensions, “flatland,” and with phenomena that occur
when they are cooled to very low temperatures and exposed to a high magnetic
field. This system of elections which can be realized at the interface of two
semiconductors is known to produce very unusual quantum mechanical phases of
matter, most notably those for which a component of resistance, known as the
Hall resistance, to the flow of electrical current is a multiple of a quantum of
resistance that is independent of the material and depends only on fundamental
constants like the charge of an electron. That this macroscopic resistance
becomes quantized was unexpected; this phenomenon is called the fractional
quantum Hall effect. It has served as the springboard for the advent of new
phenomena that occur in two-dimensional quantum materials, such as semiconductor
structures known as quantum wells, single and multi-layer graphene, and a class
of materials known as transition metal dichalcogenides that may be an
alternative to graphene for some technical applications. An additional aspect of
these systems is the emergence of new and exotic types of particles, which are
not found elsewhere in nature, and which have generated innovative ideas for
future quantum device technologies. &lt;br/&gt;To gain further insight into the
fractional Hall effect, the PI will investigate the consequences of a model
interaction that is exactly solvable and exhibits several aspects of the
observed phenomenology of the fractional quantum Hall effect. A crucial aspect
in which this model deviates from the previous models is that the interaction is
taken to be infinitely strong compared to the kinetic energy. This project
involves the investigation of exactly solvable models to provide useful insights
into existing concepts and to reveal fruitful new directions of inquiry to
advance understanding of the fascinating physic of electrons confined to two
dimensions. Aspects of the fractional quantum Hall effects that will be
investigated include proposed new particles that are fundamentally different
from the electron or photon - the quantum of light, and proposed particles that
behave as if they were a fraction of an electron. The PI also plans to explore
generalizations to other physical systems beyond electrons in “flatland.”
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The students supported by this project will be trained in
advanced numerical techniques, analytical field theoretical methods, topological
concepts, and high-performance computing. They will also be exposed to
international collaboration. Participation in various education and outreach
activities will be an integral part of their training because it not only
promotes public understanding of the STEM fields but also is of utmost
importance for the professional growth of the graduate students and will help
build essential skills that will serve them well in their future careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research and education to investigate new
directions in the study of the fractional quantum Hall effect. This effect has
given rise to new concepts, such as particles with fractional charge and
fractional statistics, composite fermions, topological superconductivity,
Majorana fermions, and chiral Luttinger liquids. Some of these have found homes
in other platforms and have driven ideas related to topological quantum
computation. Exact parent Hamiltonians have been constructed for certain
fractional quantum Hall wave functions, the earliest example being Haldane’s
model that obtained the Laughlin wave function as the exact ground state. These
models assume that the cyclotron energy is infinitely large compared to the
interaction energy, so that electrons are confined to the lowest Landau level.
&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project will be to investigate several
directions opened by a recently developed model that considers an interaction
that is infinitely strong compared to the cyclotron energy and is solvable for
all eigenstates and eigen-energies. Various topological features will be
explicitly evaluated from the exact wave functions, which have a rather complex
form. In particular, the entanglement spectrum and braid statistics of the
quasiparticles will be evaluated. The wave functions will be extended to the
spherical and torus geometries, which should bring out their topological
character. The physics of pairing instability and of non-Abelian statistics will
be addressed within this model, which will also be generalized to fractional
quantum Hall effects of bosons, spinful electrons and bilayer systems, and to
include structures inspired by the parton construction. An important goal will
be to ascertain what aspects of the solution relate to the laboratory
experiments and whether hitherto unknown structures emerge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students supported by this project will employ
advanced analytical as well as computational techniques, such as Chern-Simons
field theory, exact diagonalization studies, and quantum Monte Carlo method.
They will also organize education and outreach activities for pre-college
students at appropriate summer camps at Penn State as well as at the annual Arts
Festival at State College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.