* 2037835
* NSF/FDA SIR: Safer (polymeric) batteries in medical devices and evolving regulatory framework
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Peter Kofinas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2022
* USD 83,409.00

Batteries play an important role in the overall function, reliability, and
safety of many medical devices such as pacemakers, implantable cardioverter
defibrillators, glucose monitoring devices, and wheelchairs. The insights gained
in this one-year NSF/FDA Scholar-In-Residence fundamental research project will
aid and inform the development of protocols that demonstrate safety and
feasibility of polymer electrolytes for lithium batteries. Success of this
project will help streamline the regulation of solid polymer electrolytes in
medical devices as a safer alternative. In addition to the impacts on science,
the project will also broadly impact engineering education, training students of
different educational levels and from diverse backgrounds. Several initiatives
are planned, including specific programs that assist in undergraduate and
graduate education, graduate student mentoring, and training of high school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to better understand
the electrochemical, transport, and safety properties of water-containing solid
polymer electrolytes. A small amount of water acts as a super plasticizer of the
polymer matrix and provides an alternative conduction pathway that significantly
improves cation transport. Additionally, the inclusion of water is expected to
have a significant impact on the safety of the resulting battery device.
Specifically, the Investigatorâ€™s propose to study an aqueous solid polymer
electrolyte (ASPE) consisting of varying amounts of polyacrylonitrile (PAN),
water, and lithium salt as a model system to probe these questions. An
investigation of these ASPEs will focus on determining how salt concentration,
water concentration, and polymer molecular weight can affect ionic conductivity,
cation transport, electrochemical stability, cell safety, and cell performance.
Gaining insight into the water-dominant transport mechanism causing the enhanced
electrochemical performance of the proposed ASPE systems will greatly benefit
the design of the next generation of batteries for medical devices. Full cell
devices will undergo safety testing that will help inform an emerging regulatory
framework for assessing the safety of polymer electrolytes for use in medical
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.