* 2037455
* EAGER GOLD-EN Rewards: removing barriers and supporting geoscience diversity leaders by revising evaluation and reward systems.
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Lori Snyder, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,878.00

This EAGER proposal aims to identify, empower, and reward diversity, equity, and
inclusion (DEI) champions within the geosciences by aligning hiring, promotion,
award, and other evaluation systems with goals to promote diversity and
inclusion within the field. The PIs will work with the Southwest Center for
Human Relations Studies (SWCHRS) to learn from and work with national leaders in
diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) initiatives in higher education to revise
and re-envision evaluation and reward structures within academic units that
recruit and train the next generations of geoscientists. PIs propose the
following workplan to achieve project goals: 1) Collect DEI data from geoscience
departments nationwide to capture a baseline. 2) Interview faculty in focus
departments and survey geoscience programs nationally to establish how faculty
are currently evaluated in geoscience departments; determine how DEI efforts fit
within evaluation, tenure, promotion, and award frameworks; assess faculty
attitudes on the value of DEI work; and identify barriers to engaging in and
rewarding DEI efforts. 3) Work with expert consultants to develop example
evaluation and reward structures that explicitly value DEI work that can be
adopted/adapted by other geoscience departments. 4) Work with SWCHRS experts to
develop and distribute two webinars focused on helping academic units explicitly
value DEI efforts within hiring and evaluation systems. These webinars will be
offered at no cost to the geoscience community. 5) Evaluate the impact of the
webinars and faculty perceptions of revised evaluation systems that explicitly
value and reward DEI efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to
employ social science methods to study barriers that hinder diversity in
geosciences. Outcomes from the research will inform the production of resources
that PIs will widely and freely disseminate, using a website highlighting 1-
example questions, assessment rubrics, and decision trees departments can use to
explicitly value DEI knowledge, skills, efforts, and impact in faculty hiring,
tenure, promotion, and annual evaluation processes; 2- national geoscience
faculty diversity data; and 3-webinars to help geoscience departments clearly
and effectively value DEI knowledge and efforts in faculty hiring and evaluation
processes. These resources will catalyze development of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce and engage full participation of UR scholars in
geoscience and positively impact URM/marginalized faculty and students by both
valuing the knowledge gained through their lived experiences and encouraging
more faculty from diverse backgrounds to engage in DEI efforts, thus dispersing
the load and broadening the impact, while also rewarding those who engage in DEI
work, including previously “invisible” labor. The PIs will develop and share
ways to reward faculty who engage in inclusive and active teaching practices,
which have been shown to positively impact student learning across the board,
while also closing the achievement gap for UR scholars and marginalized
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.