* 2037848
* RAPID: PetCAT-Scan: A high definition scanning tool for geoscientists in the COVID-19 pandemic and beyond
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Matthew Brueseke, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2022
* USD 169,220.00

This RAPID award provides support for a high definition thin section scanner to
establish the PetCAT-Scan facility at Kansas State University. This facility
will help Midwestern universities rapidly develop their optical microscopy-based
instructional resources online during this period associated with the COVID-19
pandemic. Students will be able to observe and analyze petrographic thin
sections online, transforming their personal tablet/smartphone/computer in a
‘Virtual Microscope’. This facility will also be used for ongoing, and future,
research by Kansas State University geoscientists and will improve data
management and the development of an open access virtual thin section
library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moving from in-person to on-line teaching has
become a requirement for most faculty worldwide during the COVID-19 pandemic.
One of the most challenging classes to teach online is Petrology, because it
relies on access to microscopes and thin sections. With the possibility that
many universities will continue online instruction, how to transition other
courses that involve optical microscope work (e.g., mineralogy, sedimentology-
stratigraphy, structural geology), and how to improve on current efforts to
provide instruction in igneous, metamorphic and sedimentary petrology, will
become essential. The PetCAT-Scan facility will assist with these efforts and
increase open access resources. Furthermore, with limited access to research
labs, the facility will provide critical access to virtual petrographic imagery
of research samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.