* 2037751
* I-Corps:  Software to enable use of robotic liquid handlers to produce synthetic polymers
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Adam Gormley, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lies in the fact
that advances in polymer science are a driving force for many technologies.
Access to advanced polymers with tailored material properties remains limited to
larger companies who can employ teams of in-house chemists. In contrast, small
companies and research groups commonly lack the resources to have dedicated
chemistry staff, which restricts their ability to develop and access useful
materials that are critical for their technology and research. While these
groups can attempt to source advanced polymers from the market, their options
remain limited as on-demand and custom polymer synthesis remains too costly or
labor intensive for companies to adopt. Team Plexymer is looking to use
automated polymer synthesis technology to bridge this gap and enable smaller
companies and research groups to access advanced polymer materials, empowering
and accelerating their ability to develop tomorrowâ€™s
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to combat the labor
intensive and costly effort required to synthesize and test new polymeric
materials. Polymers are commonplace in wide variety of industries due to their
material diversity and utility in different products ranging from plastics and
surface coatings to pharmaceutical formulations. While the potential uses of
polymers continue to rapidly expand, synthesis and analytical testing remain
painstaking, manual processes. To address this unmet need for custom polymer
synthesis, the team has developed software to direct liquid handling robotic
platforms that carry out on-line polymer chemistry and material analytics. So
far, prototype efficacy has been demonstrated by successfully synthesizing high
quality polymers as well as carrying out multi-step synthesis and chemical
modification procedures. Utilizing this technology, batches of up to 96 unique
polymer materials can be synthesized simultaneously and have reduced the time
required for synthesis and labor by 80%. The team is collaborating with chemical
companies to discover novel polymers for pharmaceutical
formulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.