* 2037737
* Understanding the Origins and Institutionalization of Social and Economic Hierarchies through Archaeological Settlement Survey
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* John Steinberg, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 12/31/2024
* USD 297,362.00

Few regions in the Arctic experienced the development of social inequalities
prior to the modern era. Yet such inequalities emerged in Iceland soon after its
initial colonization. This archaeological project explores how and why H贸lar in
Hjaltadalur, North Iceland, became a powerful social, economic, and religious
center during the medieval period. Rather than studying individual sites in
isolation, the proposed regional analysis tracks the sequence of site
establishment, habitation and abandonment throughout Hjaltadalur. These broad
socioeconomic processes are considered within the local geographic and
environmental context of the H贸lar site to advance understanding of the factors
favoring the development of social hierarchies and centralized
power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs coring, geophysical
investigation, and test excavations to develop a settlement sequence for the
H贸lar area, determining when farms and churches were established, inhabited, and
abandoned. Twenty-one farm sites in Hjaltadalur will be tested by coring. The
tephrochronology that exists for the valley will facilitate dating, and cores
with evidence for human activity will delineate farm perimeters. Test
excavations of middens (trash pits) will establish stratigraphy and provide
faunal and floral samples. Historical study of property documents and measures
of agricultural productivity will complement archaeological fieldwork. Work at
H贸lar will provide American students with international field experience and
thesis datasets; work with Icelandic faculty and students will foster
international collaboration and exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.