* 2037660
* RAPID: The effects of wildfire on an ecohydrological experiment and the role of abiotic drivers of resistance and resilience in sagebrush-steppe landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Marie-Anne de Graaff, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 259,152.00

Wildfire frequency and intensity are rising across the western United States. In
the Great Basin region, fire promotes invasion of non-native annual grasses that
further perpetuate the fire cycle. Fire and plant invasion threaten the habitat
of many native species, the productivity of grasslands, and human livelihood.
Understanding how fire affects plant species, soil resources, and ecosystem
recovery following fire remains limited. In the sagebrush steppe ecosystem of
the western United States, identifying the plant, soil, and climate conditions
that control post-fire recovery would help pinpoint what makes these ecosystems
resilient or vulnerable to fire. This project will evaluate how differences in
soil water and nutrient availability before a fire determine the balance of
native and invasive plant species after a fire. The dynamics of soil nutrients
and water might explain why some sites are more likely to become invaded than
other sites. There are strong connections between the researchers and rangeland
managers in the region. The knowledge acquired in this study will help inform
our understanding of fire-prone grasslands in the western United States. This
project will train several early-career researchers, including a postdoctoral
associate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
study a 25-year ecohydrological experiment in Idaho that manipulates moisture,
soil depth, and plant community composition. The experiment burned in a large
2019 wildfire, providing a unique opportunity to test how pre-fire abiotic and
biotic conditions influence the resistance to invasive species after wildfire.
This experiment will test a key hypothesis about how non-native annual grasses
invade native ecosystems. The expectation is that the primary establishment of
non-native grasses causes further changes to the soil that change the ecosystem.
To test this hypothesis, several measurements need to be made immediately during
the initial vegetation recovery phase: (1) vegetation composition and cover, (2)
soil water and nutrient availability and (3) soil water and nutrient movement.
These immediate measurements will help understand what happens to soil nitrogen
and water availability as bare soil is recolonized by plants. This will allow
mechanistic insight into what drives differences in plant community recovery in
sagebrush steppe ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.