* 2037605
* RAPID: Mitigating the Potential Negative Impacts of Involuntary Online Engineering Courses to Diverse Students’ Sense of Belonging
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Thomas Tretter, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 07/31/2023
* USD 118,767.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by identifying how the
unexpected shift to remote instruction during the COVID-19 pandemic impacts
undergraduate engineering students from diverse populations. Specifically, this
work focuses on students’ sense of belonging, which is a documented predictor of
student success. The rapid transition to remote teaching may result in students
facing a “triple threat,” since student’s personal identities, online course
formats, and the STEM disciplines themselves each can obstruct development of a
sense of belonging in STEM. This treat may be particularly acute for students
from racially/ethnically underrepresented populations, first generation
students, women, and students from low income backgrounds. The project will
carry out its research activities in several online engineering foundations
courses that have traditionally been held in-person. Collecting and analyzing
data from these courses will be especially important since they generally serve
as students’ first postsecondary exposure to engineering and are thus important
first steps towards completing an engineering degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
multi-phase mixed-methods approach will address the following research
questions: (a) How do engineering students perceive their sense of belonging in
involuntary remote courses and why? (b) What elements of remote engineering
courses are most influential for equitably fostering a sense of belonging for
all the students? The project will measure sense of belonging with an existing
four-item scale for which the institution has historical engineering student
responses. Given the importance of examining sense of belonging in the context
of an online course, the Community of Inquiry framework, designed to examine key
elements of an online course, is also a component of the study. Sources of data
will include surveys of first year engineering students, small focus groups with
students from populations of interest, and course observations. The study design
affords both examination of the overarching relationships among belonging,
student identity, and course delivery as well as in-depth understanding of why
and how elements of a course relate to students’ sense of belonging. The impacts
of the study’s findings include the potential to help campuses mitigate
potential threats facing diverse students currently in remote courses because of
COVID-19 and to craft future online STEM courses that avoid such threats. This
RAPID award is made by the IUSE program in the Division of Undergraduate
Education (Education and Human Resources Directorate).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.