* 2037562
* ENG: CCSS: Long Term Reliable Neural Recordings and Neuro Modulation Using GHz Ultrasonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Amit Lal, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2024
* USD 375,000.00

Neural technology with the ability to excite and sense electrically active cells
in the body has the potential of solving diseases such as epilepsy, and help
preserve body function due to spinal cord disorders, and also create new
approaches to treat diseases by periodic excitation of nerves. There have been
significant advances in the neural interface technology in which electronic
circuits and electrodes sense and excite nerve and neurons. Despite the promise
and the advancements in neural interfaces technology, there are two areas of
deficiency that have prevented long-term stable interfaces to nerves and
neurons. These include non-specific excitation of nerves and long-term stability
of excitation and sensing of action potentials. In the case of deep brain
implants and vagus nerve stimulation, the excitation is conducted by large
electrodes that expose the neuronal tissue with current exciting many neurons
and axons concurrently. The non-cell-specific excitation can lead to unintended
downstream effects in electrically stimulating effects in many parts of the
body. Axon specific or axon-bundle specific excitation would be beneficial for
targeting nerves intended for particular body function and is a goal of this
program. The conductive or capacitive interfaces to neurons and tissue in probes
do not last beyond a few weeks to a few months, as glial cell response on
electrodes insulates the electron flow, and weakens signals with capacitive
readout. This lifetime limitation prevents the wide-spread use of neural probes,
and even in applications where that are required, repeated surgeries replace
insulated probes. This proposal will develop ultrasonic neural interfaces to
sense action potentials over a patient's lifetime would pave the way for neural
probe-based diagnosis and control of diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed effort is to develop a neural probe technology that can rely on ultra-
high frequency ultrasonic waves to affect neuron activation and to sense the
action potentials generated by the cells. CMOS integrated GHz ultrasonic
transducers will stimulate neurons and detect action potentials. The technology
will be optimized first in vitro operation on neurons, and then test probes in
mice brains. Ultrasonic transducer arrays with operating frequencies from 400
MHz to 2-GHz will be designed and fabricated. A microfluidic chip assembly will
be applied and attached to the ultrasonic transducers. The microfluidic chip
will allow for the isolation and control of the mechanisms of ultrasonic
stimulation and sensing. The microfluidic chamber will control the volume and
acoustic boundary conditions to modulate acoustic streaming and acoustic
radiation pressure while providing pathways for the action potential related ion
fluxes to be detected by ultrasonic pulses. The cell stimulation with ultrasound
will be verified using optical Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence microscopy
(TIRFm) and electrical measurements using electrical probes, in addition to
ultrasonic interrogations. The new knowledge created will be disseminated by
training graduate students, and developing a class on ultrasonic
microsystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.