* 2037870
* SII Planning: ARIES: Center for Agile, RelIablE, Scalable Spectrum
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Arnold Swindlehurst, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

This award is a planning grant for the Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National
Center for Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center). The focus of a spectrum
research SII-Center goes beyond 5G, IoT, and other existing or forthcoming
systems and technologies to chart out a trajectory to ensure United States
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum. The
PIs bring together an interdisciplinary team to explore a research case study on
the coexistence between cellular systems and weather satellites via three
interconnected research themes related to fundamentals and emerging
technologies, experimentation, and policy. The prime collaborators include
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (Virginia Tech.), Rutgers
University, University of Southern California, and University of Colorado,
Denver. The outcomes of the proposed work will help improving understanding of
spectrum co-existence among passive and active systems. The proposed engagement
and partnership workshops will bring together spectrum stakeholders from various
sectors, disciplines, and domains, thus taking a step forward towards breaking
the barriers between silos. Involvement of non-traditional stakeholders such as
observatories, non-profits, and startups are proposed which will help broaden
the participation. The planning activities proposed will lead to a better
understanding of the challenges and gaps in spectrum research and education
encountered by academia, industry, national labs, and other
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund activities towards the
development of a full center proposal. The PIs propose a reductionist parametric
model that will quantify adjacent channel interference (ACI) to weather
satellites due to 5G transmissions. They also propose to conduct an in-depth,
integrative experimental study of ACI which has the potentials to provide new
insights into the spatio-spectral spreading of energy from 5G. A rigorous
exploration and definition of spectrum attributes within the context of the
considered case study is proposed along with a new game-theoretic framework for
assessing the technical, economic, and social impacts of policy making in the
spectrum world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.