* 2037673
* Porous silicon on paper-based optical biosensor for diagnostics
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Paul Laibinis, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2024
* USD 375,000.00

There is a critical need for the development of cost-effective, highly
sensitive, widely deployable, rapid diagnostic testing systems that can be
adapted for detecting a variety of pathogens. This type of testing system can
give healthcare providers key information necessary to make educated treatment
decisions, and also can facilitate epidemiological studies of disease
distribution patterns. This project investigates whether incorporation of a high
surface area porous nanomaterial on a paper substrate can enable a new, highly
sensitive, quantitative, and reliable platform for rapid diagnostic testing. The
porous nanomaterial serves as the active sensing region that produces a clear
optical signal change when signature molecules are selectively captured inside
the pores, while the paper substrate is a simple and cost-effective fluid
delivery vehicle that enables active transport of a test solution to the porous
nanomaterial. The proposed work will lead to advanced understanding of fluid
flow dynamics and molecular attachment in porous nanomaterials integrated with
paper as well as advanced knowledge related to interfacing nanomaterials with
non-traditional substrate materials. Educationally, this program will expose
students to interdisciplinary research at the intersections of optics, materials
science, engineering, and chemistry. A hands-on optical biosensor demonstration
kit will be developed and deployed to K-12 students through shareable videos,
classroom visits, and on-campus outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to demonstrate a porous silicon-on-paper optical
biosensor capable of rapid, accurate, quantitative, and high sensitivity
detection of protein biomarkers that will significantly advance the capabilities
of rapid diagnostic testing. A comprehensive understanding of the achievable
performance metrics, tolerances, and potential limitations of the porous
silicon-on-paper optical biosensor platform will be attained. To accomplish this
goal, key advances to realize porous silicon in a lateral flow configuration on
paper and understand the fluid flow dynamics and molecular binding kinetics in
such a configuration will be achieved. Specifically, this project seeks to: (1)
develop a robust approach for integrating nanoscale porous films with paper-
based microfluidic substrates; (2) understand molecular transport and binding
kinetics in a porous film-on-paper platform as a function of the chemical and
physical characteristics of the porous film and species infiltrated in the film;
(3) establish the viability of using porous silicon optical thin films in a
lateral flow rapid test framework; and (4) validate sensor through detection of
SARS-CoV IgM and IgG antibodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.