* 2037251
* Ship-based Technical Support in the Arctic (STARC)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Lee Ellett, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Frank R. Rack
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,307,012.00

In the Arctic, research vessels play a critical role in exploration and continue
to contribute significantly to the US research effort. Shipboard research
provides a means to understand physical and biological processes upon which
human well-being depends. NSF provides shipboard marine technical support in the
Arctic to satisfy two main functional requirements of NSF through the Ship-based
Technical Support in the Arctic (STARC) award: (1) to plan, coordinate and
deliver scientific technical support onboard US Coast Guard Cutter (USCGC) Healy
(and other vessels and platforms, as appropriate) in a manner that augments the
role of the US Coast Guard (USCG) marine science technicians, and (2) to
coordinate with NSF, USCG and the academic community to provide for the
operation, maintenance and upgrade of science equipment installed or used on
USCGC Healy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STARC shipboard technical support enables
transformative scientific research by providing competent shipboard technical
services that enable the effective use of oceanographic facilities by scientists
and students. Marine technicians assist researchers in the safe and appropriate
use of oceanographic instrumentation, which improves both the quantity and
quality of oceanographic researct1 conducted. Our marine technicians participate
in ongoing educational programs to maintain operational readiness, learn new
skills, and continually improve the methods for executing research at sea. By
seeking out and sharing new ways to better achieve scientific objectives at sea,
marine technicians strengthen, broaden and perpetuate the capabilities of NSF-
supported oceanographic research infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
awardee will employ an approach based on best practices within the University-
National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS). A senior technician will be
designated Arctic Cruise Coordinator with the responsibility for creating and
maintaining a cruise planning process suited to meet the needs of scientists
embarking on USCG icebreakers operating in the Arctic region. As cruises are
identified for the upcoming field season, the Coordinator will work with
scientists, NSF and USCG personnel to coordinate and execute the required
technical and logistical activities for each cruise leg. The Coordinator will
develop staffing schedules for each deployment, as well as pre- and post-
deployment activities and off-season maintenance. Under the supervision of the
Project PI, the Coordinator will develop annual budgets and annual reports that
will be submitted to NSF. The spectrum of research enabled by this technical
support collectively achieves far-reaching broader impacts through the promotion
of training and learning, increased participation of underrepresented groups in
research, and dissemination of results that enhance scientific and technological
understanding. STARC technicians train and educate US Coast Guard technicians,
and share new tools and techniques with colleagues throughout the UNOLS fleet,
thus broadening the technical knowledge base that supports U.S. oceanographic
research. These technical services support the acquisition and broad
dissemination of shipboard data to ensure that shipboard data is submitted to US
national data centers in a timely manner, thus enabling data to be made broadly
available to the academic community and the public at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.