* 2037516
* Conference: Protein Folding on the Ribosome
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Christian Kaiser, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2022
* USD 46,803.00

The 2020 Annual Meeting on Protein Folding on the Ribosome will be held at Johns
Hopkins University in Baltimore, MD on December 11-13, 2020. Nascent protein
folding, targeting and quality control are key to ensuring proper cellular
function. Understanding nascent protein folding and behavior in cells presents
theoretical and experimental challenges that are being tackled in a vibrant,
multi-disciplinary and growing research arena. This meeting will be attended by
an international cohort of scientists, and will promote sharing of new knowledge
and stimulate new collaborative research efforts both within and outside of the
US. Travel assistance to graduate students and postdocs will promote training of
the future STEM workforce, notably through networking opportunities with
international researchers specializing in a variety of
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past few decades have seen an explosive
growth in information about genomic sequences and the structures of the proteins
they encode. The intersection of these two realms, at which polypeptides are
synthesized by the ribosome, is still comparatively poorly explored. The focus
of this meeting will be on emergent topics, including nascent polypeptide chain
structure and folding, regulation of translation, and nascent chain targeting
and translocation to membranes. The overall goals will be to: i) provide an
overview of recent progress and identify the most pressing challenges; ii)
identify limitations of currently available methodologies and foster ideas for
developing novel approaches; and iii) promote knowledge exchange and
collaboration between and among experimental, theoretical and computational
researchers. Thus, the meeting will serve as a platform for scientists to
continue to advance understanding of different facets of protein biogenesis and
how they enable cellular function and complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
meeting is supported by the Molecular Biophysics and the Genetic Mechanisms
programs of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Biological
Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.