* 2037301
* EAGER: QSA: Solving Optimization Problems on NISQ Computers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Itay Hen, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Optimization problems are ubiquitous in all areas of science and engineering.
Many important problems in chemistry, physics, and materials science can be cast
as the optimization of a cost function under specific constraints.
Traditionally, classical numerical optimization methods are the main go-to tool
for studying such problems, but these methods are known to be grossly
inefficient when tackling problems of this sort due to the exponentially
increasing configuration space that needs to be explored. Quantum algorithms —
protocols meant to be executed on quantum computers — provide a promising
approach to solving such problems. Specifically, hybrid classical-quantum
methods have been the focus of much attention in this context recently. The
present project seeks to develop and experimentally implement a novel hybrid
approach to solving optimization problems that reaches beyond the capabilities
of the current state-of-the-art and that enables faster convergence with
significantly fewer classical-quantum iterations and considerably fewer repeated
experiments per iteration. The developed protocol will in turn allow reaching
more accurate solutions to problems as well as the handling of larger problems
than allowed by current algorithmic capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of
the main bottlenecks of traditional quantum optimization protocols, such as QAOA
and VQE, is that they require many classical-quantum iterations to converge. The
main objective of this project is to dramatically reduce the number of
classical-quantum iterations. This approach, which relies on combining advanced
parametric minimization tools together with recent results in quantum
information theory, enables the efficient estimation of physical quantities
(observables) with precise control over estimation errors. The present
parametric-based minimization is inherently different than state-of-the-art
approaches wherein the optimization is based on available data and as such it is
expected to substantially reduce the number of classical-quantum iterations.
These savings in resources will in turn enhance our ability to solve
optimization problems on current NISQ devices. This project is being co-funded
by the Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.