* 2037256
* Build and Broaden: We Still Remain: A Conference Toward the Promotion of Southeast Indigenous Research, Scholarship, and Collaboration
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Danielle Hiraldo, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 09/30/2022
* USD 144,236.00

The stories of the Southeastern Indigenous Peoples who remain often are lost in
the white-black binary story that is told in this region. We Still Remain
Conference (WSRC) is co-hosted by the University of Arizona and University of
North Carolina at Pembroke to improve the publicâ€™s understanding of SE
Indigenous Peoples. This two-day conference will gather Indigenous and non-
Indigenous students and scholars from various disciplines to (1) examine areas
of tension in research affecting underserved groups; (2) document ways
Indigenous Peoples without federal recognition might govern research within
their jurisdiction; and (3) test how a community of practice model might change
individual and institutional behaviors of research. This conference will amplify
the general awareness of the sovereign status of SE Indigenous Peoples. The
results will be disseminated broadly for academic and non-academic audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WSRC objectives are to: (1) characterize and define SE
Indigenous studies; (2) encourage underrepresented undergraduate and graduate
students interested in SE Indigenous Peoples; (3) increase the promotion of SE
Indigenous Peoples research and education; and (4) support early career and
senior scholars in their research development. The conference will feature a
plenary session, small group workshops, student poster sessions and invited
guest speakers to provide context and perspective of emergent themes. Expected
outcomes are to increase collaborative research opportunities and share
evidence-based practices. The conference will broaden policy impact--not only
among Indigenous communities, but local and state governments that engage these
communities, and connect researchers and their research topics more closely to
community needs. The success of the conference will be measured through pre- and
post-conference evaluations, anecdotal and empirical evidence, and subsequent
publications disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.