* 2037914
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Experimental Facility with Large Wave Flume and Directional Wave Basin 2021-2025
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Daniel Cox, Oregon State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,987,287.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) is supported by
the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user national
facility to provide the natural hazards engineering research community with
access to research infrastructure that includes earthquake and wind engineering
experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure (CI), computational modeling and
simulation tools, high performance computing resources, and research data, as
well as education and community outreach activities. Originally funded under
program solicitations NSF 14-605 and NSF 15-598, NHERI has operated since 2015
through separate, but coordinated, five-year research infrastructure awards for
a Network Coordination Office, CI, Computational Modeling and Simulation Center,
and Experimental Facilities, including a post-disaster, rapid response research
facility. Information about NHERI resources is available at the NHERI web portal
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). Awards made for NHERI contribute to NSF's role
in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National
Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). NHERI Experimental Facilities will
provide access to their experimental resources, user services, and data
management infrastructure for NSF-supported research and education awards. This
award will renew the NHERI Experimental Facility at Oregon State University from
January 1, 2021, to September 30, 2025. Through this award, Oregon State
University will continue to maintain, operate, and enhance the Large Wave Flume
and Directional Wave Basin to provide access to experimental equipment,
instrumentation, and technical support to enable research to mitigate the impact
of natural hazards, such as coastal surge and waves and tsunamis, on the
nationâ€™s civil infrastructure and communities. Consistent with the grand
research challenges in natural hazards engineering, as outlined in the NHERI
Science Plan (https://doi.org/10.17603/ds2-4s85-mc54), the facility will enable
new research discoveries that can help protect human life, reduce damage,
minimize economic losses, and allow communities to recover more quickly after
extreme coastal hazard events. The experimental capabilities will allow
researchers to develop new technologies for adaptive engineering to mitigate the
effects of coastal hazards. Experimental data generated from the use of this
facility will be archived in the Data Depot on the NHERI web portal. The
facility will conduct annual user workshops, host Research Experiences for
Undergraduate students, and enable the development of K-12 instructional content
developed via Research Experiences for Teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Large
Wave Flume and Directional Wave Basin are capable of generating long-period
waves for tsunami research and short-crested waves for hurricane wave research
and can be used for the study of hydraulic-structure-sediment phenomena, such as
tsunami and hurricane inundation dynamics in constructed and natural
environments; tsunami and hurricane wave forces on near-coast civil
infrastructure; and tsunami and hurricane surge interaction with sediments
causing erosion and localized scour. The wave flume is a two-dimensional
representation of the coast (looking directly out to sea), eliminating the
complexity of longshore currents and wave direction, and allowing a cross-
section of test specimens to be studied at scales from approximately 1:50 up to
1:1 (prototype) scale to model wave-structure interaction of building
subassemblies, native sediments for beaches and dunes, and live coastal
vegetation. The wave basin increases the system complexity to three dimensions
by extending laterally, enabling the study of coastal communities and complex
harbors when wave direction is important. The wave basin generally requires a
decrease in scale by a factor of five (1:250 to 1:5). In addition to these two
resources, the facility will provide standard and state-of-the-art
instrumentation to assess wave conditions, velocity, and response variables such
as stress, strain, load, and sediment transport (scour and
erosion).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.