* 2037493
* Build and Broaden: Growing Capacity in Southeast Alaska Indigenous Genomic Research Partnerships
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Ripan Malhi, Sealaska Heritage Institute
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,990.00

This project will support a regional approach to building capacity for genomic
research partnerships within the Tlingit, Haida, and Tsimshian communities of
southeast Alaska. A workshop series will introduce a working group of southeast
Alaska Indigenous community representatives to basic genomic research methods
through hands-on laboratory exercises. The working group will develop
culturally-responsive genomic research policy recommendations and resources that
will serve as a potential model for other Indigenous communities, institutions,
and their collaborators. In collaboration with Sealaska Heritage Instituteâ€™s
STEAM program, insight from the working-group will also be applied to developing
a place-based, culturally-responsive genomic laboratory teaching module for
Alaska Native middle school students. This pedagogical model will be of interest
to other STEM educators serving Indigenous student populations. The workshop
activities will strengthen the existing genomic research partnerships between
the investigators and further support the training and professionalization of an
Alaska Native postdoctoral fellow (PI Bader).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
workshop series will build capacity in southeast Alaska Native communities and
the Sealaska Heritage Institute to engage in equitable genomic research
partnerships, especially with non-Indigenous collaborators. Workshop activities
will produce a genomic research toolkit of resources for Indigenous communities
and their collaborators. This toolkit will include a genomic research policy
recommendation that will hold genomic researchers accountable to community core
cultural values, a cultural competency training module for researchers who wish
to engage in genomic research with Indigenous communities in southeast Alaska,
and examples of documents like MOU/MOA and informed consent which will highlight
key points to be discussed between communities and their research partners.
Consortium publications will recommend approaches to critical elements of
genomic research (for example, sample management and data sharing) informed by
the core values of southeast Alaska Native
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.