* 2037359
* Workshop: Establishing the Vision and Creating a Roadmap for Security, Privacy and Ethics Research in Healthcare
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Jaideep Vaidya, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 87,972.00

Healthcare is a societal need with health spending accounting for 17.7% of the
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) today. There are new challenges such as new and
evolving diseases (e.g., antibiotic resistant bacteria), evolving situations
(e.g., COVID-19 pandemic), evolving behavior (e.g., anti-vaxxer movement,
sedentary lifestyle, opioid crises) that require constant innovation in
therapeutic treatments, drug discovery, and other aspects. Advances in
information and sensing technologies, communication platforms, and robotics
assisted systems, have led to significant improvements in the quality of
healthcare delivery and in controlling the costs of healthcare. Within the
Health and Human Services sector, there is rapid adoption of new technologies
such as IoT devices, robotics assisted systems, mobile and Edge/Cloud computing,
Social Networks, AI/ML, etc., creating a data-intensive hyper-connected cyber-
physical interacting systems. These new technologies provide increasing
opportunities to realize the dream of personalized health and well-being.
However, all of these technologies bring a plethora of their own unique
security, privacy and ethical challenges.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this workshop is to bring together approximately 50-60 scientists, students, and
stakeholders to identify the unique challenges in terms of security, privacy,
fairness, and ethics underlying the use of information technology and computing
in healthcare. By bringing together participants from computing, informatics,
and healthcare, across academia, industry, and government the workshop aims to
enable cross-fertilization between these communities, and the identification of
the major challenges that are unique to this context. The insights and findings
that results will be summarized in a workshop report and disseminated to the
attendees and scientific experts in the fields of security, privacy, healthcare,
and informatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.