* 2037733
* I-Corps: Passive Tactile Learning Gloves
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2020
* Thad Starner, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of passive tactile learning gloves and associated systems for manual
task learning and rehabilitation. Students’ and patients’ difficulties often
stem from lack of time to practice or perform exercises. Slow and unclear
progress leads to frustration and demotivation. Progress improvements through
passive tactile stimulation may be evident through the use of personalized
systems allowing users to customize and share lessons or therapy “session”
sequences. Teachers or therapists provide “sessions” and feedback with the
system, improving the lives of those unable to attend in-person sessions.
Markets for manual task learning (piano, text entry) and rehabilitation aids
(for stroke, spinal cord injury, cerebral palsy) span diverse demographics. The
market for this technology is broad, for example, keyboarding is taught in
grades 3 to 6 in over 40 states. In the US, 10 million adult survivors of stroke
are estimated by 2030, with upper limb disability occurring in ~50% of cases. In
addition, there are estimated to be 320,000 spinal cord injury (SCI) survivors.
Globally, over 17 million people have cerebral palsy, with spasticity affecting
70 to 80%. This technology may assist in teaching and rehabilitation of these
varied groups.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of passive tactile learning
(PTL) Gloves for manual task learning and rehabilitation. This technology
applies stimulation to the fingers throughout the day, eliciting a passive
learning and/or passive rehabilitation effect. Until the development of PTL
gloves, little research had been reported for passive learning through tactile
stimulation. Most haptic learning of skills has been active. The PTL gloves are
surprisingly effective at teaching novices new manual skills such as playing
piano melodies, keying Morse code, number entry, or typing Braille. Stroke and
partial spinal cord injury survivors using the PTL gloves have shown
improvements in sensation, dexterity, and spasticity. Individuals with cerebral
palsy also may benefit similarly and studies are currently underway. Questions
remain as to the optimal schedule and combination of passive and active learning
exposure so as to best assist new learners. In addition, passive tactile
stimulation might be effective for rehabilitation for stroke, partial spinal
cord injury, cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's, and a host of
other illnesses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.