* 2037910
* SII Planning: Center for Next Generation Wireless Spectrum Sharing
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Sayfe Kiaei, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 01/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This award is a planning grant for the Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National
Center for Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center). The focus of a spectrum
research SII-Center goes beyond 5G, IoT, and other existing or forthcoming
systems and technologies to chart out a trajectory to ensure United States
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum.
This award will fund activities towards the development of a full center
proposal. Proposed work plan includes workshop and planning activities and
committed academic, industry, and government outreach with the objective of (1)
solidifying the technical plan for ultra-wideband programmable spectrum sharing;
(2) identifying and filling-in existing technical gaps by expanding the team and
(3) formulating and finalizing educational plans to be adopted by the center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is planning activities for an Ultra-wideband
Programmable Spectrum Access (UPSA) center which will act as a hub for new
research and development for future wireless systems enabling (i) legacy-
compatible spectrum interference avoidance by sensing-informed and/or Artificial
Intelligence (AI)-enabled means; (ii) legacy-compatible optimally controlled
spectrum co-existence; and (iii) forward-looking novel multi-channel multi-task
signal co-design. The prime collaborators include Arizona State University,
Florida Atlantic University, and Florida International University. UPSA Center
researchers have expertise on low-cost and miniaturized ultra-wideband
(reconfigurable and flexible) antenna array beamforming designs, ultrawideband
RF-front circuits, ultra-wideband spectrum sensing, ultra-wideband (all-
spectrum) joint PHY/MAC design, cross-layer network optimization and control,
edge computing, and wireless security with strong industry
ties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.