* 2037795
* COMBUSTION CHEMISTRY OF LI-ION BATTERY ELECTROLYTES, THEIR PYROLYSIS PRODUCTS, AND POSSIBLE FIRE SUPPRESSANTS FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE SAFETY
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2023
* Olivier Mathieu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 10/31/2023
* USD 299,814.00

Lithium-ion batteries are globally used to power the ever-growing number of
mobile devices and will play a significant role in the transportation industry
for decades to come. The movement toward electric mobility is of strategic
importance, as the electricity used to power these vehicles can be produced from
a large blend of renewable (solar, wind, biofuels), carbon-free (nuclear)
energies, and from fossil fuels within large centralized plants, allowing for
higher efficiency, better emissions control, and carbon capture. However, these
batteries contain a flammable electrolyte in their battery cells which makes
them a safety hazard if they are damaged, such as during a collision of an
electric vehicle or in case of default in their conception. Many fire incidents
related to electric vehicles have been reported over the past few years. Since
Lithium-ion batteries are becoming so important in our lives, the fire safety
hazard associated with their usage is also increasing with their size and
ubiquity. This project aims at reducing the flammability of the electrolyte by
adding specific fire suppressants, an area where a fundamental approach at the
chemistry level has never been followed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed
project, the combustion properties of the typical components found in Lithium-
ion battery electrolytes and of a mixture of the typical gases ejected during a
battery thermal runaway will be investigated experimentally. These combustion
properties will be measured using accurate chemical kinetics markers obtained
from well-defined experimental techniques and optical diagnostics such as laser
absorption spectrometry. Many of these components from the lithium-ion battery
electrolyte will be studied for the first time. Similarly, the high-temperature
chemistry of specific fire suppressant agents will be investigated, and their
fire-suppressing potential will be investigated experimentally as well. The
experimental results obtained during the course of this study will be used to
develop or refine detailed chemical kinetics mechanisms for the electrolyte
components and for the fire suppressants. The successful completion of the
project will greatly advance the predictive capabilities on the flammability of
LiBs and will potentially allow for reducing their flammability without reducing
their performance. A safer use of lithium-ion batteries in many industries could
be experienced based on the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.