* 2037125
* Defining the Role of Elastic Fibers in Tendon Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Spencer Lake, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 01/31/2024
* USD 467,461.00

Tendons are essential tissues that transfer mechanical forces between muscles
and bones. This allows movement of the body and increases stability. Collagen is
the main component of tendon, and collagen is well-aligned with the tensile
forces that tendons are subjected to during use. However, other components of
tendon also aid in its function. Of these other components, elastic fibers are
known to affect how tendons respond to mechanical forces. When elastic fibers in
tendon are damaged or degraded, chronic pain or injuries can develop. However,
it remains unclear how elastic fibers contribute to the mechanical properties of
tendon and how they respond to repetitive use. This project will address this
important gap in knowledge by investigating the role of elastic fibers in tendon
under a broad range of conditions. Information gained from this research will
advance understanding of how tendons function under healthy conditions. This may
eventually lead to improved strategies to treat or replace tendons that have
damaged or degraded elastic fibers to restore function and reduce the burden
associated with these conditions. This project will also develop a workshop on
novel 3D tissue imaging to broaden impact within local research communities as
well as partner with a high school biomedical science program to provide unique
educational opportunities to aspiring
scientists/engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
define the role of elastic fibers in tendon mechanics. Elastic fibers are a
structural constituent of the tendon extracellular matrix and are therefore
necessary for its mechanical integrity. Despite the evidence demonstrating the
importance of elastic fibers in maintaining healthy mechanical properties in
tendon, the detailed contributions of elastic fibers in tendon mechanics are not
yet understood. This research will determine how elastic fibers affect the
mechanical function of tendon by comparing the base structure, composition, and
mechanics of normal and elastin-null mouse tendons using an array of experiments
including two-photon and transmission electron microscopy, biochemical assays,
and mechanical testing. The role of elastic fibers in overuse-induced
tendinopathy will be determined using fatigue testing and forced treadmill
running using mice to induce damage, while testing of cultured tendon explants
will inform potential effects of elastic fibers on mechanotransduction. In
addition, enzymatic degradation of elastic fibers in tendon will be utilized to
evaluate the distinct roles of elastic fibers within fascicles and within the
interfascicular matrix. Conclusions from this work will advance understanding of
composition-dependent mechanics in tendon and ultimately inform efforts to
restore proper function in tendons with elastinopathic conditions or with
degradation caused by overuse or age. This work is co-funded by the Biomechanics
&amp; Mechanobiology and the Physiological Mechanisms &amp; Biomechanics
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.