* 2037852
* SII Planning Grant: National Center for Radio Spectrum Innovations (NCRSI)
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,09/30/2021
* Michael Honig, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 09/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

This award is a planning grant for the Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National
Center for Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center). The focus of a spectrum
research SII-Center goes beyond 5G, IoT, and other existing or forthcoming
systems and technologies to chart out a trajectory to ensure United States
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum. The
radio spectrum should be utilized to the greatest public benefit at national and
global scales. Spectrum shortages, both real and perceived, are leading to
conflicts between existing users and anticipated new uses â€“ some of which were
not imagined when existing spectrum allocations were made decades ago. Many
stakeholders seek to protect and advance their interests, with aspects of these
interests overlapping and conflicting with each other. Hence, the public debate
over the optimal model for managing spectrum is a complex interplay of
technology, economics, law and regulation, policy, and the history of past
successes and failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at the
development of a comprehensive plan for an SII-Center which would help maintain
and extend US leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and
applications in science and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of
radio spectrum. The project team is led by the University of Notre Dame, with
partners from Northwestern University, Clemson University, University of
California, Berkeley, University of California, Los Angeles, New York
University, and Stanford University. The team has an extensive record of
successful research, as well as significant and relevant industry and
implementation experience. The project seeks to develop plans for a multi-
disciplinary center that emphasizes instrumentation of the radio spectrum;
collecting and sharing accurate regulatory, usage, and economic data; and
developing data-rich system designs and regulatory policies for more efficient
spectrum utilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.