* 2037565
* Collaborative Research: Nonlinear Dynamics and Wave Propagation through Phononic Tunneling Junctions based on Classical and Quantum Mechanical Bistable Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Julien Meaud, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 399,403.00

This grant will support research that will contribute new knowledge related to
nonlinear dynamics and wave propagation through classical and quantum mechanical
bistable structures, which is critical for phononic quantum computing. Current
state-of-the-art quantum computers complete complex computations at
unprecedented speeds; however, they require very low operating temperatures,
limiting their practical use. Further, the current lack of a well-established
tunneling junction capable of processing phononic quantum information limits
progress in phononic quantum computing. Bistable structures are a promising
approach for the realization of a mechanical tunneling junction because, at the
nanoscale, their energy barrier approaches the energy of a single phonon. This
award supports fundamental research to provide the knowledge regarding the
nonlinear dynamics of classical and quantum mechanical bistable structures
needed for the development of these novel tunneling junctions. These tunneling
junctions will be used for processing and computing of quantum information
carried by single phonons and will dramatically advance the technology of room-
temperature quantum computing. This capability will advance knowledge in
dynamics, quantum physics, nanoscience, and nanofabrication. This research will
benefit U.S. society due to the critical need for high performance computing in
science, defense and industry. This multi-disciplinary research will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in science and engineering and
positively impact STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to investigate the fundamental nonlinear dynamics and wave
transmission through mechanical bistable structures in classical and quantum
regimes for their potential application as mechanical tunneling junctions. Such
mechanical tunneling junctions will process quantum bits, which is critical to
quantum computing platforms using phonons. The central hypothesis of this
research is that a nanoscale bistable structure can transmit mechanical waves
(phonons) with a high enough transmission efficiency to act as a quantum
tunneling junction if the structure is driven by nonlinear and contactless
conservative interactions. This hypothesis will be tested in both classical and
quantum regimes by 1) characterizing the snap-though dynamics and wave
transmission of macroscale bistable elements with contact interactions and
nonlinear conservative (contactless) interactions, 2) evaluating the mechanical
wave (phonon) transmission efficiency through a micro-scale structure
theoretically and experimentally, and 3) demonstrating the quantum dynamics of
phonon tunneling through mechanical tunneling
junction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.