* 2037216
* SBIR Phase I:  HealthText: A Digital Decision Support Tool for Medicaid Patients
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Lisa Fitzpatrick, LISA FITZPATRICK & ASSOCIATES MD PC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 09/30/2022
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to provide underserved Medicaid patients
with accurate and culturally relevant medical advice outside of a standard
healthcare setting. This population often lacks access to timely medical advice
and this contributes to further health inequalities and unnecessary rising
Medicaid costs. Medicaid patients may be less likely to engage with medical
personnel face-to-face for fear of exorbitant out-of-pocket expenses. The
proposed mobile text-based solution will provide cost-free and culturally
relevant health advice. Proper and timely engagement will result in better
outcomes for patients and potentially reduce unnecessary trips to the emergency
room for routine care. Currently, there is no firmly established text-based
health solution for Medicaid patients. This service will be a key factor in
enabling the organization’s objective to increase health literacy in underserved
populations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will develop a culturally-appropriate, text-based,
digital platform designed exclusively for Medicaid beneficiaries and underserved
populations who have largely been omitted from digital health innovation. This
project’s research objective is to examine the receptiveness of the underserved
population to this method of health information delivery and healthcare
navigation support. This study will explore patient engagement with a healthcare
navigator using text messaging. The data will be analyzed for speech and content
patterns needed to create an easily accessible artificial intelligence (AI) tool
designed specifically for Medicaid and other patients from underserved
communities. The data generated from this project will also be useful for
researchers to refine methods to recruit underserved, black and Hispanic
communities for clinical trials and public health research
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.