* 2037694
* I-Corps: An integrated wide-area unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) aeromagnetic survey system targeting orphaned oil and gas wells
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Alex Nikulin, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a system capable of accurately detecting, assessing, and plugging
methane-emitting orphaned oil and gas wells. This remediation would effectively
remove the equivalent of 125,000 cars off the road annually, allowing New York
to come closer to its ambitious goal of net-zero carbon emissions by 2050. In
addition to the environmental benefits of this effort, accurately identifying
locations of presently unknown wells would allow for subsequent economic
redevelopment in areas where new construction and infrastructure improvement are
significantly impeded by the presence of unmarked well sites. In addition, it is
anticipated that as unmanned aircraft system platforms are adopted as part of
geophysical survey toolkits across multiple industries, the proposed technology
will expand to offer additional aeromagnetic survey solutions in the fields of
unexploded ordnance detection, geological mapping, mineral exploration, and
buried infrastructure analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of an automated wide-area unmanned aerial vehicle
(UAV)-based geophysical survey system that scans hundreds of acres a day and
accurately locates abandoned oil and gas wells year-round in difficult terrains
and dense vegetation. While UAV systems have gained recognition and customer
demand across multiple sectors has increased, their use in automated geophysical
surveys has remained relatively limited. The proposed technology allows the UAVs
to acquire, process, interpret, and map datasets, delivering actionable maps to
stakeholders that allow subsequent ground verification, classification, and
prioritization of wells for remediation. In addition, the technology includes
the design of an automated UAV-based aeromagnetic survey system for rapid
assessment of large geographical areas for presence of unmarked, abandoned oil
and gas wells. Field trials, conducted in close collaboration with environmental
regulators, demonstrated that automated UAV aeromagnetic surveys are more
efficient than both terrestrial and piloted aeromagnetic surveys; These surveys
address a critical technological gap in the effort to detect and map orphaned
and abandoned oil and gas wells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.