* 2037829
* Collaborative Research: Designing a Minimized Genome  Cyanobacterial Chassis for Efficient Bioproduction
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Costas Maranas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2024
* USD 380,000.00

The goal of this project is to obtain a photosynthetic bioproduction platform
that can efficiently convert sunlight and CO2 into bioproducts of interest,
through iterative removal of selected genes from a cyanobacterium. Cyanobacteria
are oxygenic photosynthetic prokaryotes that are uniquely poised to become
optimal platforms for sustainable bioproduction using sunlight and atmospheric
CO2 as well as free and ubiquitous substrates. The genes selected for removal
would be identified with the aid of computational methods and gene editing
techniques. Gene removal is accomplished without compromising the growth rate of
the organism. This project trains several national and international
undergraduate students under different collaborative programs, in the design and
implementation of molecular tools, relevant computational techniques and
physiology of photosynthetic organisms. In addition, the project is designed to
align with a variety of scientific entrepreneurial ventures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops Synechococcus 2973, a cyanobacterium
displaying the fastest photoautotrophic growth ever observed, into an ideal
chassis strain by streamlining its genome in a multi-step process that involves
state-of-the-art genome-editing technology, guided by experimental analysis and
metabolic modeling. Efficacy of reduction is assessed by both growth rate and
productivity of a plug-in reporter pathway. Minimizing the genome while
retaining fast growth eases the metabolic burden on the strain, removes cryptic
regulatory processes that challenge predictable engineering, and improves
understanding and control over this powerful autotrophic workhorse. The creation
of a novel streamlined model cyanobacterium is a significant step in achieving
an industrial “green E. coli” and establishing the foundation for a sustainable
bioeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
and the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering Program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.