* 2037937
* Infrastructure for Predicting, Understanding, and Mitigating Zoonotic Disease Outbreaks
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Pamela Soltis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Charlotte Roehm
* 08/31/2024
* USD 77,128.00

This award to the University of Florida supports a series of workshops that will
catalyze collaborations around suites of data housed in natural history
collections. The workshops will identify gaps in biodiversity and infectious
disease data to address basic research and broader social issues pertinent to
diseases that originate from other animals. An outcome of the workshops will be
a strategy for framing an integrated agenda for transdisciplinary training and
research. Products of the workshops will be broadly applicable for improving the
communityâ€™s understanding of infectious diseases in general, achieved through
the strengthening the cyberinfrastructure supporting and connecting the
important data stored in natural history collections. The plan is to assemble a
diverse group of participants that includes students and contributes to the
preparation of the next generation of STEM researchers to sustain these
conversations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded series of workshops will bring
together representatives from natural history collections, biodiversity
informatics, taxonomy, systematics, ecology, genetics, virology, pathobiology,
infectious disease, epidemiology, social science, and communications. This
transdisciplinary effort will establish a dialogue and frame an integrated
research agenda for understanding, mitigating, and predicting emerging zoonotic
disease. A primary aim of the activity is to unveil the potential role of
natural history specimens in pathogen discovery and mitigation, resulting in new
approaches to gather, share, and interpret data and knowledge for deployment in
preventing, predicting, and responding to diseases of zoonotic origins (future
pandemics). To achieve this, the project will identify gaps in biodiversity and
pathobiology data connections, develop possible solutions to close these gaps
and enable a more synthetic view of biodiversity and human health, establish a
plan for framing an integrated research agenda, and develop a plan for
interdisciplinary training and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.