* 2037748
* I-Corps: A physicochemical method for improving microorganism viability during manufacturing and storage
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Ariel Furst, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop
technology to improve the viability and stability of microorganisms during
manufacturing and thus enable the availability and efficacy of probiotics for
use in the food, supplements, cosmetics, personal care products, animal feed,
agriculture, and/or therapeutic industries. Current processing methods of
probiotics cause significant cellular stresses and result in cell death,
consequently limiting the efficacy and the number of probiotic species
commercially available. This innovation may enable current production lines to
manufacture novel probiotics without the need for costly equipment modifications
and for new, beneficial species to be brought to market. Many bacteria species
have been identified as targets for therapeutic use in a number of
gastrointestinal disorders (e.g., Crohn’s, ulcerative colitis, colorectal
cancer), for improved wellness in humans and animals, and for enhanced crop
production. For example, the use of probiotics in livestock can improve growth
and mitigate the use of antibiotics. The innovation may provide a safe and cost-
effective method to bring these bacterial targets to
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on an the development
of encapsulation technology that may be applied to protect cells. A major
bottleneck in the commercialization of beneficial living microorganisms is
manufacturing and storage. Current processes cause significant thermal, shear,
osmotic, and oxidative stresses that impact the viability of microorganisms.
Protection strategies currently used to enhance viability include addition of
protective agents, controlling processing parameters, and prestressing the
microorganisms prior to drying. The proposed technology uses a self-assembling,
inorganic-organic hybrid coating for the protection of microorganisms during
manufacturing. This material is biocompatible, permeable, thermally and
mechanically stable, pH-responsive, functionalizable, acts as a reactive oxygen
species (ROS) scavenger, and is made from generally recognized as safe (GRAS)
ingredients. Previous work has demonstrated that this material can coat living
cells and impart cytoprotective qualities (e.g., against UV radiation, lytic
enzymes, and silver nanoparticles), enhance the Young’s modulus of the membrane,
resist proteases, and increase antioxidant capacity, which benefits the
stability of the microorganisms under stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.