* 2037916
* I-Corps: Artificial Intelligence-Based Clinical Decision Support for Acute Stroke Victims
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Nadir Weibel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a computational technology to reduce the occurrence of
misdiagnosed strokes in the emergency departments of underserved hospitals.
These hospitals may not have a specialized stroke center or may have limited
access to stroke specialists. Emergency department physicians are challenged to
identify the different symptoms of stroke and to distinguish stroke from a
diverse range of diseases that have overlapping symptoms. Missed or late
diagnosis of strokes result in permanent disabilities or otherwise preventable
deaths and incur unnecessary treatment costs for both hospitals and patients. In
addition to improving the accuracy of stroke diagnosis, a computational support
system may increase the speed of diagnosis, thereby increasing the
administration of time-sensitive drugs that are only effective within 3 hours of
the onset of stoke symptoms. Diagnosing stroke quickly and accurately therefore
improves long-term stroke patient outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project explores the translation of developments to improve clinical decision
support systems to aid acute stroke diagnosis. The technology is a real-time
system that is able to quantify stroke symptoms like weakness, facial droop, and
incoordination simply from video footage. The proposed technology may support
diagnosis by emergency department physicians without requiring an experienced
stroke specialist to be on hand. The proposed technology employs a particular
set of validated and published machine learning algorithms trained on a growing
dataset of video and audio recordings of stroke patients undergoing neurological
exams. Results show that from just 10 seconds of video footage of stroke
patients sitting passively at rest, the technology is able to detect hemiparesis
with 80% accuracy, exceeding the performance of neurologists conducting a video-
based assessment of stroke.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.