* 2037732
* SII Planning: Olin Spectrum Innovation Initiative Center (OSIIC)
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Whitney Lohmeyer, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 07/31/2021
* USD 198,809.00

This award is a planning grant for the Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National
Center for Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center). The focus of a spectrum
research SII-Center goes beyond 5G, IoT, and other existing or forthcoming
systems and technologies to chart out a trajectory to ensure United States
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum.
Olin College of Engineering, a global leader in engineering education and
curriculum innovation, proposes to establish the Olin Spectrum Innovation
Initiative Center (OSIIC) as a hub that brings together commercial and
government expertise with academic collaboration to not only transform wireless
education and technology, but to share innovative academic approaches and
wireless curriculum design with institutions on a global scale. Following the
guidelines outlined in the Presidential Memorandum on Spectrum Sustainability,
the OSIIC team will explore techniques to revolutionize the current educational
paradigm in the field of wireless communications and spectrum management, and
experiment with an academic model that is grounded in real-world, project based
learning with apprenticeship-styled educational experiences. These techniques
and models will cultivate learning experiences that create educational, social,
and financial value, and in turn, serve as a framework to create replicable,
systemic educational change that strengthens the higher education financial
model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout the duration of the OSIIC Planning
Grant, Olin College, and specifically the Olin Satellite + Spectrum Technology
and Policy (OSSTP) Group will continue to identify potential partners, further
hone the research and educational agendas and develop the initial team to
ultimately submit a full Center proposal. Key agendas for the full Center will
include 1) real-world project-based wireless curriculum development, 2)
fundamental long-term spectrum research, 3) fostering entrepreneurial
opportunities and environments for wireless communications ventures, and 4)
encouraging organizational collaboration between academia, industry and
government agencies. Examples of spectrum sharing research themes that have been
identified as fundamental focus areas for the OSIIC include advanced antenna and
waveform technologies to enable the coexistence of inter/intra system 5G and
satellite network topologies and novel methods for spectrum sharing,
coordination and interference mitigation like fast steering and patterning high-
gain beams for interference rejection. In addition to the curriculum development
for traditional undergraduate institutions. The OSIIC will also organize
workshops, short courses, seminars, and other lifelong learning opportunities
for K-12 and post-graduate audiences. This endeavor along with the collaborative
educational, research, and entrepreneurial undertakings of the OSIIC will
comprehensively train, develop, and refine the skills of a modern, talented
workforce ready to tackle the challenges of the rapidly evolving landscape of
wireless communications. After the review, this project was modified to increase
its focus on the broader impacts portion of the project, especially curriculum
development, curating environment conducive to workforce development, and
forging new alliances between public and private entities to strengthen
workforce and educational systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.