* 2037896
* SII Planning: NASCE: A National Spectrum Center to Conquer, Program, and Protect the Wireless Spectrum
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Abhimanyu Gosain, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 07/31/2022
* USD 175,000.00

This award is a planning grant for the Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National
Center for Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center). The focus of a spectrum
research SII-Center goes beyond 5G, IoT, and other existing or forthcoming
systems and technologies to chart out a trajectory to ensure United States
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum. The
objective of this project is to lay the foundations to establish the new
Spectrum Innovation Initiative (SII) center NASCE: A National Spectrum CEnter
for convergent research on transformative approaches to develop new spectrum
science and technology. Today’s wireless spectrum is exceptionally crowded. It
is expected that by 2025, over 75 billion devices will be absorbed into the
Internet, generating a global network of “things'' of dimensions never seen
before, all in need of unbounded wireless access. Beyond the clear commercial
strategic needs, technologies such as 5G and the Internet of Things (IoT) are
also critical for national security, shaping a technological revolution with
far-reaching social, economic, and geostrategic consequences. Wireless systems
will continue to change the way we live, work, manufacture goods, and protect
our citizens. Furthermore, the role that wireless connectivity is playing as a
unique vehicle to provide work and educational opportunities during the current
COVID-19 pandemic—especially in rural areas—cannot be overstated. The
overarching objective of this center is to foster the creation of next
generation wireless systems capable of using the whole wireless spectrum, from a
few Hertz (Hz) to Terahertz. The team will conduct advanced research in
technology areas in support of the commercial sector, all segments of the
wireless market, defense and intelligence agencies, in cooperation with leading
industries in the field. All center activities are designed to prepare students
and continuous learners for careers in spectrum-related fields via experiential
learning, research, new workshops and shareable educational modules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research promoted by this project is organized into
three interdependent research thrusts: (i) Conquering the spectrum, with a focus
on interdisciplinary approaches for broadening existing available spectrum
options; (ii) programming the spectrum, for developing the foundations of
applying modern data-driven techniques and software-defined networking for blue-
sky approaches to spectrum sharing and exploitation; (iii) protecting the
spectrum, for new algorithms and systems for reliable exploitation of the
available spectrum in civil and contested environments, and protecting incumbent
users. Orthogonal and pervasive to these fundamental thrusts, center plans and
operations will be informed by the following technological themes: (a) policing
the spectrum, with the twofold aim of providing technology for enforcing
regulatory policies, and providing key agencies with technological and policy
advice to shape the wireless future of our nation; (b) an Artificial
Intelligence approach to new data-driven techniques for inference and control of
large amount of spectrum data, and (c) perform and enable large scale
experimentation and emulation thanks to our privileged access to NSF PAWR
platforms, Colosseum, the largest RF networked channel emulator in the world,
and to a Terahertz wireless networking testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.