* 2037839
* SII Planning: Escaping Gravity: The End of Gs
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Joel Johnson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 05/31/2022
* USD 175,000.00

This award is a planning grant for the Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National
Center for Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center). The focus of a spectrum
research SII-Center goes beyond 5G, IoT, and other existing or forthcoming
systems and technologies to chart out a trajectory to ensure United States
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum.
This project aims to catalyze the activities of a multi-disciplinary academic
team and stakeholders towards collaborative long-term research, education,
workforce development and establishing the definitive center of spectrum
engineering, policy and science. The SII-Center is envisioned as the corner
stone of trans-disciplinary effort, amalgamating efforts of academics, industry,
government, policy, standard bodies and scientific and civic communities. The
center will transform wireless communications anytime, anywhere, providing use
and utilization of spectrum ubiquitously and seamlessly across networks, devices
and communities, addressing the critical need of closing the digital divide,
providing reliable and secure access to information for all. The broader impact
of this effort will directly contribute to the United States reclaiming its
rightful place as the global leader in wireless communications and information
processing in the internet of everything era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
comprehensive research vision of the center is to establish the next and last
generation of wireless connectivity by an integrative system design that will
build on optimal use of wireless resources throughout the spectrum, from
hardware to system design, software and policy, ensuring coexistence
requirements of communities who are primary users of the spectrum. The project
will seek to (i) refine the research vision by engaging industry, government,
research labs, and communities with use requirements such as remote sensing and
radio astronomy; (ii) formulate research partnerships towards executing the
vision; (iii) prepare a comprehensive white paper which will not only contribute
to the center proposal, but importantly, will be a stand alone guide for
government, learned societies, communities, industry and academia on the last
generation of wireless, i.e., a holistic system design making optimum and
seamless spectrum utilization an innate component from the outset. The center
vision includes inter-disciplinary curricula and workforce development for
spectrum science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.