* 2037575
* Project Title: RAPID: Understanding the Experiences of Public Internet Users            during the Novel Coronavirus Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* William Staples, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project addresses challenges faced by those
who rely on public libraries for their computing needs and broadband Internet
access. We see these individuals as disadvantaged by their life circumstances
and as being digitally homeless. Without a residence from which they can reach
the internet and have sufficient bandwidth, their computing lives are resource-
limited, transient, less private, and less secure than those who access
broadband from their residences. The novel coronavirus and COVID-19 pandemic has
caused unprecedented disruption to life and brought new challenges to the lives
of these individuals. The months-long shuttering of libraries has, in essence,
evicted these users from their only space for broadband. These people cannot
simply work from home or e-learn new skills, nor can their children shift to
distance learning. The key questions we address are, how has the pandemic
affected library Internet users? How have they adapted to the closure of
facilities? Where did they turn for Internet access? How did libraries respond
to help meet the needs of patrons? A better understanding on the experiences and
needs of the digitally homeless during the current pandemic advances a number of
societal benefits and socially relevant and desirable outcomes. Systematic,
scientific knowledge will contribute to developing more informed strategies and
policies to build a safe and secure cyber-infrastructure that is available to
all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As states begin the process of ending stay-at-home
orders and libraries reopen, the PIs are collecting qualitative and quantitative
retrospective information about what transpired during the quarantine and what
is transpiring as states reopen. They are soliciting cooperation from library
computer users at the local research site to complete a brief survey, and a
subset to participate in field interviews. They also are generating a multi-
stage cluster sample of library systems in the U.S. Team members are contacting
selected libraries though phone or email to collect information on their
experiences with the closures, how they did or did not provide open Internet
access to the public, and what steps were taken to ensure secure and trustworthy
access. The researchers are conducting a content analysis of news stories
published during and after the pandemic regarding the experiences of Americans
without internet access and how they coped during this
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.