* 2037983
* Online Practice Suite: Practice Spaces, Simulations and Virtual Reality Environments for Preservice Teachers to Learn to Facilitate Argumentation Discussions in Math and Science
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Meredith Park Rogers, Educational Testing Service
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,197,909.00

In teacher education it is widely acknowledged that learning to teach requires
that preservice teachers have robust, authentic, and consistent opportunities to
engage in the work of teaching--ideally across different contexts, with diverse
student populations, and for varied purposes--as they hone their instructional
practice. Practice teaching experiences in K-12 classrooms, such as field
placements and student teaching, are the most widely used approaches to provide
these opportunities. In an ideal world these experiences are opportunities for
preservice teachers to observe and work closely with mentor teachers and try out
new instructional strategies with individual, small groups, and whole classes of
K-12 students. While these experiences are critical to supporting preservice
teachers’ learning, it can be difficult to help preservice teachers transition
from university classrooms to field placements in ways that provide them with
opportunities to enact ambitious instructional strategies. This need is
particularly acute in mathematics and science education, where classrooms that
model strong disciplinary discourse and argumentation are not always prevalent.
This challenge is amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic environment; with schools
and universities across the nation operating online, many preservice teachers
will miss out on opportunities to practice teaching both within their courses
and in K-12 classrooms. To address this urgent challenge in STEM education,
project researchers will develop, pilot, and refine a set of coordinated and
complementary activities that teacher education programs can use in both online
and face-to-face settings to provide practice-based opportunities for preservice
teachers to develop their ability to facilitate argumentation-focused
discussions in mathematics and science, a critical teaching practice in these
content areas. The practice-based activities include: (1) interactive, online
digital games that create targeted practice spaces to engage preservice teachers
to respond to students’ content-focused ideas and interactions; (2) facilitating
group discussions with upper elementary or middle school student avatars in a
simulated classroom using performance-based tasks; and (3) an immersive virtual
reality whole-classroom environment that allows for verbal, textual and non-
verbal interactions between a teacher avatar and 24 student avatars. The online
practice suite, made up of these activities along with supports to help teacher
educators use them effectively, represents not just an immediate remedy to the
challenge of COVID-19, but a rich and flexible set of resources with the
potential to support and improve teacher preparation well beyond the COVID-19
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use design-based research to
create this integrated system of practice teaching opportunities. This approach
will involve developing and refining the individual practice activities, the
integrated online practice suite, and the teacher educator support materials by
working with a teacher educator community of practice and engaging up to 20
teacher educators and 400 preservice teachers in multiple rounds of tryouts and
piloting during the three-year project. The project will proceed in three
phases: a first phase of small-scale testing, a second phase trying the
materials with teacher educators affiliated with the project team, and a third
phase piloting materials with a broader group of mathematics and science teacher
educators. Data sources include surveys of preservice teachers’ background
characteristics, perceptions of the practice activities, beliefs about content
instruction, perceptions about preparedness to teach, and understanding of
argumentation and discussion, videos and/or log files of their performances for
each practice teaching activity, and scores on their practice teaching
performances. The project team will also observe the in-class instructional
activities prior to and after the use of each practice teaching activity,
conduct interviews with teacher educators, and collect instructional logs from
the teacher educators and instructional artifacts used to support preservice
teachers’ learning. Data analysis will include pre and post comparisons to
examine evidence of growth in preservice math and science teachers’ beliefs,
perceptions, understanding, and teaching performance. The project team will also
build a series of analytic memos to describe how each teacher educator used the
online practice suite within the mathematics or science methods course and the
factors and decisions that went into that each use case. Then, they will
describe and understand how the various uses and adaptations may be linked to
contextual factors within these diverse settings. Findings will be used to
produce empirically and theoretically grounded design principles and heuristics
for these types of practice-based activities to support teacher
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.