* 2037725
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Experimental Facility with Boundary Layer Wind Tunnel 2021-2025
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Kurtis Gurley, University of Florida
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 3,336,901.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) is supported by
the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user national
facility to provide the natural hazards engineering research community with
access to research infrastructure that includes earthquake and wind engineering
experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure (CI), computational modeling and
simulation tools, high performance computing resources, and research data, as
well as education and community outreach activities. Originally funded under
program solicitations NSF 14-605 and NSF 15-598, NHERI has operated since 2015
through separate, but coordinated, five-year research infrastructure awards for
a Network Coordination Office, CI, Computational Modeling and Simulation Center,
and Experimental Facilities, including a post-disaster, rapid response research
facility. Information about NHERI resources is available at the NHERI web portal
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). Awards made for NHERI contribute to NSF's role
in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National
Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). NHERI Experimental Facilities will
provide access to their experimental resources, user services, and data
management infrastructure for NSF-supported research and education awards. This
award will renew the NHERI Experimental Facility at the University of Florida
from January 1, 2021, to September 30, 2025. Through this award, the University
of Florida will continue to maintain, operate, and enhance its Boundary Layer
Wind Tunnel (BLWT) component of NHERI, which enables research to understand the
vulnerability of civil infrastructure to the destructive impacts of strong winds
and improve building codes and standards to safeguard hazard-prone communities.
The BLWT is an important tool for assessing wind loads on structures through the
simulation of the effects of extreme winds (hurricanes, thunderstorms, and
tornadoes) on scaled models in a controlled environment. This fundamental
understanding of wind forces is a critical aspect of mitigating risk, reducing
damage, and saving lives by enabling engineers to perform cost effective design
to resist extreme winds. The facility will cultivate an important ecosystem for
the hazard engineering workforce through the development and implementation of a
K-12 teacher training program to increase pedagogical knowledge about wind
hazards. The facility will also conduct annual user workshops and host Research
Experiences for Undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combined with the
collocated high-performance computing cluster, the NHERI facility at the
University of Florida will provide the experimental and computational capacity,
staffing, domain expertise, and end-to-end project services that enable
transformative research. The BLWT is a culmination of multiple technologies that
improve the range and throughput of wind hazard experiments that can be
performed. The experimental automation tools will provide researchers
flexibility in their test configurations while supporting high-throughput
testing and data collection. The approach terrain can be rapidly reconfigured
over a continuum of options to achieve desired flow conditions over a wide range
of geometric scales. The instrumentation gantry can traverse preset paths to
collect wind field measurements anywhere in the tunnel test section using
multiple 3D probes or a stereoscopic particle imagine velocimetry system. The
Flow Field Modulator (FFM) consists of a 2D array of 319 individually controlled
shrouded propellers driven by electronic speed controllers. The FFM enables the
simulation of non-monotonic profiles and nonstationary events, such as damaging
gust fronts and downbursts, at a reduced geometric scale. The facilityâ€™s
cyberinfrastructure supports remote use, hybrid experiments, real-time analysis,
automated data back-up, and seamless integration with the NHERI
cyberinfrastructure. These experimental capabilities will provide new
opportunities in wind tunnel testing and open pathways to solve outstanding wind
hazard issues associated with resilient infrastructure, lifelines, wind energy,
and meteorology. Experimental data generated from the research conducted at this
facility will be archived in the Data Depot on the NHERI web
portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.