* 2037941
* SBIR Phase II:  Low-Power, Wireless Crop Quality Sensors for Grain Quality Preservation and Storage Automation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Lucas Frye, Amber Agriculture
* Cooperative Agreement
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2023
* USD 990,804.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to reduce postharvest loss due to toxins and
insect damage while increasing the returns for farmers. In the US, an annual
$3-5 billion dollars of crop value is lost due to toxin, insect and moisture
mismanagement that could have been prevented through the introduction of
affordable and accessible monitoring technology during product storage.
Additionally, rising carbon dioxide levels in production agriculture create 14%
of global greenhouse gas emissions. This project will validate the feasibility
of low-power, wireless sensors that can detect grain storage conditions. The
project will also enable buyers in the grain marketplace to ensure that the
grain they are purchasing is, in fact, from fields where sustainable practices
are implemented. This technology will help validate the feasibility of tracking
grain across the supply chain to create trust and new business models around
sustainability-verified grain. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to advance internet
of things automation and wireless sensor applications as applied to production
agriculture and the postharvest supply chain. There are certain manual processes
of farm production that are strenuous due to time burdens and the lack of
information available to make decisions. One such process is monitoring grain
assets in farm bins, commercial storage, and barges, though this is important
for the safety of the global food supply. This technology is focused on sensing
for loss and spoilage risks and connecting and turning the data into automation
opportunities. Cable-based monitoring solutions currently exist, but adoption is
restricted due to physical installation limitations, electricity/power
constraints, and investment costs. This project will validate the feasibility of
low-power, wireless sensors that can detect grain conditions and last a full
postharvest cycle (18 months). Such a device will create opportunities to track
grain qualities across the agriculture value chain, advancing its current use in
on-farm grain bins. By characterizing and testing smart kernel sensors this
project will provide business model applications of tracking mechanisms in the
grain supply chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.