* 2037267
* SenSE: Closed-loop Artificial Pancreas with Noninvasive Monitoring of Glucose and Diet
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,04/30/2023
* Tam Vu, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 04/30/2023
* USD 749,987.00

Abstract Title:&lt;br/&gt;SenSE: Closed-loop Artificial Pancreas with
Noninvasive Monitoring of Glucose and Diet&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
2037383&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Xia Zhou, Gregory Forlenza, Qiang Liu,
Temiloluwa Prioleau &amp; Tam Vu&lt;br/&gt;Institutions: Dartmouth College,
University of Colorado &amp; University of Texas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Type-1 diabetes affects over 1.25 million people
in the United States and its incidence is increasing every year. The majority of
type 1 patients are not successful in achieving target blood glucose levels and
control has actually been worsening in recent years despite expanded use of
technologies. Inadequately controlled diabetes is the leading cause of
blindness, kidney failure, heart attack and peripheral vascular disease possibly
leading to amputation and in some cases death. Joint use of a continuous glucose
monitor and insulin pump is considered the current gold standard for management
of type-1 diabetes. Existing technologies, however, suffer from two well-
established limitations: high user burden due to the need for manual “meal
announcements” to estimate insulin doses and low adherence to glucose monitoring
devices due to the inconvenience of constantly breaking the skin for sensor
insertion and irritation from the sensor adhesive. Thus, there is an urgent need
in public health for fully automated, closed-loop glycemic control for type-1
diabetes patients, which will be the focus of the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
aims to develop and pilot a joint multimodal sensing system that can provide
continuous noninvasive glucose monitoring data in addition to automated meal
detection with an estimate of meal intake. Both types of information are
necessary to inform artificial pancreas algorithms for prediction of bolus (i.e.
short-acting) insulin dose needs. More specifically, the proposed system is in
the form of an ear-worn device, tackling key systems and algorithmic challenges
to realize a fully closed-loop artificial pancreas system. The intellectual
merits of the proposed work are following. First, it will develop novel system
designs to realize fine-grained, robust dietary sensing by fusing three streams
of signals (i.e., bio-electrical signals, motion, and acoustic signals); Second,
it will advance existing optical-based noninvasive glucose monitoring by
addressing challenges of skin scattering and mitigating the impact of
confounding factors and user diversity; Third, it will present new energy-
efficient machine learning models dedicated to enabling local execution at
micro-controllers, dealing with the limited number of labeled training data, and
ensuring data privacy and communication efficiency; Finally, it will
characterize and validate biological and behavioral biomarkers most relevant to
diabetes management for implementing an artificial pancreas systems and develop
new approaches for adaptive sampling and noise handling to ensure accurate
monitoring of target events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.