* 2037303
* Build and Broaden: Build and Broaden Indigenous Agriculture and Food Sovereignty Symposium
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Scott Herron, INTERTRIBAL AGRICULTURE COUNCIL INC
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,610.00

The Build and Broaden Indigenous Agriculture and Food Sovereignty Symposium will
provide opportunities for researchers, practitioners and community members to
share common interests in the field of Indigenous agriculture and foods. Content
of the symposium will be focused on four major themes in the area of Indigenous
foods: ecology, economy, diversity, and sovereignty. Symposium attendees will
view presentations, engage in discussions, and participate in hands-on
demonstrations regarding Indigenous foods. Sovereignty is defined as self-
governance, authority, jurisdiction and agency, thus Indigenous food sovereignty
means Indigenous people have the authority, agency and ability to define what is
food, how food should be grown, cared for, harvested, processed, consumed, and
related to. As Indigenous people everywhere struggle yet persevere in redefining
all their relationships, this relationship to the plant and animal worlds is key
to deepening the ancient relationships all people have to their ancestral and
adopted foods. This project will help bring these newly defined relationships to
all the people living across Turtle Island (North America) through its
objectives and outcomes, including proceedings. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Indigenous foods are under-researched in our society, and as such,
only scant evidence exists regarding contemporary scholarly work in this area.
Symposia like this are vital to the collective understanding of the
relationships between humans and food in general, and Indigenous foods
specifically. It is estimated that currently, only five of the regularly
occurring events focused on food studies across the nation are focused on
Indigenous foods. Given the unique status of American Indian tribes in the US,
it is important to develop a shared understanding of sovereignty in relation to
food and food systems. Lastly, the relationship between traditional ecological
knowledge (TEK) and scientific ecological knowledge (SEK) in relation to
Indigenous foods, although little studied, has the potential to address food
insecurity worldwide. TEK and SEK studies of Indigenous foods are both core to
addressing world food shortages, health and nutrition, and Indigenous/non-
Indigenous rights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.