* 2037849
* NSF/FDA SIR: Focused ultrasound and microbubbles for transport of therapeutics across blood brain barrier: A cellular model
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Kausik Sarkar, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Neurological diseases are the second leading cause of death accounting for 17%
of deaths in the US. A major limiting factor for medical interventions with
these disorders is the transport of therapeutics past the blood brain barrier
(BBB). The BBB has been shown to open transiently in presence of transcranial
focused ultrasound (FUS) and microbubbles by disrupting the tight-junction
proteins in animal and clinical trials. This offers a promising pathway for
therapeutic interventions for neurological disorders. Thus, the goal of this one
year NSF/FDA Scholar-in-Residence program is to investigate the effects of FUS
and microbubbles on the BBB on a cellular level using a series of cell,
microfluidic, and in vitro (lab based) models of the BBB. The fundamental
understanding that is gained from the detailed study of the cellular mechanisms
in response to FUS and microbubble treatments can help scientists and clinicians
develop more effective and safe treatment options of neurological diseases and
disorders for patients. The in vitro BBB model can potentially become another
regulatory tool to test criteria outlined in new FDA submissions for the safety
and efficacy of the proposed procedures and can be used as a high-throughput
model for fast evaluation. The project will also establish a robust
collaboration between the FDA and the Investigator’s lab and provide a unique
training experience for a postdoctoral scholar who will in turn use experiences
gained at the FDA to mentor high school, undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on developing validated
models to understand the fundamental cellular effects of focused ultrasound
(FUS) and microbubbles on the blood brain barrier (BBB). Though transcranial FUS
in the presence of microbubbles is known to reversibly open the BBB and
facilitate the delivery of therapeutic compounds with spatial and temporal
control, the detailed physical and cellular mechanism of the BBB opening has not
been studied, and as a result, it is difficult for regulatory agencies to
understand safety-related issues. The research plan is aimed at closing this
gap, with goals of providing a fundamental understanding of the underlying
bioeffects and creating a high-throughput in vitro BBB model backed by a
physical computational model of induced acoustic stresses. These goals will be
achieved by investigating the cellular phenomena in multiple in vitro setups,
each more complex than the one before and offering new information. A
microfluidic setup with embedded neurons will allow bioeffects investigation in
biologically relevant flows. A 3D hydrogel scaffold will also be used to
realistically recapitulate the brain morphology. Finally, fluid dynamics models
and computation will be used to relate the FUS and microbubble dynamics to the
shear stresses and microstreaming flows causing the
bioeffects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.