* 2037987
* EAGER-QAC-QSA: Bifurcation-Enabled Efficient Preparation of Many-body Ground States
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Lin Tian, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports theoretical
research and education on the implementation of a special purpose quantum
computer with practical devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum computers with
50-100 qubits and decoherence times not long enough for general-purpose quantum
computing can now be built in laboratories. With such devices, a quantum
simulator, a special-purpose quantum computer, may be able to solve problems
that cannot be solved with classical computers. A prerequisite to implementing
quantum simulation is to prepare the simulator in an appropriate many-body
ground state, something that could also benefit the solution of combinatorial
optimization problems. These many-body states are often unknown, highly
entangled, and hard to prepare with quantum logic gates. Despite previous
efforts, it remains a challenging question to prepare such many-body states with
high fidelity. The PI aims to develop a universal and implementable algorithm to
efficiently and accurately generate such many-body ground states by coupling the
quantum simulator to an auxiliary system that induces nonlinearity. This novel
approach exploits a generic but unique property of nonlinear systems to suppress
unwanted transitions between the ground state and the excited states. The
objectives of this project include the development of the general framework for
the algorithm, benchmarking the algorithm, and studying the effect of circuit
noise. The algorithm will be tested on four models that represent problems of
different interests in quantum simulation. Both numerical simulation using
classical computers and hardware emulation using a superconducting cloud
platform will be employed to test the algorithm. Because it exploits generic
nonlinear dynamics, this algorithm can be applied to a broad range of
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project not only has potential scientific
impact on quantum computing and quantum simulation, but it can also open the
door to a new direction that uses nonlinear physics for efficient quantum
computing. The educational component of this project will broaden the
participation of women and minority students and improve the diversity of the
workforce in quantum technology. The PI will develop a course on advanced
quantum computing, actively recruit students and postdocs from underrepresented
groups, and organize activities with the women-in-STEM group and the Society of
Physics Students at UC Merced. These activities will engage students at UC
Merced, a Hispanic serving institute, in quantum
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports theoretical research and
education on the implementation of quantum simulation with noisy intermediate-
scale quantum devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A quantum simulator is a special-
purpose quantum computer that can solve classically-hard problems. Efficient
preparation of a many-body system in its ground state is a prerequisite for
exploring quantum dynamics and many-body correlations in quantum simulators.
Understanding the feasibility and limits on state preparation also benefits the
study of combinatorial optimization problems in adiabatic quantum computing.
Despite previous efforts, it remains a challenging question to prepare many-body
states with high fidelity due to the lack of knowledge of the energy spectrum,
the rapid decrease of energy gaps with the size of the quantum simulator, and
the limited decoherence times in practical devices. The PI aims to develop a
universal and implementable algorithm to efficiently and accurately generate
many-body ground states by coupling a quantum simulator to an auxiliary system
that induces nonlinearity. This novel approach exploits the unique dynamics in
the vicinity of bifurcation points, which is a generic property in nonlinear
systems, to enable self-governed adiabatic evolution with significantly
suppressed diabatic transitions. The project includes three objectives: 1.
developing the generic framework, operational protocol, and requirements on the
quantum circuits for the algorithm, 2. benchmarking the algorithm and comparing
its performance with other methods, and 3. qualitatively studying the effect of
circuit noise. The algorithm will be tested on four models representing
different interests in quantum simulation: the transverse-field Ising model, an
exact-cover problem, a finite-sized Jaynes-Cummings lattice, and toy models with
multiple energy gaps. Both numerical simulation and hardware emulation using the
IBM Q cloud platform will be employed to test the algorithm. Because it exploits
generic nonlinear dynamics, this algorithm can be applied to a broad range of
problems without knowledge of the energy spectrum or the construction of
unphysical multipartite interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project not only
has potential scientific impact on quantum computing and quantum simulation, but
it can also open the door to a new direction that uses nonlinear physics for
efficient quantum computing. The educational component of this project will
broaden the participation of women and minority students and improve the
diversity of the workforce in quantum technology. The PI will develop a course
on advanced quantum computing, actively recruit students and postdocs from
underrepresented groups, and organize activities with the women-STEM group and
the Society of Physics Students at UC Merced. These activities will engage
students at UC Merced, a Hispanic serving institute, in quantum
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.