* 2037491
* Enhancing the Independent Mechatronics Technical Curriculum and Creating a New Pathway from Rural High Schools into Mechatronics Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Doug Laven, South Central College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,551,663.00

Manufacturing is a significant industry in both Minnesota and Nebraska, creating
a strong demand for highly skilled mechatronics technicians. Mechatronics is a
cross-disciplinary field that integrates principles of electrical, mechanical,
computer, and control systems to design, develop, and maintain “smart devices”
in automated manufacturing or process environments. Both South Central College
in Minnesota and Central Community College in Nebraska have Mechatronics and
Process Instrumentation and Control programs. However, the demand for
mechatronics technicians continues to exceed the supply of graduates, creating a
pressing need to expand the pipeline of skilled technicians. Prior to the
current COVID-19 pandemic, the colleges were making progress on developing
effective and efficient distance learning models for technician education. The
resulting restrictions and disruptions have amplified the importance of
developing high-quality technician education that can be supported via distance
learning. In this project, the two colleges will collaborate to enhance
accessibility to technical education programs and develop new pathways into
mechatronics technical careers for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to increase the number of
Mechatronics and Process Instrumentation and Control technicians by enhancing
and expanding a high-quality/low-cost distance education model and creating a
new pathway to Mechatronics programs in partnership with dedicated rural high
schools. The project will be guided by three overarching considerations: strong
industry demand hindered by a workforce skills gap; the need for distance
technology coursework; and existing programmatic capacity upon which to build.
The two colleges will align 12 credit hours of coursework from their existing
Mechatronics programs for remote delivery, with a focus on recruitment and
enrollment of students who cannot attend on-campus learning programs. The
specific aims are to: 1) Develop state-of-the-art, low-cost, portable
instructional units, known as Independent Remote Experiential Automation Labs
(iREAL), which will enable hands-on learning, including for students in remote
locations; 2) Establish a Business and Industry Leadership Team to provide
active leadership related to the curriculum, iREAL trainer design, and equipment
selection; 3) Engage industry personnel from food-processing, biofuels, energy,
and manufacturing to mentor students; and 4) Provide substantive professional
development workshops each year for 12-18 rural secondary educators that will
lead to partnerships between the schools, a business mentor, and their
partnering college. Expected project outcomes include: a new distance learning
education model that will bring meaningful technical education to students at
remote locations; development of dual enrollment capacity of secondary schools
in mechatronics courses; documentation of project impact on high schools and
industry; and mechatronics educational resources that are freely available on
partner websites, and through relevant ATE Centers and ATE Central. This project
is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.