* 2037981
* Novel antifungal symbiotic peptides: Modes of action and control of fungal pathogens
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Kirk Czymmek, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2024
* USD 375,000.00

Fungal pathogens cause significant losses of crop yield and are a serious
biological threat to food security. Effective management of fungal diseases in
crops has become a major challenge due to development of fungicide resistance in
pathogen populations and lack of single gene resistance. Thus, it is important
to look for countermeasures. Small cysteine-rich antifungal peptides that
exhibit potent antifungal activity against economically important fungal
pathogens offer peptide-based biofungicide alternatives to on-farm chemical
fungicides. We have identified two small antifungal peptides from leguminous
plants that offer significant potential for development as second-generation
safe and sustainable biofungicides. For effective use of these peptides for crop
protection in agriculture, it is important to understand their structure-
activity relationships and mechanisms of antifungal action. Preliminary studies
have revealed that these peptides exhibit multi-faceted modes of action. In this
proposal, active sites of these peptides governing their antifungal activity
will be determined and extensive high-resolution microscopy will be used to
investigate subcellular targets of these peptides in a fungal pathogen that
causes gray mold disease in fruits and vegetables. Further, biochemical tools
will be employed to identify molecular targets of these peptides in the fungus.
This project provides interdisciplinary training to a postdoctoral student and
under-represented minority undergraduate students. In addition, it provides
hands-on research experiences to teachers and students from low performing
public schools in the St Louis area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two cationic
sequence-divergent nodule-specific cysteine-rich peptides, NCR044 and NCR13,
exhibit potent antifungal activity against plant fungal pathogens. We
hypothesize that these two NCR peptides exhibit unique structural
characteristics and are highly effective due to their multi-faceted modes of
action. We further propose that NCR peptides have untapped potential for
development as safe spray-on biofungicides. In this project, 3D structure of
NCR13 will be determined. Sequence motifs of NCR044 and NCR13 governing membrane
disruption and antifungal activity against Botrytis cinerea will be determined.
In particular, sequence motif(s) required for nucleolus-localization of NCR044
will be elucidated. Biochemical experiments will establish if NCR044 and NCR13
inhibit protein translation by binding to ribosomal RNA and/or ribosomal
proteins. The fully completed gapless and annotated 38.8 Mb genome sequence of
the B. cinerea genome and its functional genomics tools will provide essential
resources for the protein-protein interaction studies. Extensive high-resolution
live cell imaging of fungal cells with each peptide will be performed to
identify mechanisms of internalization, subcellular dynamics and mobility of
each peptide using organelle-specific fluorescent proteins and vital dyes with
confocal and super-resolution microscopy and correlative electron microscopy.
Finally, spray-application of NCR044, NCR13 and their variants will determine if
they confer resistance to gray mold disease in tomato plants. Experiments are
planned to elucidate peptide-imposed changes in “spore germination
transcriptome” in planta.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.