* 2037297
* RAPID: Virtual Reality Cyberinfrastructure Enabling Data Visualization, Exploration, and Collaboration Among Distant Individuals
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Danny Milisavljevic, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 02/28/2023
* USD 66,833.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has introduced obstacles to many areas of astronomical
research, especially topics requiring access to shared facilities and driven by
interaction between scientists to interpret complex multi-dimensional data. A
research team at Purdue University will accelerate production of the Virtual
Reality (VR) data visualization platform Collaborative Astronomy VR, which
leverages recent advancements in high-powered consumer hardware and cloud-based
multi-user server architecture. Building this platform will globally connect
individuals isolated by COVID-19 restrictions and provide virtual environments
where they can actively engage with complex data and representations. The
distributed application will be tailored for immersive visualization of
supernova explosions and other topics in astronomy, but will have flexibility
for potential use in other fields requiring visualization and interaction with
3D data environments. The work will contribute to a graduate student thesis and
provide opportunities for undergraduate students, who will actively help develop
and showcase the technology. A small instructional lab for physics and astronomy
classes will also be created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The platform will be
appropriate to visualize, explore, and collaborate with data made from
observations and simulations of astronomical objects and phenomena. The flexible
data ingestion pipeline will support multi-dimensional formats common to
astronomical data, and will have clean up and optimization procedures to ensure
data fidelity and fluid visualizations. This project fulfills the urgent need
for scientists to navigate complex, multi-dimensional data collaboratively with
distant individuals via scalable multiuser connectivity and broad platform
compatibility. Collaborative Astronomy VR enables rapid and intuitive
exploration of multidimensional data with on-the-fly scaling, rotation, and
changing of perspective among many participants connected online
simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.