* 2037372
* Response to COVID-19 Field Research and Education Disruptions: Creating Virtual Field Experiences in Coastal and Estuarine Science
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Damon Gannon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2021
* USD 97,450.00

Three university field stations, including Upham Woods Outdoor Learning Center
at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, the Baruch Marine Field Laboratory
(BMFL) at the University of South Carolina, and the University of Georgia Marine
Institute (UGAMI), are collaborating to produce a suite of virtual estuarine
field experiences polished for distance-delivery in undergraduate programs.
UGAMI at Sapelo Island and BMFL at North Inlet - Winyah Bay, will be the two
filming locations for these virtual modules because they have unique access to
relatively pristine model estuarine systems dominated by Spartina alterniflora
marsh that are similar to low-gradient, Spartina marshes that rim the Atlantic
and Gulf of Mexico coastlines from approximately New York through Texas, with
the exception of the mangrove systems of South Florida. The virtual field
experiences will be more accessible and equitable than traditional in-person
field experiences and can help address barriers to participation in the
traditional field experiences, such as mobility impairments, financial
limitations, family obligations, as well as reduce limitations of geographic
accessibility. The videos, datasets, and educational materials will be available
for free download and will be developed to be compatible with platforms used by
universities in virtual learning. Upham Woodsâ€™s expertise in environmental
education will help ensure the quality and applicability of these assets.
Providing these experiences to a wider audience has the potential to broaden the
pipeline of students pursuing careers in STEM fields. The final products will
feature research by and voices of a diverse group of scientists to address
issues of equity in the university field station community and to better
represent human diversity in ecological fields, and the modules will be
distributed widely to undergraduate institutions, outdoor education centers and
schools.

This project will develop products that address widespread educational
challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic for the marine science community. The
pandemic has dramatically impacted the educational landscape in the United
States, radically limiting the traditional in-person, experiential educational
programs for undergraduates and high school students. The crisis has highlighted
the need to develop educational content and experiences that provide access to
outdoor, field-based learning to all students, not just those who are able to
access in-person programs. This project will bring accessible, engaging, and
rigorous science experiences to learners by developing a suite of virtual
estuarine field experiences for undergraduate courses. These experiences will
consist of ten modules, each focusing on a particular estuarine ecology topic
and featuring research projects, datasets, prompts, and worksheets to support
science learning. A range of topics will be covered in the modules, such as fish
ecology, fisheries research field techniques, coastal physical oceanography,
coastal depositional processes, biogeochemical processes in the coastal zone,
benthic and water column processes, field sampling and laboratory methods for
estuarine biogeochemistry research, human interactions with coastal ecosystems,
research ethics, formulating research questions and hypotheses, designing field
studies, laws governing research, collecting and analyzing data, scientific
writing and presentation skills. The modules will also be modified for delivery
to high school students as virtual modules that can be incorporated into
programs at outdoor education centers and schools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.