* 2037859
* SBIR Phase II:  Affordable, Multi-wavelength Imager plus Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR) for Autonomous Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Shimon Maimon, NBN TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 920,766.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project based on this SBIR sensor solution, with its high
quality and low cost, will enable the advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS)
industry to accelerate the progress to greater functionality of assisted
driving, ultimately reaching full autonomy. The subject focal plane array (FPAS)
chips may reduce the current US 36,560 annual vehicles deaths (the leading cause
of death for those 1-54 years old) as well as reduce the 4.4 million injuries
requiring medical attention and the $ 871 billion in damages and health costs.
Additionally, improved assisted driving will enhance the mobility of
seniors/disabled. Finally, the technology may reduce the societal carbon
footprint by reducing congestion as a result of more fuel-efficient acceleration
and braking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase
II project seeks to improve the current ADAS sensor suite to increase safety.
Current ADAS systems require many different sensor technologies to be
implemented simultaneously. These sensors are insufficient to achieve higher
levels of autonomy limiting the vehicle’s used in poor conditions. The proposed
sensor solution will function in low light and harsh weather conditions with
high performance. The added sensor functionalities will reduce the processor
bandwidth required to integrate and analyze sensor data and detect road hazards,
increasing the accuracy of the system. Overall, this improvement in performance
may increase the overall safety in ADAS vehicles. An evaluation system will be
developed to characterize the sensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.