* 2037844
* EAGER: Photocatalytic extension of short-chain molecules for biomass conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Dunwei Wang, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

The project investigates a sustainable process that uses catalytic reactions
driven by solar energy to convert biomass to hydrocarbon chemicals. The process
uses a new catalytic material that generates small reactive molecules that
combine to form larger molecules with 10-20 carbon atoms, like those found in
diesel and jet fuels. By using biorenewable feedstocks in combination with
solar-driven chemical processing, the project could lay the groundwork for a
near-zero greenhouse gas technology for producing fuels and high-value chemicals
from biomass. The project includes a novel outreach program that educates high-
school students in current science issues and provides opportunities for them to
be spokespersons for conveying those issues to the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photocatalysis has recently been reported to enable
room-temperature dehydrogenative C-C coupling of 2,5-dimethyl furan (2-5 DMF)
and 2-methy furan (2-MF) while producing hydrogen simultaneously. However, the
process suffers from low conversion and poor selectivity, as well as sensitivity
to oxygen. The underpinning mechanism (i.e. the radical species generated from
C-H activation of the methyl group would resonate to furan rings and lead to a
variety of isomer products) is understood as a key reason for this important
deficiency. Recently, one of the investigators has discovered that under
photoelectrochemical conditions, Ta3N5 can enable an alternative radical-based
pathway that is not only highly efficient but also insensitive to impurities
such as H2O or O2 in ambient air. The project will extend those studies to
photocatalytic biomass conversion. To that end, detailed understanding of the
reaction mechanism is needed. The mechanistic studies will include light-dark
experiments, detailed product characterization, and experimentation with various
radical generator and acceptor species. Moreover, comparisons will be made
between the Ta3N5 utilized as a photoelectrode and as a heterogeneous
photocatalyst, with co-catalysts such as platinum included in some
cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.