* 2037707
* EAGER:  The Development of Covalent Organic Frameworks as Anode Materials for Potassium-Ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Psaras McGrier, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2023
* USD 149,885.00

The development of high-performance batteries is vital for applications such as
electric vehicles, portable electronics, and storage of electrical energy from
renewable sources. Although lithium-based batteries are currently used in many
high-performance applications, batteries based on more earth-abundant materials
such as potassium and sodium are being investigated as more sustainable
alternatives. In this project the investigators are seeking to prepare the next
generation of organic-based electrode materials for potassium-ion batteries
(KIBs) using an advanced class of crystalline porous polymers called covalent
organic frameworks (COFs). The electrode materials will help improve the
performance of KIBs and assist with reducing the accumulation of harmful
greenhouse gases emitted from fossil fuels. The principal investigator is
utilizing several education and outreach programs at Ohio State to help increase
the participation of young underrepresented minorities in STEM fields. These
activities include participation in the Breakfast of Science Champions, an OSU
STEM program that allows underrepresented middle school students from Columbus
City Schools the opportunity to visit and learn more about various cutting-edge
research projects at OSU. The investigator is also co-directing and mentoring
students in the OSU Chemistry and Biochemistry Post-Baccalaureate Bridge
Program, an OSU STEM program that provides assistance to post-baccalaureate
minority students to help enable their success in a Ph.D. program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator is developing conductive two-
dimensional (2D) COF-based anode materials that contain triangular-shaped pi-
electron conjugated dehydrobenzoannulenes (DBAs) for KIBs. COFs possess high
chemical stability and open pore channels, making them useful for the transport
of ions; however, the transport processes of potassium within these structures
are poorly understood and will be studied this exploratory work. Although
conductive inorganic materials (e.g., Sn, P, Sb, and Bi) have been developed for
KIBs, many of these materials exhibit volume expansion, which can compromise the
structural integrity and cycling stability of the system. Olefin linkages are
useful on account of their enhanced chemical stability and ability to extend pi-
conjugation along the x and y planes of 2D polymeric materials. DBAs are neutral
macrocycles that are redox-active and capable of using their peripheral aromatic
rings and soft alkynyl ligands to form strong pi-cation interactions with
potassium ions. These features will be useful for fabricating organic-based
electrodes for KIBs with superior electrochemical properties and good cycling
performance. The PI will also study several non-aqueous electrolytes that will
minimize side reactions and potassium dendrite growth. Results from this
exploratory project may be transformative in leading to the design of
lightweight olefin-linked COF-based electrodes that can be used as components of
highly efficient KIBs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.