* 2037903
* I-Corps:   Materials and methods for manufacturing engineered optics for augmented and virtual reality applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2020
* Douglas Keszler, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this I-Corps project are based on
the development of inorganic inks for fabrication of augmented and virtual
reality (AVR) devices. The inks are UV curable and methods include manufacturing
visibly transparent, high-index engineered optics. Inorganic films offer higher
transparency and refractive indexes compared with current organic materials
sets. Such an inorganic solution is crucial to advance augmented and virtual
reality (AVR) markets, as end users are continually striving to lower
manufacturing costs and improve product form factors. The proposed inks are
projected to improve device performance by enabling fabrication of high
refractive index engineered optics. These optics are required to improve the
form factor of wearable devices and to grow the AVR market.

This I-Corps project is based on the discovery and development of inorganic inks
that are imprinted to produce high-index optical gratings. Such a fabrication
method is crucial, as the AVR market is developing a new generation of low-
profile devices that require high-index transparent films. Current technologies
are based on organic polymers that suffer from low transparency and small
refractive indexes. Success has been demonstrated creating high-index, UV-
curable engineered optical structures with high transparency and compatibility
with current manufacturing technologies. The proposed technology may provide AVR
manufacturers with cost effective methods to fabricate high refractive index
transparent photonic devices that would otherwise be impossible or cost
prohibitive to manufacture by methods currently available.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.