* 2037958
* RAPID: The Long-Term Effects of Covid-19: Decisions, Discovery, and Impact in the Space Sciences
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Janet Vertesi, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2023
* USD 163,564.00

What will happen to science in the wake of COVID-19? Between present work
disruptions and a forthcoming recession, we expect significant challenges for
federally-funded science. COVID-19 catches scientists in a double bind of both
strained budgets and social distancing in the laboratory that make sustaining
research programs much more complicated than before. The virus’ varied impact in
different states also complicates researcher’s collaborations across different
institutions. The tough decisions that scientists make now to navigate the
current crisis will have an impact on the coming generation of scientists’
careers, research, and experiments. To examine COVID-19’s emerging impacts on
science, we look to a case of federally-funded big science disrupted by the
current crisis: planetary and space sciences. These scientists and engineers
collaborate on long-term projects that build and command spacecraft that explore
the solar system. Through online participation and interviews, we will analyze
how planetary scientists build the tools and maintain the relationships they
need to get the job done, while largely confined to their homes. Building upon
previous NSF-supported research, we will develop a repertoire for action,
indicating what scientific communities can do to weather the storm, keep lines
of discovery open, maintain investments in diversity and in infrastructure, and
organize successful lobbying efforts. In this way we can help to ensure the
broadest possible outcomes and benefits from public investment in science during
the crisis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines how the relational work
of infrastructuring science hold up under extreme economic crisis, and social
distancing. The research will examine how researchers plan for the future in
uncertain times, how computer-mediated communication impacts decision-making,
and how economic and social crises impact diversity initiatives in the sciences.
Responses to financial crises shape the social and intellectual organization of
science at the level of everyday practice and over the long durée. Further,
moments of crisis help surface the often-invisible social relations that
scientists depend upon to get the job done. The present COVID-19 crisis,
however, makes past periods of uncertainty appear trivial in scale and scope.
This project undertakes a rapid-response one-year observational period among the
planetary science community, seizing the opportunity to follow a scientific
community in depth at its time of greatest potential transformation during a
period that promises long-term consequences of decades or more. This federally-
funded science is experiencing considerable effects of the crisis, with
laboratories are shut down or open under social distancing guidelines, expanding
the timeline and expense associated with project delivery, and disruption to
established patterns of collaboration. Further, planetary scientists will
produce their decadal survey this year: a community engagement study conducted
once every ten years to determine the coming decade’s priorities for spacecraft
development and scientific investment. As a result, decisions with lasting
import will be made in ephemeral, fleeting video-conferenced meetings and text
messages, available for a digital ethnographer to attend on the spot but
impossible to retrieve after the fact. Using virtual ethnography and online
interviews this project will follow three future missions -- the developing
Europa Clipper, a proposed mission to Neptune, and an Interstellar Probe – and
this year's planned Decadal Survey. The project will also examine the social
media conversations that now constitute frontstage chatter among scientists.
Examining these ephemeral and undocumented critical interactions will allow the
researchers to document a crucial year in the history of the field and to
develop novel insights into the relationship between governance and scientific
outcomes, discovery, and impact. They will also develop a science funding
continuity toolkit for publicly-funded scientists to take action, indicating
what scientific communities can do to weather the storm, keep lines of discovery
open, maintain workforce diversity, and maximize scientific impact in
unprecedented times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.