* 2037878
* NSF/FDA SIR: Objective Assessment of Recovery during Post Stroke NeuroRehabilitation Therapy using Brain-Muscle Connectivity Network
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* John Ross Rizzo, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2022
* USD 99,978.00

Stroke is the leading cause of motor disabilities and places high pressure on
healthcare infrastructures due to the imbalance between the need for serving an
aging society and available neurorehabilitation resources. Thus, there has been
a surge in the production of novel rehabilitative technologies for accelerating
recovery. Despite the successful development of such devices, lack of objective
standards besides clinical investigations using subjective measures have made
controversial recommendations regarding several devices, including robots. To
address the need for effective rehabilitative technologies, this one year
NSF/FDA Scholar-in-Residence project is focused on the design, implementation,
and evaluation of a novel, objective, and robust algorithmic biomarker of
recovery, named Delta CorticoMuscular Information-based Connectivity (D-CMiC).
The proposed algorithm quantifies the connectivity between the central nervous
system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS) by designing and
implementing a protocol for simultaneously measuring electrical activity from
the brain and an ankle muscle on the affected side of recovering post-stroke
patients. Project outcomes will produce a scientific vision regarding the
neurophysiology of recovery and expedite availability of more effective
rehabilitation devices to patients for a range of neurological disorders beyond
stroke (such as Parkinson’s disease, Essential Tremor and Ataxia). For
educational impact, the project will generate a unique transdisciplinary
educational environment by conducting workshops regarding emerging Brain-
Computer Interface (BCI) technologies in medicine and undergraduate team
projects for human-machine interfacing, with a focus on promoting STEM
activities within underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to design, implement, and evaluate a robust algorithmic biomarker of
stroke recovery, which quantifies the spectrotemporal neurophysiological
connectivity between the CNS (using electroencephalography (EEG)) and PNS (using
high-density surface electromyography (HD-sEMG)). The project is motivated by
the lack of objective standards and direct neurophysiological metrics for
quantifying the “true” efficacy of rehabilitation in terms of the translation
between central and peripheral nervous systems to control functional movements.
The predictive capability, precision, and efficiency of the developed D-CMiC
metric will be analyzed by collecting data from recovering stroke patients and
healthy subjects. Unique D-CMiC features include: (1) accurately and objectively
tracking corticomuscular functional connectivity in the Delta/low frequency
band, which will be robust to stochastic high-frequency artifacts while encoding
the 3 temporal phases of motor control: preparation, execution, relaxation; (2)
computationally modeling of corticomuscular connectivity through the fusion of
spectrotemporal similarity measures, which will reward persistent true-positive
CNS-PNS connections while diminishing false-positives; and (3) building the
basis for the first medical device development tool (MDDT) for the systematic,
objective, and transparent evaluation of pre-market rehabilitation devices,
aligned with the FDA’s mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.