* 2037531
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Antarctic Environmental and Biological Predictability to Obtain Optimal Forecasts
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Marika Holland, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 225,215.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many biogeochemical and
biophysical processes are changing in the present and coming century. The
mechanisms and the predictability of these processes are still poorly
understood. Limits in understanding of these progress limits climate
forecasting. Similarly, ecological forecasting remains a nascent discipline.
Comparative assessments of predictability, both within and among species, are
critically needed to understand the factors that allow (or prevent) useful
ecological forecasts. This study will reveal the influence of climate system
dynamics on ecological predictability across a range of scales, and will examine
how this role differs among ecological processes, species and regions of
Antarctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project research will examine the
predictability of Antarctic climate and its influence on seabird demographic
response, predictability at various temporal and spatial scales, using the
longest datasets available for several polar species. Specifically, the PI will
1) identify the physical mechanisms giving rise to climate predictability in
Antarctica, 2) identify the relationships between climate and ecological
processes at a range of scales, and 3) reveal the factors controlling ecological
predictability across a range of scales (e.g., those relevant for short-term
adaptive management versus those relevant at end-of-century timescales). These
objectives will be achieved using the analysis of existing climate data and
century length time-scales, Atmosphere-Ocean Global Circulation Models (AOGCMs),
with coupled analysis of existing long-term demographic data for multiple
seabird species that span a range of ecological niches, life histories, and
study sites across the continent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.