* 2037350
* RAPID: Small Businesses and Access to Legal Resources During the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2023
* Verity Winship, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 06/30/2023
* USD 158,235.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has severely affected businesses of all sizes,
particularly small business entrepreneurs. In addition to economic harms, small
businesses often lack access to legal resources that would help them navigate
issues raised by the pandemic and assist in economic recovery. This project will
examine small business’ access to legal advice by generating knowledge about
legal challenges they face. As well, this research will assess the effectiveness
of different methods of disseminating legal information to small businesses
during the COVID-19 pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
incorporate a mixed-methods approach to study small business’ ability to access
legal resources during times of economic turmoil. First, the project will employ
interview and survey techniques to generate data from small business owners
across different demographic groups and industries regarding legal issues they
face. Second, using an experimental design the project will examine randomized
interventions designed to provide legal information through low-cost means that
enable self-help to small business entrepreneurs who lack representation.
Findings will provide insight into the ability of small business entrepreneurs
to utilize and understand the law during the COVID-19
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.