* 2037119
* Collaborative Research: A Comprehensive Evaluation of the Interactions between Pollution and Hazardous Ice Fog in Interior Alaska
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Thomas Hill, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 11/30/2023
* USD 662,701.00

This project is part of a broader effort, the Alaskan Layered Pollution and
Chemical Analysis (ALPACA) research initiative and will also contribute to the
NSF-funded SNAP-TEC (Sustainably Navigating Arctic Pollution through Engaging
Communities) project that includes an intensive field campaign planned for the
year 2022. The goal of ALPACA is to better understand the chemical processing of
air pollution during the cold and dark conditions in the wintertime in the
Arctic. The objectives of SNAP-TEC are to improve the understanding of
wintertime Arctic outdoor and indoor air pollution to assist in the sustainable
development of the Arctic and improve air quality for Arctic peoples. This
project will investigate the composition of ice nucleating particles that form
ice fog in the atmosphere during the wintertime in Fairbanks Alaska. Persistent,
dense ice fog events cause low visibility conditions leading to significant
problems in the transportation and aviation sectors. These fog events also are
associated with high pollution levels that can cause adverse health
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes a 7-week deployment at a
supersite in Fairbanks focusing on measurements of aerosols and their ice
nucleation properties, both during ice fogs and clear conditions. The goals of
the project are to determine the detailed sources and chemical transformations
of ice nucleating particles (INPs) in the Arctic boundary layer, determine how
they evolve over the course of ice fog episodes and assess whether INPs can
modulate ice fog microphysics. The following hypotheses will be tested: (1)
organic/inorganic aerosols from residential wood burning contribute to the INP
population that facilitates ice fog formation; (2) INP composition captured at
the beginning of events is indicative of those that seed ice fog formation; and
(3) under similar temperatures and humidity, variation in INP populations affect
ice fog microphysics, especially under mixed-phase conditions. The measurements
provided through this effort are essential for better understanding the ice fogs
in Fairbanks that affect visibility and human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.