* 2037715
* SBIR Phase I: Defect-free manufacturing of ultra-clear monolithic silica aerogels for insulated glass units
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,03/31/2022
* Kyle Wilke, AEROSHIELD MATERIALS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project advances the
development of ultra-clear, super-insulating aerogels. Insulated glass
manufacturers have a need for improvements to existing double-pane window
manufacturing. Residential insulated glass units represent a $2 billion market
in North America alone. Currently, windows in the U.S. lose $20 billion dollars
in energy each winter. A double-pane window with a sheet of aerogel between
glass panes can achieve a vastly improved insulation, as an aerogel thickness of
just 3 mm enables a product 50% more insulating than gas-filled double-pane
windows, comparable to triple-pane products. Adoption could enable cost-
effective energy savings of 1.2 quadrillion BTUs by 2030. This work also extends
to other markets, such as transparent doors for refrigeration and ovens, and
solar thermal receivers for process heat, which also represent significant
opportunities for energy savings and viable market
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project seeks to address key technical barriers for integration
of super-insulating aerogels in window insulated glass units by focusing on two
main risks. First, the project will further improve the optical clarity of the
aerogel materials. The human eye is highly sensitive to haze and defects in
transparent media, and although optical clarity meeting minimum requirements for
the residential window market has been achieved, further improvement and testing
are needed. Clarity will be improved by reducing haze through solution-gelation
recipe optimization and by removing the fundamental causes of surface defects
through development of mixing and molding strategies. Second, widespread
adoption also requires straightforward incorporation of aerogel into insulated
glass units. Bonding methods to attach aerogels directly to glass without
reducing optical clarity will be developed, which will enable simple handling
and incorporation into existing insulated glass unit
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.