* 2037654
* EAGER-QAC-QCH: NSF-BSF: Quantum Computation as a Non-Equilibrium Dynamical Many-Body System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Alex Kamenev, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2023
* USD 326,098.00

Non-technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is made on an EAGER
proposal invited through the Quantum Algorithm Challenge Dear Colleague Letter.
It supports research and education to study new concepts for how quantum
mechanical states can be prepared and manipulated to perform computation which
includes protocols or algorithms required to use a quantum computer to solve a
problem. Quantum computing hardware has significantly advanced over the past few
years. Both Google and IBM have recently demonstrated devices with about 50
fully controlled superconducting qubits with high fidelity and long coherence
times. The number of qubits may be expected to increase even further, but the
number of independent external controls presents a crucial bottleneck in scaling
up the modern quantum computing architecture. This means that near-term quantum
computers are not going to operate the way classical processors do. The PI aims
to develop specific operating protocols, which will allow already existing
quantum devices to perform particular optimization tasks, which are
exponentially hard for conventional classical algorithms. The latter suffer from
being trapped into sub-optimal solutions for extremely long times. Quantum
tunneling allows for simultaneous exploration of multiple potentially optimal
configurations, and ultimately enables finding the true unique optimum. This
project is aimed to investigate theoretical limits for efficiency of these
quantum algorithms. Practical demonstration schemes will be conceptualized and
possibly implemented on existing prototypical quantum devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF funds will provide training for a graduate student
research assistant and (partially) a postdoctoral fellow. Both will be trained
in the theoretical apparatus underlying construction of algorithms for quantum
computation. The results of the project will be incorporated in graduate classes
at the University of Minnesota as well as at regular summer schools, which the
PI co-organizes through the Fine Theoretical Physics Institute. Part of the
project will be conducted in close cooperation with Prof. Yuval Gefen of the
Weizmann Institute, who will be funded separately by BSF. The BSF part will
provide training for another postdoctoral fellow.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is made on an EAGER proposal invited through the Quantum Algorithm
Challenge Dear Colleague Letter. It supports research and education to study new
concepts for how quantum mechanical states can be prepared and manipulated to
perform computation which includes protocols or algorithms required to use a
quantum computer to solve a problem. The PI will consider quantum approximate
optimization algorithms (QAOA) and quantum image recognition schemes. Both are
based on the idea of an information processing engine, which repeatedly performs
a particular cycle. The cycle involves coupling and decoupling of the active
quantum system, which can be modeled by a Sherrington-Kirkpatrick spin glass
encoded with a desired optimization problem, with the information bath. A qubit
realization of the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev (SYK) model will be explored as a model for
the information bath. The SYK system, being a holographic dual of a black hole,
possesses a finite entropy down to the exponentially small temperature. This
allows quantum tunneling among multiple local minima of the spin glass. The
quantum measurement operation, performed in the end of each cycle, provides a
progressively improving set of candidate optimal spin configurations. A goal of
the project is to evaluate the probability of finding the true optimum within
such a set. Another goal is to optimize the cycle to determine theoretical
bounds for efficiency of the information engine. The NSF-BSF part of the project
will deal with a theoretical description in terms of the reduced density matrix
of the working substance. We expect to find a Lindblad-like evolution equation.
It will allow for an efficient analysis of computation schemes using existing
powerful field-theoretical and computational
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.