* 2037982
* EAGER: SaTC: Privacy-Preserving Convolutional Neural Network for Cooperative Perception in Vehicular Edge Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Qing Yang, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 99,948.00

Cooperative perception enables vehicles to exchange sensor data among each other
to achieve collaborative object detection and classification, which is extremely
useful to enhance autonomous vehicles' safety as they frequently suffer from
blind spots and/or occlusions. Without proper measures in place for data
protection, however, very few vehicles are likely to share their sensor data,
due to the concerns on potential privacy leakage. A vehicle can encrypt its
sensor data before sharing it with others, however, data encryption only
protects data security during transmission, i.e., a receiving vehicle can still
access private and sensitive information after it decrypts the data. To address
this issue, a privacy-preserving convolutional neural network (CNN) is designed
so that encrypted sensor data generated by vehicles can be fused and processed
to produce ciphertext-based object detection results. Although a receiving
vehicle obtains meaningful object detection results from received ciphertexts,
it has no means to recover the original data, thus protecting the privacy of
data shared from other vehicles. The proposed technique is a generic solution
that can be extended to offer data privacy protection for other machine learning
methods. This project will be transformative because it will enable vehicles to
securely share useful sensor data between each other. Such an advance can be
extremely beneficial for extending the line of sight and field of view of
autonomous vehicles, which secures the public safety and advances smart
transportation and national prosperity. This project offers a wide variety of
research activities, ranging from CNN analysis, security algorithm design, and
hardware programming. The investigators will actively engage students with
various backgrounds in this project. Special efforts will be made to increase
the participation of underrepresented student researchers. A workshop on
Connected and Autonomous Vehicles will be organized annually to promote the
research outcomes from this project to the industry and research communities and
benefit society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand
the security and privacy challenges in achieving cooperative perception among
autonomous vehicles, and then design an effective and efficient privacy-
preserving CNN for processing encrypted sensor data, shared from multiple
vehicles. Leveraging the additive secret sharing technique, sensor data is first
randomly split and encrypted into two ciphertexts, and then processed in the
encrypted format by two non-colluding edge servers. To process the encrypted
data, edge servers make use of a privacy-preserving CNN model that securely
implements all layers in the original CNN, including the secure convolutional
layer, secure activation layer, secure pooling layer, secure region proposal
network layer, and secure full-connection layer. As an edge server possesses
only a partial view of the sensor data, sensitive information contained in the
data is protected. To optimize the privacy-preserving CNN model, cross-layer
optimization and field programmable gate arrays (FPGA)-based acceleration
techniques are designed to increase the speed of object detection and
classification while keeping the energy consumption low. The proposed system
will serve as a convincing proof-of-concept for data privacy protection using
CNNs, thus opening the door to widespread adoption of privacy-preserving CNN in
processing sensor data. The source code and the privacy-preserving CNN model,
along with its training and testing datasets, will be made publicly available,
serving as a catalyst for enabling innovative research on data privacy
protection in vehicular edge systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.