* 2037885
* RAPID: Optimal allocation of COVID-19 testing based on context-specific outbreak control objectives
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Katriona Shea, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2023
* USD 180,234.00

The purpose of this project is to design a framework for objective-driven,
context dependent disease surveillance strategies, designed to deal with
sampling errors and biases. This framework will be applied to the allocation of
COVID-19 testing based on multiple outbreak scenarios, employing the use of
multiple models to improve decision-making for COVID-19 surveillance and
control. This work will improve the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Results
will be presented to key federal agencies, so that they can be considered as
part of the decision-making process for the COVID-19 outbreak. These methods
will also be highly applicable to optimal vaccine allocation especially during
the early stages of vaccine availability when supplies will be limited. In
addition, it will provide a framework for future outbreak testing response. One
postdoctoral researcher will be trained in the theory and methods of applied
epidemiological research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a growing, but still
limited number of imperfect tests available, the way in which tests are
allocated critically determines what we can learn and in turn, what inferences
can be made with respect to managing the disease for individuals and
populations. This poses an optimal allocation problem for limited resources. The
context-dependent nature of allocating a limited number of tests introduces
additional potential sources of error and bias, making the question of optimal
testing allocation a unique challenge. Current modeling efforts focus
necessarily on disease dynamics and the efficacy of intervention strategies, but
few consider testing, contact tracing, and isolation strategies explicitly.
Unlike shelter-in-place or social distancing mandates, the impact of test
allocation on management strategy decision-making is density-dependent. While
testing remains limited, it is critical to explicitly model test allocation and
strategies that involve both monitoring and management. The key to successful
surveillance is to actively design surveillance strategies for a specific
objective. The project will use a principle of effective monitoring based on two
steps. First, identify the objective of the monitoring? Second, tailor the
sampling design to achieve that objective, in this case selecting groups of
individuals in a nonrepresentative way and to separately estimate the
probabilities that a randomly sampled individual would appear in these groups.
Misclassification of disease state (e.g., false positives/negatives) due to the
specificity and sensitivity of different tests, the performance of different
test platforms and population-level incidence will also be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.