* 2037034
* RAPID: Supporting Universities with Online Educational Materials through the MetEd Website
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Elizabeth Page, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 06/30/2021
* USD 79,821.00

University faculty are faced with unprecedented challenges as they quickly
transition many of their teaching activities to virtual environments. In
atmospheric science, this transition requires finding ways to engage students in
learning about complex scientific processes and creating ways for students to
apply these concepts using numerical models and observational datasets. This
project will develop an online guide to COMET’s MetEd lessons and
graphics/animations so as to enable university faculty to quickly find and
incorporate high-quality interactive lessons, graphics and datasets into their
meteorology courses this fall. The online guide that maps current COMET lessons
and graphics/animations to standard undergraduate courses in meteorology will be
broadly disseminated through COMET’s freely-available MetEd website, which has
over 625,000 registered users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce 1)
an online guide that maps current lessons available on MetEd to standard courses
in meteorology, 2) a gallery of graphics and animations bundled for standard
courses in meteorology and 3) new online courses that contain the mapped MetEd
lessons, with required and optional components, such that users can complete all
required lessons to earn an online certificate of completion. To create the
university curricula lesson mapping, COMET staff will survey course curricula
and syllabi from several leading university programs in meteorology to create a
“composite curriculum” that represents the typical in-major course requirements
for an atmospheric science/meteorology degree. COMET will also reference the
most recent American Meteorological Society Statement on Bachelor’s Degree to
ensure alignment with current and future academic needs from the professional
vantage point. The project will focus on seven widely taught courses in
meteorology/atmospheric science degree programs; introductory meteorology,
physical meteorology, dynamic meteorology, synoptic meteorology, weather
analysis &amp; forecasting, mesoscale meteorology, and remote
sensing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.