* 2037783
* RAISE-QAC-QSA: Open Quantum Systems on Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Prineha Narang, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2023
* USD 399,998.00

Non-technical Summary: Open quantum systems are ubiquitous in chemistry,
physics, and materials science, from photosynthetic light-harvesting
chromophores and catalytic centers to quantum defects in solid-state materials.
More generally, open quantum systems provide a framework to consider the
structure and dynamics of a system that has significant interactions with its
environment. Despite the fundamental and technological importance of open
systems, classical approaches remain computationally limited. Catalyzed by
recent discoveries in quantum computation, the team proposes to use quantum
resources (noisy intermediate-scale quantum, or NISQ, devices) to describe open
quantum systems. A new quantum algorithm for such open systems, one that scales
favorably on quantum devices, would be transformative beyond the quantum-
information community. In the larger context of quantum simulation, accurate and
efficient computation of molecules and materials is one of the most important
outstanding problems in science and engineering. The advent of quantum computing
raises new possibilities for eliminating the exponential complexity that has
stymied simulation of strongly correlated and open quantum systems on high-
performance classical computers. The proposed quantum algorithm will leverage
the power of quantum computing to solve a class of physically-relevant problems
and overcome inherent limitations of the exponential scaling of many-electron
quantum theory in classical approaches. To advance quantum information science
and technology, this program will pursue parallel approaches to broader impact:
(i) Education, with a Quantum Computing for Open Quantum Systems course and
online-module across Harvard and University of Chicago. This course would
leverage access to small-scale quantum devices. PI Narang has already
incorporated such ideas into an undergraduate course with devices at IBM; (ii)
Outreach Programs emphasizing recruitment and inclusion of underrepresented
groups in STEM to the field of Quantum Algorithms via connections with Boston's
Museum of Science; and (iii) a close engagement with industry partners and
startups in the area of quantum information for chemistry and
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: The PIs propose a dedicated and
multidisciplinary RAISE program between quantum chemistry, theoretical computer
science, and computational condensed matter physics in the context of NSF's
Quantum Algorithm Challenge. A new quantum algorithm for such open systems, one
that scales favorably on quantum devices, would be transformative beyond the
quantum-computing community. The team notes the timeliness of the proposed
approach: as recently as 2019, researchers at Google and NASA presented
heuristic benchmarking showing that their 54-qubit superconducting circuit
quantum computer performs certain sampling algorithms much faster than classical
computers, even though these algorithms have no known practical application.
This advance sparked the research for practical quantum algorithms that solve
relevant problems in chemistry and physics on near-term devices. The proposed
quantum algorithm will leverage the power of quantum computation to solve a
class of physically-relevant problems and overcome inherent limitations of the
exponential scaling of many-electron quantum theory in classical approaches. The
proposed effort will be organized in the following closely connected,
interdisciplinary Thrusts: 1) Accelerated quantum algorithms for Non-Markovian
dynamics with the ensemble-of-Lindbladian-trajectories (ELT) method on NISQ
devices, and 2) Demonstration of the quantum ELT algorithm to capture non-
trivial electron and nuclear dynamics in strongly correlated condensed-phase
systems with non-exponential scaling. For weakly coupled Markovian systems, the
Lindblad formalism gives an efficient and accurate depiction of the dynamics,
though it places severe constraints on the size of the system. This program will
build on the ELT method with the quantum algorithm retaining significant
advantages of its classical counterpart, including an exact treatment of non-
Markovian dynamics and complete positivity of the density matrices.
Multidisciplinary discoveries and methods from the PIs spanning computational
and condensed matter physics, theoretical chemistry, and theoretical quantum
information are essential to the vision and goals of this program, well-suited
for the NSF RAISE program mandate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.