* 2037851
* RTG: Analysis and Partial Differential Equations at the University of Wisconsin
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Andreas Seeger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,171,259.00

This Research Training Group project brings new students and postdoctoral
researchers into research groups in analysis and partial differential equations.
The twelve senior personnel will recruit junior mathematicians to join the group
as students and postdocs and closely mentor them throughout their training. The
project places particular emphasis on diversifying the group’s undergraduate and
graduate programs through expanded, targeted recruitment efforts and structured
mentoring. Seminar exchanges and international collaborations will develop a
mentor coalition among research groups, while also providing advanced graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers at other institutions opportunities to
come to the University of Wisconsin-Madison to interact with the group’s senior
personnel. Annual RTG workshops will provide a more intensive venue for the
sharing of research results and development of collaborative relationships among
researchers from all seniority levels. Weekly graduate writing groups during the
academic year will be complemented by annual writing camps involving early-
career researchers from other universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
capitalizes on the experience of the University of Wisconsin-Madison faculty in
analysis and partial differential equations to connect mathematicians at all
levels of experience with cutting edge research. The project gives trainees the
opportunities and mentoring needed to become leaders in the rapidly growing
fields of harmonic analysis, spectral theory, analytic number theory, dispersive
equations, fluid dynamics, and nonlinear elliptic and parabolic equations.
Traditional graduate and postdoctoral research opportunities will be augmented
by community-oriented mentoring structures, while new undergraduate research
programs and courses will provide the most junior trainees a foothold in high-
demand research areas. Vertical integration, in which senior personnel,
postdoctoral researchers, and graduate and undergraduate students collaborate on
projects, will increase research productivity while also providing opportunities
for trainees to develop their skills as the next generation of educators and
mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.