* 2037902
* I-Corps:  A Powered Prosthetic Hand with Continuous Multi-Grasp Control
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2021
* Michael Goldfarb, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a prosthetic hand that offers a truly “lifelike” appearance to
enable an active lifestyle, confident return-to-work capabilities, athletic
pursuits, and optimal self-image. Over half a million people in the US are
affected by upper-limb loss and the majority choose either non-functional
cosmetic prostheses or none. Though existing devices have evolved advanced
technical capabilities, overall use has remained static due to problems with
ease-of-use, weight, and size. This project proposes a novel prosthetic hand for
decreased disability, increased productivity, and improved confidence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
technology in prosthetic hand control, production, and mechanical architecture.
Currently, multi-fingered hands require the user to command coded patterns of
muscle contractions whenever he/she wants to change posture. Users report this
extra step and associated planning effort as onerous and disruptive to task
performance. The proposed technology is a novel method of electromyographic
interface (EMG) hand control that offers a more intuitive way of accessing a
larger grasp space while retaining the simplicity and robustness of standard
two-site EMG. Because prosthetic hands are attached to the body via soft tissue
rather than directly to the bone, their weight is generally perceived as
something that needs to be carried. The proposed device utilizes a production
approach that capitalizes on newly available cellular structure synthesis
software and additive manufacturing to significantly increase structural
efficiency and reduce mass at competitive cost. Due to unnatural size,
prosthetic hands typically draw unwanted attention even when covered with a
glove. To reduce size, the proposed device utilizes a unique actuation topology
facilitated by a bottom-up design approach that leverages practical finger
individuation differences to reduce motor count and mechanical
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.