* 2037845
* SII Planning: Interdisciplinary and Cross-Layer Research Agenda for the National Wireless Spectrum Center
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Marwan Krunz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This award is a planning grant for the Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National
Center for Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center). The focus of a spectrum
research SII-Center goes beyond 5G, IoT, and other existing or forthcoming
systems and technologies to chart out a trajectory to ensure United States
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum.
This award is for ceenter planning with a truly interdisciplinary approach. The
research agenda is comprehensive and cross-cutting, designed to address all
aspects of spectrum use, as well as educational outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at the development of a
comprehensive plan for an exceptional SII-Center which would help maintain and
extend US leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications
in science and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of radio
spectrum. The team that has assembled for this SII planning proposal spans eight
universities (Rutgers, Columbia, NYU, U. Arizona, UT Austin, Oregon State,
Princeton, and U. Wisconsin-Madison) and consists of well-established wireless
researchers with prior contributions to spectrum across a range of
specializations: high frequency spectrum, economics and policy, spectrum
protocols, cross layering, wireless systems physical-layer security, optical,
wireless-fiber integration, wireless physical layer and modeling, network
architecture, spectrum protocols, testbeds, and more. This award will fund
activities towards the development of a compelling research agenda, pilot
studies on key topics, engagement with research, government, and industry
stakeholders, and plans for experimental infrastructure and education/workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.