* 2037631
* I-Corps: Regenerative High-Performance Curtain Wall for Net Zero Energy Buildings
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Kyoung-Hee Kim, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a cost-effective regenerative curtain wall specifically
configured to achieve building energy cost-savings and user satisfaction for
net-zero energy building applications. Building envelopes contribute to an
increase in heating, cooling, and lighting loads inside the building while
affecting occupant comfort. This technology, a high-performance regenerative
curtain wall, is designed to curtail building energy consumption and carbon
dioxide (CO2) emissions to reduce broader societal, economic, and commercial
impacts. The successful application of the technology in commercial buildings is
expected to accomplish 95 trillion Btu in annual energy reduction (i.e., $10
billion energy bill saving) and 13 million metric tons of CO2
sequestration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a multi-functional, energy-efficient curtain wall system. This
regenerative curtain wall incorporates a 3D interlayer of concentrated micro-
photovoltaic (CMPV) components within a double-pane glass assembly. Capitalizing
on solar radiation, CMPV components consist of silicone-based solar cells with a
Fresnel lens, which is a lightweight optical lens whose light concentration
efficiency maximizes solar output within a small PV cell area. A key advantage
of using the CMPV is that it allows optimization for various building
performance needs, including energy efficiency (i.e., reduction of air
conditioning load and maximum daylight transmission), user satisfaction (i.e.,
temperature, relative humidity, glare), and solar-powered energy production. The
optimization algorithm for geometric configurations of the system may maximize
power production and year-round energy savings for different climate conditions
and building orientations where sunlight level varies. Reductions in building
operational energy costs from lighting, cooling, and heating loads may result in
energy cost savings. In addition, the systemâ€™s ability to allow viewing and
daylight penetration is expected to improve the health and well-being of
building occupants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.