* 2037271
* RCN: Geosciences Associated Societies Committed to Embracing and Normalizing Diversity (Geosciences ASCEND)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Stephen Boss, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

A Research Coordination Network (RCN) will be established with the University of
Arkansas, Geological Society of America (GSA), University of Florida, James
Madison University, and University of Texas-Austin serving as the lead entities
to organize thirty associated societies, organizations and institutions broadly
representing the Geosciences disciplines. The Geosciences Associated Societies
Committed to Embracing and Normalizing Diversity Research Coordination Network
(Geosciences ASCEND RCN) will focus on action to 1) advance and accelerate
cultural change in geosciences, 2) broaden participation of diverse identities
in geoscience, and 3) create a more inclusive discipline in which all people may
participate and contribute. The Geosciences ASCEND RCN Steering Committee is
comprised of the Principal Investigators and senior personnel representing six
academic institutions and eleven professional societies and organizations. Thus,
Geosciences ASCEND RCN is broadly representative of professional organizations
that serve geoscientists in the national geoscience workforce. Framing diversity
and inclusion in geosciences through system dynamics, team leaders will engage
the network to provide a different perspective with the goal of creating a more
inclusive geoscience workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Basing actions on the
theory of Community-Based Social Marketing (CBSM), the RCN will develop and
deploy activities with demonstrated efficacy for effecting broad behavioral
changes. CBSM has been used effectively in the discipline of Sustainability to
develop more sustainable behaviors among broadly different populations. Actions
embraced by CBSM center on community and emphasize the community benefits of
adopting the specific actions. Thus, CBSM is a powerfully persuasive mechanism
to promote changes that are embraced by the audience. Successful CBSM
initiatives establish behaviors that are permanently adopted by the groups
engaged in the process. The Geosciences ASCEND RCN will explore the elements and
attributes of Geosciences Culture to better understand how specific norms may be
a barrier to inclusion. More importantly, Geosciences ASCEND RCN will recommend
actions to be implemented by member professional societies to lower or eliminate
cultural participatory barriers. By sharing common information about actions
that can lower or eliminate participatory barriers, the RCN will support a more
diverse and inclusive geoscience workforce and community of
learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.