* 2037158
* Strongly-Correlated Hybrid Light-Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Victor Galitski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 12/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an integrated
research, education, and outreach program in theoretical condensed matter and
materials physics. One of the major goals of modern physics is to discover and
engineer new materials with useful properties. The conventional approach to
material discovery often involves the trial and error method of examining
various electronic compounds in the search of desirable functionalities. This
project puts forward a new paradigm for functional material design by combining
the rich physics of electrons in solids with laser physics and the optics
toolbox. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to put together the
theoretical foundation of the nascent field of light-matter coupled materials,
where material properties could be tuned at will by controlling the optical
environment and/or coupling of electronic, magnetic, and sound modes in solid-
state materials to light. Of particular interest are so-called quantum fluids of
light, where part-matter and part-light particles form a unique state called a
Bose-Einstein condensate. In Bose-Einstein condensates, all constituent
particles flow in unison without friction. Another related example of research,
supported by this award, is light-induced superconductivity. Superconductivity
is a Bose-Einstein condensate of charged particles, which forms in some metals
at low temperatures. In this state, electrons flow without any resistance and
can indefinitely sustain currents and magnetic fields. Superconductors are of
outmost importance to various technologies, from their ubiquitous use in
magnetic resonance imaging machines to components of magnetically levitating
trains to ultra-sensitive magnetic sensors to superconducting quantum bits in
various quantum computing architectures. However, their usefulness is often
limited by prohibitively low temperatures, where superconductivity usually
emerges. This project will develop novel approaches to enhancing
superconductivity to higher temperatures by coupling superconducting materials
to light. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activity will go hand in hand with
an education and outreach program, which is an integral part of this award. The
program will involve mentoring high-school students from the Washington, DC
area's magnet schools and organizing events and competitions in the fields of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics. PI's prior high-school
advisees have won national awards with PI's research projects and successfully
participated in the international physics Olympiads. The PI will continue this
successful mentoring program. The PI will also involve students from the
historically black colleges and universities in the Washington, DC area. Apart
from this, a quality massive open online course on condensed matter physics will
be developed with an eye on exposing the students to research in quantum science
and material physics. The PI has previously developed such a course on graduate
quantum physics, which has been taken by more than 100,000 students worldwide.
The broader impacts of all these activities will be early exposure of young
talented students to cutting edge research, which will help attract students to
careers in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Finally, this
award will support recruiting and advising undergraduate students, graduate and
postdoctoral researchers from underrepresented backgrounds to participate in
condensed matter and materials research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an integrated research,
education, and outreach program in theoretical condensed matter and materials
physics. The emphasis is on relating exciting theoretical results and ideas to
experiment and communicating them to a broad audience. The research part of the
project is motivated by significant new theoretical and experimental
developments and is devoted to theoretical studies of strongly-correlated
electron systems interacting with quantum light. The research will focus
on:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Strongly-correlated polariton matter. Exciton-
polaritons are part-light, part-matter quantum quasiparticles, resulting from
strong light-matter coupling in a combined structure of semiconductor quantum
wells and cavity photons. The PI will develop a generalization of this
polaritonic matter in strongly-correlated quantum materials, by hybridizing
collective modes of the interacting electron systems with light.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Cavity-enhanced superconductivity. It has been long
known that subjecting a superconductor to external classical radiation can lead
to an enhancement of superconductivity in it. The PI will explore quantum
generalization of these phenomena, by considering a superconductor interacting
with a photon field in optical cavities with an eye on experimentally relevant
protocols for cavity-induced enhancement of
superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Peierls superradiance. Peierls
transition is a spontaneous distortion of a crystal lattice driven by electronic
correlations in one-dimensional systems. By exploiting an analogy between the
electron-phonon coupling in solids and matter-light coupling in optical
cavities, the PI will explore the possibility of spontaneous formation of
"photon crystals" driven by a photonic analogue of the Peierls
effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activity will go hand in hand with an
education and outreach program, which is an integral part of this award. The
program will involve mentoring high-school students from the Washington, DC
area's magnet schools and organizing events and competitions in the fields of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. PI's prior high-school
advisees have won national awards with PI's research projects and successfully
participated in the international physics Olympiads. The PI will continue this
successful mentoring program. The PI will also involve students from the
historically black colleges and universities in the Washington, DC area. Apart
from this, a quality massive open online course on condensed matter physics will
be developed with an eye on exposing the students to research in quantum science
and material physics. The PI has previously developed such a course on graduate
quantum physics, which has been taken by more than 100,000 students worldwide.
The broader impacts of all these activities will be early exposure of young
talented students to cutting edge research, which will help attract students to
careers in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Finally, this
award will support recruiting and advising undergraduate students, graduate and
postdoctoral researchers from underrepresented backgrounds to participate in
condensed matter and materials research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.