* 2037773
* RAISE: A Materials Science Gateway for X-ray Imaging and Modeling of Microstructures
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Mark Miller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 07/31/2023
* USD 993,220.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the development and
deployment of a Science Gateway, a set of tools, computational materials-science
models, and x-ray scattering data that are integrated and available through
single web-based location. This project will facilitate the synergistic
interaction of computational, and experimental research to accelerate progress
on developing understanding of how materials deform, and in some cases fail,
that will have impact on technological needs. Advances in the development of new
structural materials with specified properties require improved diagnostics
across a wide range of length and time scales. Examples of technological needs
include: the development of high strength, low density metals that can be
significantly deformed without rupturing or breaking for light weight
applications in a vast variety of aerospace, power generation, and structural
materials; the capability to make accurate predictions of residual stress and
relaxation and recovery in additive manufacturing and metal forming; and
reliability of interconnects in semiconductor chip technology. Advanced x-ray
diffraction imaging from synchrotron facilities provides the necessary
diagnostic information about the three-dimensional structure of complex
materials with unprecedented resolution. Synchrotron facilities produce
radiation, and of particular interest here, high energy x-rays, by accelerating
electrons very close to the speed of light, capturing radiation that occurs from
further acceleration by magnetic fields, and directing it to instrumentation
that can perform experiments by scattering high energy x-rays off the atoms in
materials. Instrumentation at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source can
perform advanced x-ray scattering experiments and provide high resolution data.
Key aspects of the technique include being nondestructive in hard materials, and
fast enough and of high enough resolution to observe structural changes at
length scales below one micron in materials samples as they are subjected to
thermal, mechanical, or other types of loading. Such unprecedented resolution
results in the creation of very large datasets, uniquely rich in information,
but difficult to mine and analyze, except by a very small number of experts.
This is a significant bottleneck to progress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Science
Gateway is aimed to facilitate the mining and analysis of extremely large
datasets by bringing together software engineers, data scientists, and
disciplinary scientists. This is transformational in how Gateways are
architected, and equally importantly, in how large experimental facilities are
operated. The Gateway is designed to provide seamless access to new data being
produced, to data reduction and reconstruction codes, and to modeling tools, all
in a curated and user-friendly environment. The Gateway accelerates the feedback
loop between data, tool creators, and tool users, and therefore the overall
discovery process. It is also empowers investigators, by providing broad
community access to data and sophisticated analysis tools no investigators who
are not specialists in the techniques and technical areas that created them. The
developments supported under this award may prove useful in developing Science
Gateways to accelerate progress on other fundamental problems relevant to
materials research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the development and deployment of a
Science Gateway, a set of tools, computational materials-science models, and
x-ray scattering data that are integrated and available through a single web-
based location. It is well recognized that advances in the development of new
structural materials with specified properties require improved diagnostics
across all the relevant length and time scales. Examples of technological needs
include: development of high strength, high ductility, low density metals for
light weight applications in a vast variety of aerospace, power generation, and
structural materials; accurate predictions of residual stress and relaxation and
recovery in additive manufacturing and metal forming, for example in the
automobile and defense industries; and improved reliability of interconnects in
semiconductor chip technology. Advanced x-ray diffraction imaging at leading
synchrotron facilities uniquely provides the necessary diagnostic information
about the three-dimensional structure of complex materials with unprecedented
resolution. Key aspects of the technique include being non-destructive in hard
materials, and fast enough and of sufficient resolution to observe structural
responses at the sub-micron scale in samples as they are subjected to thermal,
mechanical, or other types of loading. Such unprecedented resolution comes with
very large datasets, uniquely rich in information, but difficult to mine and
analyze, except by a very small number of experts. This is a significant
bottleneck to progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program develops an open
cyberinfrastructure in the form of a public Science Gateway to serve the Cornell
High Energy Synchrotron Source. The gateway is based on the Galaxy framework.
Raw data is accumulated locally at the beam lines, and ingested into a Galaxy
instance using standard web application programming interfaces. Data is typed,
metadata is attached, and is made available through a shared data library. The
gateway then provides the infrastructure for user defined transformations,
including data reduction, image reconstruction, and feature analysis, while
retaining metadata and provenance information. The gateway supports data
transfer to XSEDE resources, as Galaxy natively orders individual codes
according to category, and maps the execution of the designed workflows to the
necessary resources without user awareness of their location. Workflows
including visualization and modeling are also supported. The gateway is
extensible by users of the facility and the broader community as new analysis
and modeling tools are developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developments
supported under this award may prove useful in developing Science Gateways to
accelerate progress on other fundamental problems relevant to materials
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the Office
of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Computer and Information Sciences
Directorate, and the Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.