* 2037607
* I-Corps: Artificial Intelligence-Driven Disaster Risk Prediction and Assessment
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Youngjib Ham, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a rapid and automated scene understanding technology to
intelligently evaluate existing conditions of vulnerability and assess potential
disaster risks more proactively and effectively. This technology may help make
informed decisions regarding steps to reduce the impacts of disasters.
Developing and implementing the technology to reduce disaster risk requires
identifying and assessing the sources of potential risk effectively, but a lack
of a rapid and automated tools makes practitioners rely on manual inspection.
The proposed innovation is to make the current disaster risk assessment process
more intelligent and efficient by reducing time-consuming and labor-intensive
manual inspection. If the project is completed successfully, the proposed
innovation will enhance scientific and technological understanding of rapid and
automated visual sensing and analytics for disaster risk prediction and
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of the integrated analysis of low-level image features together with
high-level semantic models, which enables robust scene understanding and risk
prediction in complex environments. By leveraging large-scale data from
multimodal visual sensors (e.g., drones, security cameras, etc.), the technology
automatically encodes the context of potential disaster risk into machine vision
algorithms to identify the elements at risk on video recordings and assess the
degree of vulnerability and the elements at risk in complex environments. The
system generates site-specific managerial information in an automated manner,
which may enhance risk-informed decision-making for disaster mitigation and
preparedness, thereby reducing both the level of risk and the impacts of
disasters effectively. The proposed innovation may also provide the foundation
for further vision-based reasoning for disaster
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.