* 2037328
* SenSE: AI-Driven, Resilient and Adaptive Monitoring of Sleep (AI-DReAMS)
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Vladimir Pozdin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Martin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 748,668.00

A considerable amount of the population in the US and around the world suffers
from a chronic sleep disorder. However, the majority of these are not diagnosed
or treated. There is a vital need for new wearable technologies to increase the
capacity of sleep researchers to make further advances in investigating sleep,
understanding sleep pathologies, and to improve the ability of clinicians to
reliably detect and treat sleep disorders. This award investigates the use of an
artificial intelligence driven, reconfigurable sleep monitoring system to
transform sleep research in the clinic and at-home. A sensor fusion strategy
backed by artificial intelligence to ultra-miniaturize the sleep assessment
instruments and explore novel sleep-related biomarker features have the
transformative potential to invigorate sleep research for more efficient and
accurate diagnosis and treatment of sleep disorders. Combining lower cost with
better ergonomic comfort, and more efficient data analysis will pave the way for
rapid translation, adoption, and effective deployment of these technologies for
home-use in real-world settings. The research results from this award have the
potential to positively influence the continuous monitoring instrumentation
required for other chronic conditions such as heart diseases. This project
enables several motivating opportunities for outreach and education including
the use of technologies to interface sleep, learning new artificial intelligence
and data analytics skills, analyzing sleep performance to unlock its mysteries,
and the impact of sleep in the wellness and efficiency of society. Several such
activities are planned with the products of this research project to reach out
to younger generations, educators, other researchers in the field and public-at-
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award integrates two parallel efforts combining
innovations in hardware and data analytics: 1) enabling an adaptable and
reconfigurable embedded system platform in the form factors of an adhesive
patch, and 2) developing state-of-the-art machine learning techniques
incorporating the data-driven models necessary for improving sleep monitoring
system resilience. The hardware system fuses multimodal wearable sensors,
combining Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) with other traditional sleep related
signal sensors, in skin conformable substrates, to collect data on multiple body
locations. The efficacy of the system will be assessed in terms of improving
conformability and flexibility, and reducing the system real estate and cost.
The data analytics platform includes 1) signal processing to enable data-driven
metrics for signal quality assessment for a given inference task, 2) inference
models based on transfer learning techniques and diverse datasets for detection
of sleep events and disorders using new sensing modalities, and 3) Bayesian
Neural Network supported sensor selection for improving the resilience and
adaptability of sleep sensor systems. The `adaptation' will take place by
selecting the most resilient sensing configurations over design iterations and
in real-time during operation. In addition to allowing a novel, artificial
intelligence-driven and reconfigurable tool design for sleep research, this
effort will also shed light into novel multimodal biomarkers assessed
noninvasively in wearable form factors for detection of sleep stages and
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.