* 2037809
* Exploring the Strategies Used by Two-year Colleges to Support Academic Continuity in STEM Education During the COVID-19 Crisis
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Jonathan Beck, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2024
* USD 483,055.00

Like other institutions of higher education, two-year institutions in the United
States responded to the COVID-19 pandemic by using virtual instruction to
provide academic continuity. Many of these institutions turned to the use of
Digital Learning Tools, such as e-curricula, e-learning simulations and
laboratories, and virtual reality modules. This pivot to online learning is
expected to mitigate the disruption in the education of highly skilled
professionals for the technical manufacturing workforce. The project team will
examine the immediate e-learning response of two-year institutions to the
COVID-19 crisis by investigating the use of Digital Learning Tools, specifically
the e-curricula/materials and virtual reality simulations and laboratories
developed by the NSF-funded Center for Aviation and Automotive Technological
Education Using Virtual E-Schools (CA2VES) project. The goal of the project is
to better understand the immediate e-learning responses of two-year institutions
to the COVID-19 crisis, as well as the impact of these responses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working closely with the South Carolina Technical College
System and the National Center for Autonomous Technologies, the Clemson
University-based research team will conduct a sequential exploratory research
study that applies the Resilience Engineering Framework and the Technology
Acceptance Model to address four research questions: 1) What demands were placed
on two-year college educators during the rapid pandemic response? 2) What
barriers to adoption and integration of e-learning resources did educators and
students experience? 3) What strategies did administrators, educators, and
students employ during the rapid transition? 4) What adaptations to e-learning
do educators and students anticipate in the immediate future because of the
COVID-19 pandemic? The mixed methods study will investigate the demands placed
on instructors, students, and administrators to understand the barriers in
adopting and integrating e-learning resources into manufacturing programs by
conducting field studies. Based on the field studies, the project team will
develop and administer a national survey to document and examine the national
landscape for strategies employed in the rapid transition to online learning.
The research team will systematically analyze and integrate quantitative and
qualitative data to inform the development of evidence-based guidelines to
strengthen academic continuity and the e-learning ecosystem. They will
disseminate research findings to a broad audience of stakeholders to guide
effective rapid educational transitions under disruptive conditions. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.