* 2037097
* FMRG: Threading High-Performance, Self-Morphing Building Blocks Across Scales Toward a Sustainable Future
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2025
* Andrej Kosmrlj, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 11/30/2025
* USD 4,600,000.00

This Future EcoManufacturing research grant will develop sustainable, self-
morphing building blocks from the nano to macro scales inspired by the
biological systems to devise novel manufacturing processes of highly efficient
structures and components from centimeter to meter scale. These systems will be
lightweight, yet ultrastrong, self-supportive, adaptive and energy efficient.
Using common construction materials such as concrete, steel, aluminum, carbon
fibers in constructing sustainable buildings, bridges, and other products
involves a lot of construction waste and energy consumption. Polymers and their
composites potentially offer strong and lightweight alternatives, however, none
has matched the performance of steel and concrete. Natural materials are known
for their lightweight yet astoundingly high strength, stiffness, and toughness,
such as spider silk, dragonfly wings, and trees, where the intricate nano- and
microarchitectures can prevail into meter scale. Inspired by natural materials,
this project will develop new rules, new bio-based and bioinspired composite
materials, and new eco-manufacturing methods to create low-cost, high-
performance structural components for reuse, repurposing, and upcycling. It will
bring researchers in architectural and structural designs, chemistry, physics,
materials science, bio-, chemical and mechanical engineering, computation and
economics together. It will also train an inclusive and responsible future
Science, Technology, Engineering, the Arts and Mathematics (STEAM) workforce and
K-12 through curricula innovation, science demos, public exhibitions, workshop,
and underrepresented minority outreach and internship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future EcoManufacturing research aims to bridge the
nanometer- and meter-scale by addressing common questions in design and
manufacturing, while overcoming existing challenges at the macroscale such as
gravity versus internal structural forces. Several types of nano- and
microstructured design elements will be manufactured from scalable bio-based and
bioinspired composite materials with intrinsic anisotropy, followed by eco-
construction via origami/kirigami engineering, modular assembly, and on-demand
printing. By fine-tuning the materialâ€™s interfacial interactions to program the
dynamic and active behaviors for reuse, repurpose and upcycling, and use of
form-finding and topology optimization techniques, the project will achieve
higher performance (e.g. lower weight, higher precision, high strength, novel
wave-matter interactions) with fewer parts and reduced assembly. The project
will involve four highly synergistic thrusts, including 1) multi-scaled design,
modeling, prediction and optimization of stimuli-responsive structures at multi-
scales, 2) assembly of anisotropic, responsive and high strength multi-materials
at the nano-/microscale, 3) proof-of-concept, reduction-to-practice eco-
manufacturing of materials developed in 2) into structures designed in 1), and
4) pushing the envelope to achieve additional performative function with reduced
material via wave-matter engineering. This Future Manufacturing research is
supported by the Divisions of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation
(ENG/CMMI), Materials Research (MPS/DMR), Chemistry (MPS/CHE), Engineering
Education and Centers (ENG/EEC), and the Division of Undergraduate Education
(EHR/DUE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.