* 2037357
* SenSE: Multimodal Biometric Sensor for Optimal Regulation of Circadian Rhythm and Neurocognitive Performance
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Anak Agung Julius, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 749,999.00

Circadian rhythms are regulated by an internal biological clock that
synchronizes our biological processes with the daily light and dark pattern. It
regulates sleep, metabolism, hormone secretion, and neurobehavioral processes
that impact alertness and work productivity. Disruption of circadian rhythms has
negative impacts on health. Modern lifestyle poses challenges in maintaining
healthy circadian regulation, such as exposure to bright light during nighttime
and, more recently, the working-from-home situation that blurs the boundary
between work and personal time. This problem can be addressed by involving smart
and connected built environments that promote individual circadian health and
work productivity. The goal of this project is to obtain reliable mathematical
models that capture the dynamics of individual circadian rhythms and the ability
to estimate the state of circadian rhythms and related neurobehavioral
processes. This project will build wearable hardware and software to extract
useful information from noisy biometric signals that can be used in building the
above-mentioned mathematical model and state estimation. The software will be
deployed as a smartphone app that will use this information, interface with the
human users, and provide optimal recommendations for sleep, lighting, and task
schedules to maintain healthy circadian rhythms and optimize work productivity.
On the educational front, the project will support the training of graduate and
undergraduate students in multidisciplinary research, integration of new
pedagogical material into the engineering design curriculum, and outreach
activities to raise interest in STEM among student populations that are
currently underrepresented in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The clinical
standard for assessing the state of the circadian system is by measuring
biomarkers such as the concentration of hormones that participate in circadian
rhythm regulation. Such procedures are impractical for online use in a closed-
loop feedback system. Off-the-shelf wearable devices can only partially fill the
need for online personalized biometric measurements because they only measure a
limited set of signals and exclude the critical measurement on blue light
exposure. In this project, the investigators will develop wearable sensor
devices that (1) have energy harvesting capability, (2) measure indirect
circadian phase markers such as actigraphy, body temperature, heart/pulse rate
variation, blood pressure, ECG, and EEG, and (3) can resolve the spectral
content of blue light exposure to the subject. The investigators will develop
signal processing algorithms for noisy heterogeneous biometric data from various
sensing modalities developed in this project. The processed signals will be used
in model identification and state estimation of the circadian system and related
neurocognitive processes. The state estimation algorithms will use tools from
control theory and machine learning and combine model-free and model-based
approaches to achieve robustness to noise and data dropouts. The validity of the
hardware and software developed in this project will be evaluated in controlled
in-lab experiments with the assessment of dim light melatonin onset in healthy
human subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.