* 2037121
* EAGER: Spillover of coffee diseases into forest ecosystems and consequences for forest plant communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Laura Aldrich-Wolfe, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Many agricultural lands and protected natural areas are physically adjacent to
each other and interact with each other, yet there have been few studies of how
agricultural and natural ecosystems influence each other and what the
consequences of these interactions are for both the effectiveness of
agricultural management and the conservation of natural lands. Spillover is a
term from disease ecology recently applied more generally to describe the
movement and effects of organisms as they cross habitat boundaries. This project
will advance understanding of the importance of spillover between agriculture
and natural habitats and of the role of birds as well as wind in the dispersal
of plant-associated fungi. By comparing fungi and plant disease between two
types of coffee management, sun and shade, this research will inform decisions
on the relative benefits of these agricultural strategies for coffee fungal
disease management and for minimizing negative effects of spillover. This
project will train a graduate student and two undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups in science as well as provide outreach to student and
community groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of phylogenetic ecology
provides a clear framework for predicting patterns and effect size of pathogen
spillover from one host to others that can be applied to the spillover of
pathogens from agricultural to natural systems. This research will estimate
fungal movement by wind and birds, measure disease incidence in the forest, and
assess effects of coffee on native forest plant communities by comparing
community composition of understory plants at plots near and away from coffee.
This project is high risk-high reward in its application of a phylogenetic
framework to the community ecology of fungal spillover, its measurement of bi-
directional movement and spillover from agriculture to natural habitats, and its
examination of the role of birds as well as wind in the dispersal of plant-
associated fungi. By examining the coffee-forest interface at sites where coffee
is an introduced species yet closely related to many understory plant species,
this project will test two integral hypotheses of phylogenetic community
ecology: 1) more closely related hosts share more pathogens and disease than
distantly related hosts; and 2) more closely related pathogens share more host
species than less closely related pathogens. Testing the utility of a
phylogenetic framework for predicting disease and plant community composition is
important for developing a predictive understanding of biotic interactions
between agricultural and natural plant communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.