* 2037569
* RTG: Algebra, Geometry, and Topology at UIC
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Izzet Coskun, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,937,357.00

The Research Training Group in Algebra, Geometry, and Topology at the University
of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) will conduct a suite of activities spanning
educational levels from high school to postdoctoral. Faculty will lead graduate
and postdoctoral research in algebraic geometry, commutative algebra, topology,
and algebraic topology. Activities will include conferences, learning seminars,
and workshops to bridge the gap between coursework and current research.
Undergraduate students will be involved in mathematical research through
projects in a Mathematical Computing Laboratory and summer research
opportunities. Professional development workshops will help students and
postdoctoral fellows prepare for success in their future careers. To recruit the
next generation of talented students into the mathematical sciences, the project
activities will include high school research projects, Sonia Kovalevsky Day
workshops, an Undergraduate Mathematics Symposium, and participation in the UIC
Math Olympiad Project enrichment program for gifted students in grades 7-12. The
program will develop mentoring activities in association with the UIC Emerging
Scholars Program and the Association for Women in Mathematics to improve
retention and to increase the proportion of female and minority students and
postdocs in the mathematical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of
algebraic geometry is among the most fundamental and active areas of research
mathematics. Algebraic geometers study the properties of geometric objects
defined by algebraic equations, using tools from algebra, analysis, and
topology. Techniques in algebraic geometry have developed into important tools
for resolving questions in number theory, complex geometry, string theory in
mathematical physics, cryptography, and computer-aided geometric design. This
Research Training Group (RTG) project will train undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows in algebraic geometry and the related fields
of commutative algebra, topology, and algebraic topology. The RTG activities aim
to integrate these young researchers into the mathematical community. It is
expected that the students and postdoctoral researchers trained in the program
will make significant contributions to these important fields, including the
understanding of moduli spaces, birational geometry, characteristic-p
techniques, and the topology of three- and four-
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.