* 2037873
* SII Planning: SPECTRA: Spectrum Policies, Economics, Coexistence, and Technological Research Advancements
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Jose Moura, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 04/30/2022
* USD 175,000.00

This award is a planning grant for the Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National
Center for Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center). The focus of a spectrum
research SII-Center goes beyond 5G, IoT, and other existing or forthcoming
systems and technologies to chart out a trajectory to ensure United States
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum.
This award is for planning activities for a Center of Spectrum Policies,
Economics, Coexistence, and Technological Research Advancements (SPECTRA), which
will be a center of excellence for all spectrum-related issues for all
stakeholders including government (federal, state and local, including
regulatory agencies), industry, defense. The center will focus on future
spectrum issues, projecting 5 to 10 years and beyond. The center will foster a
multidisciplinary effort drawing on key contributors from the academia, industry
partners ranging from service providers, equipment suppliers, and semiconductor
manufacturers, as well as government labs. SPECTRA will work collaboratively
with all stakeholders as part of its research activities but also from the
beginning of the planning stages. A number of research theme areas will be
explored during the SPECTRA planning process, including regulatory policies, new
frequency bands, radio astronomy, atmospherics, weather sciences, cognitive
radar, and cognitive radio. Spectrum partnership with all stakeholders, which
includes an international component, will be developed in planning the SPECTRA
Center and preparing a full spectrum innovation initiative center proposal.
Collaborations and integrations with national and international leading radio
test beds will be explored in planning SPECTRA infrastructure. One of the most
critical efforts in the SPECTRA Center is the education and workforce
development in radio spectrum science and engineering, which will be conducted
by not only academic institutions, but also industry and other spectrum
stakeholders. SPECTRA Center will address societal issues, serve communities,
and contribute to reducing socioeconomic disparities in science, technology, and
engineering fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund planning
activities for a Center of Spectrum Policies, Economics, Coexistence, and
Technological Research Advancements (SPECTRA), which will draw expertise and
resources from the US and Europe and create a multidisciplinary organization
that will conduct research, foster collaboration, and guide policy making in
spectrum utilization. Expertise at the center will include electrical
engineering, computer science, artificial intelligence, semiconductor device
technologies including analog and radio frequency design, information theory,
signal processing, statistical interference, quantum sensing and networking,
radio frequency safety, public policy, defense communications, law enforcement
communications, radio astronomy, atmospherics, weather sciences, economics,
physics and neuroscience. SPECTRA will utilize testing facilities, especially
those funded by NSF. Topics of research will include new techniques for
evaluating and quantifying harmful interference, spectrum sensing, spectrum
sharing protocols, the economics of spectrum use, legal issues, dynamic spectrum
access and exploitation of new frequency bands such as the Terahertz band,
crowd-sensing of a variety of observables for smart environments, location and
context awareness, integration of wireless and artificial intelligence, quantum
information science applied to networks, and future scenario analysis for
spectrum 5-10 years in the future. Topics of research in radio astronomy,
atmospherics, and weather sciences will be explored. SPECTRA Center has the
means, the expertise, the intention and the drive to bring the fruits of our
effort to the broader communities. SPECTRA investigations and experiments will
advance scientific research in diverse engineering and applications areas to
serve the society and communities. SPECTRA Center carries out significant
educational and workforce development programs, including new graduate
certificate programs in radio spectrum science and engineering, capstone senior
projects utilizing SPECTRA infrastructure, K-12 Summer Camps focused on
mentoring students from under-represented communities, and annual radio spectrum
summer school and symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.