* 2037777
* SII Planning: National Center for Wireless Spectrum Research
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Jeffrey Reed, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,996.00

This award is a planning grant for the Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National
Center for Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center). The focus of a spectrum
research SII-Center goes beyond 5G, IoT, and other existing or forthcoming
systems and technologies to chart out a trajectory to ensure United States
leadership in future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science
and engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum.
Radio spectrum is a critical enabler of technological innovations in commercial
wireless communications, national security, scientific research, and many other
important areas. In recognition of radio spectrum's importance, the White House
announced multiple Presidential Memorandums concerning spectrum over the past
few years. In the most recent Memorandum, titled "Developing a sustainable
spectrum strategy for Americaâ€™s future," the President directed the Department
of Commerce to develop a long-term National Spectrum Strategy to prepare for
deployment of next-generation wireless technologies and to enable more efficient
utilization of spectrum. This project includes planning activities for a
national SII-center that will serve as a premier nexus for spectrum-related
research, education &amp; workforce development, and industry &amp; government
engagement. Ultimately, the overarching aim of the center is closely aligned
with that of the National Spectrum Strategy: maintaining the United States'
position as a leader in spectrum technologies, while sparking innovation and
economic growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is for planning activities for
an envisioned center with three primary research priorities aligned with
national priorities: (1) increase spectrum efficiency and agility; (2) enable
near real-time spectrum awareness and automated spectrum decision making; and
(3) enforcement and security, passive use protection, and safety of radio
frequency emissions. The team will carry out and promote research associated
with spectrum flexibility and agility that will enable the use of multiple
spectral bands, and novel multi-functional waveforms. They will carry out and
promote research that provides the ability to manage and access spectrum at a
high-level of fidelity and fine granularity while maximizing automation. And
they will carry out and promote research that advances the state-of-the-art in
spectrum rule enforcement and incumbent user protection, with a particular focus
on protecting passive users of spectrum. The envisioned center will carry out a
wide range of activities that will have broader impacts on several fronts.
First, the center's research agenda will advance the state-of-the-art in
wireless technologies, and will enable fundamentally new technologies, methods,
and policies that represent a significant step towards realizing a long-term,
sustainable spectrum access framework. Through collaboration with the center's
industry partners, such research activities will help the U.S. wireless industry
maintain its leadership position. Second, the center's thrust on IP generation
and involvement in the standards-setting landscape will aid the U.S. wireless
industry's ongoing efforts to have greater influence on next generation wireless
standards, especially those that directly dictate the equipment and devices that
operate on standards-enabled networks. Third, the center's programs on education
and workforce development will address the long-term workforce shortage problem
in the U.S. by nurturing a diverse, globally competitive workforce that is well
trained in spectrum-related technologies. Lastly, the center will significantly
impact the interplay between spectrum stakeholders by acting as a key hub that
enables substantive organizational collaborations and linkages between academia,
industry, federal agencies, national labs, and other
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.