* 2037898
* FMRG: Holistic Design of Low-Cost and Recyclable High Energy Density Li-ion Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Marta Hatzell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 12/31/2025
* USD 3,250,000.00

Lithium-ion batteries are emerging as the key energy storage technology for both
the power grid and electric vehicles due to their high energy capacity and
lightweight. However, they remain costly, are very difficult to recycle, and
suffer significant performance degradation over time. This Future Manufacturing
(FM) grant will support fundamental research to discover and develop future
manufacturing concepts that enable fabrication of reliable, energy dense, and
easily recyclable next generation Li-ion batteries. The novel manufacturing
approach will enable battery fabrication in smaller steps and provide highly
efficient thermal management, while improving electrochemical performance,
lifecycle sustainability, and recyclability. The manufacturing processes will
result in both reduced waste and lower energy input compared to the current
state-of-the-art. The research will reduce the dependency of the United States
on imported critical materials, support a circular economy through simplified
battery manufacturing and recycling processes, and in doing so also reduce the
cost of Li-ion batteries. The grant will also create new outreach projects and
workforce development activities for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students
and professionals and transform the curricula in multidisciplinary areas related
to Li-ion batteries, manufacturing engineering, thermal science, and system
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Li-ion batteries today are manufactured via slurry-
based processes, which introduce complexity, cost, and other challenges into
battery manufacturing and recycling. This research will utilize a new
manufacturing paradigm, which capitalizes on novel electrodeposition/de-
electroplating technologies to holistically optimize Li-ion battery
manufacturing for enhanced performance, lifecycle sustainability, thermal
management, and recyclability. In support of this vision, the research plan is
composed of four tightly coupled research thrusts, paired with extensive
workforce development and education activities. In Thrust 1, the research will
advance electrode and electrolyte manufacturing and assembly of cathode-
electrolyte-anode stacks. In Thrust 2, the research will use the understanding
developed in Thrust 1 to develop both electrochemical and innovative inside-out
cell recycling concepts. In Thrust 3, the research will focus on cell design,
exploiting the novel thermal and electrical properties of the electrodeposited
electrodes and electrolytes to form high performance cells compatible with
recycling. In Thrust 4, the research will perform extensive lifecycle analysis
and reliability-based optimization, to enhance reliability and lifecycle
sustainability of the Li-ion battery solution and demonstrate its performance
gains over existing battery manufacturing technologies. Running through these
thrusts is a holistic design strategy that integrates aspects of manufacturing,
performance, recycling, and lifecycle analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.