* 2037164
* FMRG: Genetically-targeted chemical assembly (GTCA) of functional structures in living cells, tissues, and animals
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Carolyn Bertozzi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,750,000.00

The broad vision for this project is to develop new tools for future
biomanufacturing through cross-cutting collaborations of scientists—chemists,
biologists, physicians, and engineers—united by the immense opportunity of
building functional materials with, and within, biological life. The proposed
methodologies establish the biomanufacturing toolbox for genetically-targeted
chemical synthesis of a variety of functional materials within living cells,
tissues and animals. Diverse cell-specific chemical syntheses enable a broad
array of functional characteristics and assembled structures. In the long term,
such techniques enable building electronics directly within biological systems
by harnessing the complex assembly structures within cells. The application of
these techniques to develop the capability to create new conductive pathways
within the brain may lead to rewiring of neural circuits. Moreover, genetically-
targeting the peripheral nerve may allow cell-specific nerve stimulation and
recording for neuroprosthesis. Further investigation of the deposited material
on neural activity may lead to treatments for diseases such as Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), or selectively repair
demyelinated areas for treatment of multiple sclerosis (MS). Even though current
work only focuses on basic tool development and initial understanding of the
impact of the modifications on neural activities, the tools can be potentially
expanded to diverse cell types for therapeutics and creation of new materials
and assemblies. This project offers direct training opportunities for the
students and postdocs involved in terms of research as well as important skills
for interdisciplinary collaboration. These trainees subsequently further the
development of biomanufacturing and their method of collaboration by running
their own independent research groups in academia or by incorporating their
knowledge into future industrial developments. A Training Core program in this
project provides hands-on training on basic biomanufacturing techniques for
hundreds of students, instructors and researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
existing ability to engineer materials with diverse form and functionality, a
high-level of structural and functional complexity found in multicellular living
systems are still challenging to realize. The capability of genetically
targeting enzymes and other proteins to specific cell types has yet to be
harnessed to direct complex assembly of functional structures instructed by
biological systems. This project integrates the fields of molecular genetics,
tissue biology, chemistry, and materials science in unprecedented ways to
transform the biomanufacturing of complex structures. The project focuses on
building novel structures in vivo, creating natural and unnatural polymers
within targeted cell-types of living organisms. This approach is extended to the
development of a universal shared methodology for targeted chemistry within
living beings. The work proposed focuses on developing and applying novel
toolboxes for diverse genetically-targeted synthetic processes while engineering
for biocompatibility, characterizing the synthesized molecules/materials, and
understanding the mechanisms and implications of forming synthetic materials for
eliciting natural and novel biological functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is co-funded by the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems and
the Division of Chemistry, and also by the Division of Industrial Innovation and
Partnerships, the Division of Engineering Education and Centers, and the
Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.