* 2037704
* Laboratory Studies Investigating the Influence of Particle Diameter on Viscosity
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Markus Petters, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2024
* USD 484,050.00

Visibility, cloud formation, climate and human health are affected by suspended
particles that are smaller than 100 nm in size, yet, many key particle
properties remain ill-defined. In this project, novel experimental techniques
are used to increase understanding of how particle viscosity changes with size.
Results will help explain and predict atmospheric chemical processes with
implications on climate and human health, as well as apply to a wide range of
fields where nanoparticles are present. Graduate and undergraduate students will
be an integral part of the work, and outreach activities are planned for high
school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As particle size decreases, strong
curvature of the particle-air interface leads to deviations in physical
properties from those observed in bulk materials. Viscosity is one such
property, which dependence on particle size is poorly understood, yet, viscosity
plays key roles in diffusion and reaction rates affecting atmospheric chemistry,
global climate and human health. To shed light on the particle size-viscosity
relationship, the present study seeks to quantify how solid-liquid phase
transitions are influenced by particle diameter between 10 and 100 nm.
Particular focus is on &lt;50 nm particles composed of pure or multicomponent
blends of a series of functionalized organic compounds that serve as models for
oxidized atmospheric organic aerosol (OA). A shape-relaxation method is used
that relies on the coagulation of laboratory-generated dumbbell-shaped dimer
particles to single spheres. This transformation occurs at a temperature and
viscosity that is representative of the solid-liquid phase transition. The
change in particle morphology is measured in a differential mobility analyzer.
Besides impacting climate and human health, findings will be transferable beyond
the field of atmospheric sciences where nanoparticles are investigated. Through
this project, graduate and undergraduate students will receive hands-on training
on cutting edge instrumentation. High school students will be enticed to visit
university sciences laboratories by participating in chess tournaments organized
on the university campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.