* 2037540
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing Power System Resilience via Data-Driven Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Chaoyue Zhao, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 93,400.00

As the backbone of the U.S. energy infrastructure, the electric grid transmits
power to the nation, with a revenue of around 400 billion dollars annually. The
electric grid is vulnerable to a variety of weather-related natural disasters.
The evaluation and mitigation of disruption-related risks and impacts are often
computationally prohibitive due to the complexity of the power system,
uncertainty of weather conditions, and the combinatorial nature of component
failures. This project will advance the use of analytical models and scalable
solution methods to assist system operators to better evaluate and mitigate
disruptions. The PIs, as well as their graduate students, will collaborate with
a U.S. Department of Energy national laboratory, which will facilitate
connections with power systems operators.

This award will study a new class of data-driven optimization methodologies to
support strategic and operational planning in power systems management. As part
of this research, the PIs will study probabilistic modeling of electricity grid
disruptions based on meteorological and historical transmission availability
data. These data will be incorporated in distributionally robust optimization
(DRO) models to (a) conduct risk assessment analysis, (b) harden pre-disaster
electricity grid, (c) take corrective actions during disasters, and (d) conduct
post-disaster self-healing and system restoration. The DRO approach will allow
the consideration of an exponential number of disruptions, as well as their
probabilities of occurring, to be inferred from the analysis of the data. In
addition, this project will investigate new DRO solution approaches based on
mixed-integer programming.