* 2037055
* EAGER: (ST2) Peptide-Functionalized Hydrogels that Communicate with Preprogrammed Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Sebastian Vega, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Some tissues, such as cartilage, have limited
capacity to repair or regenerate their matrix material when damaged. Self-
healing materials with the ability to detect and replace damaged matrix would
enable more effective and longer lasting therapies. This EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) project investigates the use of programmed cells
within hydrogels as a new class of materials able to detect and replace matrix
loss. This research aims to program cells within hydrogels to detect and respond
to matrix loss by producing new matrix material as needed. The matrix produced
by cells is tagged with an “OFF” signal that is used by the cells to detect when
enough of matrix has been produced. As the “OFF” signal accumulates, the cells
decrease and eventually stop production until more matrix is needed due to
further damage or degradation. This project is designed to advance the
fundamental understanding of biological feedback mechanisms and to provide
multidisciplinary research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students
by supporting the Ph.D. training of two graduate students and undergraduate
students in capstone project teams. This EAGER project is inspired by ideas
developed at the Square Table 2 (ST2) workshop on Programmable
Interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Although cells
with stimulatory synthetic receptors that produce materials (e.g., antibodies,
cytokines, etc.) upon peptide activation exist, these preprogrammed cells lack
the ability to stop production once enough material is made. The goal of this
EAGER project is to investigate stimulatory and inhibitory receptor-ligand
communication as a novel biological feedback mechanism and to use these insights
to develop adaptive materials with self-healing properties. This new class of
materials consists of cells preprogrammed with stimulatory and inhibitory
synthetic receptors encapsulated in enzymatically degradable hydrogels. Upon
activation with spatially tethered stimulatory peptides, cells produce green
fluorescent protein (GFP, measurable fluorescence) and a matrix protein tagged
with inhibitory ligand. Stimulated cells then replace their surrounding hydrogel
with cell-secreted matrix until a balance is reached between competing
stimulatory and inhibitory signals. To confirm the self-healing capabilities of
these materials, cell-produced matrix is removed locally, and cellular responses
and material production are measured via 3D imaging of cellular GFP and
fluorescently labeled nascent matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Division of
Materials Research (DMR) grant supports research to understand and develop
stimulatory and inhibitory receptor-ligand communication as a novel biological
feedback mechanism and to use these insights to develop adaptive materials with
self-healing properties managed by the Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Program in
DMR of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS)
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.