* 2037433
* Build and Broaden: Conference on Social Connections to Promote Individual and Community Resilience in Post-COVID-19 Society
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Gautam Das, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 70,233.00

This project consists of a conference, the objective of which is to build
partnerships and collaborations among the University of Texas at Arlington
(UTA), a Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI), several other Minority-Serving
Institutions (MSIs) in Texas, as well as other leading research institutions
across the nation. The conference addresses fundamental research questions of
the role of social connections as a key form of social capital for individuals
and communities adapting to changes after high-impact disasters and extreme
events. Collaborative opportunities among the social sciences, computer
sciences, and engineering in innovative data, technology, and methods of
studying and strengthening social connections are highlighted. The conference
promotes interdisciplinary dialogues as the basis for a series of fruitful
collaborations to address critical social needs as society recovers from the
COVID-19 pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This hybrid conference includes a two-
day live-streamed physical conference, two pre-conference virtual meeting
sessions, and a series of post-conference follow-up virtual meetings. Each pre-
conference virtual meeting consists of three speakers’ presentations and an open
discussion session with an estimate of 25 participants. The physical conference
includes three structured speaker sessions and three open discussion sessions,
with an estimated 50 participants. Overall, speaker sessions include topics on
1) social connections as key social capital in coping with the COVID -19 crisis,
2) vulnerability and risks of COVID-19 and mitigation impact of social
connections among minority and high-risk populations, and 3) innovative methods
in investigating the impact of social connections in vulnerability and
resilience to COVID-19. Open discussion sessions include topics on 1) the unique
roles of MSIs in leading research and dissemination among the most affected
communities, and 2) exploring interdisciplinary collaborative opportunities and
dialogues. A student-focused poster session is held at the physical meeting,
with an estimate of 50 poster presentations and an additional 50 visiting
students. The poster session focuses on social connections as a critical
component of resilience. Post-conference follow-up meetings and activities
concern team building and how the impact of the conference may be
sustained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.