* 2037510
* Workshop on Metamaterials and Metastructures for Civil Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Symeon Gerasimidis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 97,683.00

Progress in fundamental mechanics, advanced manufacturing and materials science
has led to the creation of a truly groundbreaking family of new materials called
architected metamaterials. These materials exhibit behavior and properties that
do not occur in natural materials. The high cost and small volumes associated
with architected metamaterials have thus far largely prevented their adoption in
structural and civil infrastructure applications. Yet the unprecedented
properties of these materials hold the potential to transform built environment.
A new perspective on architected metamaterials is needed to realize this
potential. This workshop will provide a forum to initiate a dialogue among a
diverse and leading group of experts and to explore the research frontier. The
workshop will bring together researchers and industrial professional from the
communities of advanced manufacturing, materials, geotechnical and structural
engineering, construction and design to identify research opportunities in
architected metamaterials for structures and provide recommendations to address
these opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held at the
University of Massachusetts, Amherst campus, in April 2021. The focus of the
workshop will be uncovering how fundamental principles of architected
metamaterials could be harnessed to enhance performance of civil infrastructure,
and to identify the fundamental research gaps while keeping in mind constraints
on cost, durability, sustainability, manufacturability and ease of construction.
The workshop will explore critical future directions towards scalable
architected metamaterials. The influence and utilization of additive
manufacturing, construction robotics and other advanced construction
manufacturing approaches will be discussed to identify bottom-up and top-down
strategies for bringing metamaterials to the built environment. The workshop
will provide recommendations in the form of a workshop report. These
recommendations will be disseminated to a broad group of
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.