* 2037266
* SenSE: Smart Electropalatography for Linguistic and Medical Applications (SELMA)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ratree Wayland, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Speech as a non-invasive biomarker could provide researchers and clinicians with
new means to capture fine changes in speech articulation patterns associated
with linguistic phenomena in the normal population or functional changes in
articulation in individuals with disorders. The overarching goal of this project
is to establish an evidence-based, quantified, data driven, non-invasive method
for using speech as a biomarker for facile detection of cross-linguistic
variation and patterns of articulatory change in various neuromotor disorders
within the linguistics and biomedical realms. This interdisciplinary project has
three interactive arms: the development of a smart, wireless,
electropalatography (EPG) system, behavioral speech data collection for
comparison with existing EPG systems, and machine learning for identifying
patterns of tongue-palate contact that signify abnormal patterns of
articulation. This work would lead to establishing a new techno-linguistic and
techno-speech pathology disciplines and related curricula. SELMA performance
will be disseminated through new courses, class lectures, conference
presentations, publications, and mass/social media. PIs volunteer for minority
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The usage of speech sounds as a biomarker offers
advantageous features such as non-contact detection and remote monitoring.
However, the acoustic signature alone is not sufficient to provide reliable
sensing for linguistic and clinical use. In this project, a unique real-time,
multi-modal, wireless smart electropalatography (EPG) system for linguistic and
medical applications (SELMA) is devised and implemented to provide additional
oral sensing modalities, including precise position, size, pressure, and
duration of tongue contacts with the palate in speaking. A pseudo-palate, the
main apparatus of the system, is 1/20 the thickness of a typical pseudo-palate,
minimizing the blockage of airflow during speech production and conform to the
palate, reducing the discomfort of the wearer and offering a close-to-normal
mouth condition during speech articulation. Wireless charging and communication
are used increasing reliability and safety. The advantage of the SELMA device is
evaluated via a behavioral linguistic experiment to assess detection of a common
class of cross-linguistic, phonological processes known as spirantization, a
process involving decreased precision of speech articulation. Machine learning
models, integrating articulatory (i.e., EPG) and acoustic data, are used to
predict degrees of lenition and subjective lenition ratings. By fine-tuning the
models on latent speech patterns with big data of atypical speech from PD
patients, intoxicated speakers and second-language accented speakers, the SELMA
system will provide a unique form of diagnostics for medical and linguistic
purposes. The usage of high resolution spatio-temporal information of tongue
contacts during speech can be extended for facile monitoring of neurological
diseases such as PD, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), traumatic brain
injuries, and other neurological disorders. Further, SELMA will be inexpensive
and small enough that can be used for monitoring treatment progress in pediatric
articulation disorders affecting intelligibility, such as cleft palate, apraxia
of speech, and Down syndrome. Future variations of SELMA may extend its utility
to other disease monitoring with additional sensors integrated into the device,
potentially allowing monitoring of cancer, HIV, smoking and sexually transmitted
diseases using salivary biomarker sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.