* 2037856
* Developing Rational Design Principles for Textured Medical Device Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Dacheng Ren, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Non-technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year, millions of medical
devices with different surface textures are used to provide life support,
mitigate failing body parts, or for cosmetic purposes. Recent research has
revealed that surface topography has profound impact on microbe-material
interactions and thus the safety of implanted medical devices. However, the
mechanisms of such interactions and how to rationally design surface
topographies to prevent infection while promoting host tissue integration are
not well understood. This study is motivated by this knowledge gap and the
recent reports of breast implant associated anaplastic large cell lymphoma (BIA-
ALCL). BIA-ALCL is a well-recognized complication that has devastating impact on
affected individuals, which has led to a decision of the Food and Drug
Association (FDA) in 2019 to remove certain breast implants from the market.
Despite this well-recognized challenge, the cause of BIA-ALCL remains elusive
and a guideline for effectively regulating such devices is still missing.
Through a prior Scholar-in-Residence at FDA project, the PI Ren and FDA co-PI
Philips have obtained important new information about how bacteria interact with
surface topographies, which led to this proposed new project. Through close
collaboration, the team will conduct the first study on how implant surface
topography affects bacterial quorum sensing and production of virulence factors,
as well as the effects of surface topography on phagocytosis. The findings from
this study will not only benefit the safety of breast implants, but also help
guide the design and regulation of other devices. Beyond the research itself,
the team will leverage this project to recruit young talents especially those
from underrepresented groups and jointly advise graduate students. This project
will help workforce development and better prepare civilly responsible engineers
to solve challenging problems facing our society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During previous study, the team discovered that
surface topographies mimicking the features of ALCL-associated breast implants
have significantly higher bacterial loads than the flat control and the surfaces
with other recessive patterns tested. In addition, the cell density in recessive
wells were about 7 times higher than the flat control based on two-dimensional
surface coverage after just 24 hours of culturing. The difference can be even
bigger considering the three-dimensional biofilm structure and interaction with
host factors, which will be studied in this project. Based on these findings,
the team hypothesizes that inappropriate recessive features can promote
bacterial biofilm formation, quorum sensing, and associated production of
virulence factors. The team further hypothesizes that these topographic features
present a physical hindrance for immune cells such as macrophages from reaching
bacterial cells and cleaning them from the implant surface, leading to
inflammation and subsequently BIA-ALCL. The team will test these hypotheses by
conducting complementary experiments and cell tracking to understand how surface
topography affects the interaction between bacteria and host cells. This new
information will fill an important knowledge gap, and provide critical insights
for understanding device-associated complications and the design of safer
medical devices. The results will help FDA to better prepare for reviews of
emerging technologies involving smart biomaterials. The team will also leverage
this project to motivate students for research, especially individuals from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.