* 2037740
* STTR Phase I:  An Additively Manufactured Reactor for Emerging Contaminant Destruction
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Robert Fox, AQUAGGA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is the acceleration of a new technology for the
destruction of toxic per- and polyfluoroalkyl (PFAS), widely used in
firefighting foams and consumer goods. However, they are environmental
pollutants, highly toxic to human consumption, and hard to destroy. PFAS do not
decompose naturally and are poorly broken down by incineration. Widespread
contamination of soil, groundwater, and drinking water at sites near airports,
military bases, and manufacturing sites is driving an effort to remove and
destroy PFAS toxins. This project will advance a technology for destruction of
PFAS-rich wastes in an energy-efficient, scalable, easily deployed manner.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project seeks to leverage advanced
manufacturing techniques and novel, corrosion-resistant alloys to advance the
hydrothermal alkaline treatment (HALT) process for the destruction of PFAS.
Hydrothermal processing has historically been plagued by challenges with
corrosion and component lifetimes, requiring the use of expensive alloys,
replaceable system components, and/or elegant chemical corrosion prevention
strategies. However, hydrothermal processes are some of the most effective and
efficient technologies for destroying hazardous wastes, such as PFAS.
Successfully mitigating the material corrosion challenge would lead to more
widespread adoption of hydrothermal processes for waste disposal. This project
will leverage advanced manufacturing techniques to test the performance of
several corrosion-resistant materials under the harsh, HALT conditions. Use of
these corrosion-resistant materials may extend component lifetimes while
reducing fabrication costs, reducing component fabrication and system
maintenance costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.