* 2037263
* EAGER: QAC-QSA: Resource Reduction in Quantum Computational Chemistry Mapping by Optimizing Orbital Basis Sets
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jianfeng Lu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,968.00

Jianfeng Lu of Duke University is supported by the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry to conduct a project
on resource reduction in quantum computational mapping by optimizing orbital
basis sets. The proposal was submitted in response to the Quantum Algorithm
Challenge Dear Colleague Letter, NSF 20-056. Jianfeng Lu and his research group
are pursuing novel algorithms to reduce the resource requirements for carrying
out quantum chemistry computations on a quantum computer. The research aims to
provide state-of-the-art computational methods that push the current boundary of
quantum computational chemistry. The project also includes new curriculum
development that creates an ideal training platform for a new generation of
computational scientists who will be able to understand and contribute to
quantum computing and related fields across science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Quantum chemistry is a natural promising area of applications of
quantum computing and has seen many exciting developments in recent years
together with experimental demonstration of small-scale problems on actual
quantum devices. The current bottleneck for capability of quantum computational
chemistry lies in the limited resources provided by the current and near-future
NISQ hardware. This bottleneck provides exciting and unprecedented opportunities
for novel algorithmic advance and breakthroughs. The proposed research aims at
resource reduction by optimizing basis sets for mapping quantum chemistry
problem to quantum computer, using a systematic and efficient variational
approach, which extends the current variational quantum eigensolver framework.
The optimal basis set will be pursued using novel optimization techniques for
ground and excited states. Efficient classical-quantum hybrid algorithms will be
developed to obtain accurate quantum chemistry calculations for large molecules
with large basis sets under NISQ budget constraints. Such innovations, combined
with other advances in quantum computational chemistry, would help scale up the
ability of quantum computer for quantum chemistry problems beyond the reach of
classical algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.