* 2037300
* EAGER: QIA: A quantum algorithm for detecting quantum information leakage in qubit systems
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Itay Hen, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

In quantum computers, information is encoded in quantum bits, that is, qubits.
Ideally a qubit is a two-level quantum system, representing the logical states
"0" and "1". In the two leading quantum computing platforms, superconducting
flux qubit and trapped ions, quantum information encoded in the qubit is prone
to leakage. As a consequence, information leakage is one of the main sources of
errors that affect our ability to perform successful computing on near-term
quantum computing devices. This project develops and experimentally tests a
novel quantum algorithm for detecting specific leakage errors in qubit systems
by harnessing entanglement, which are the strong correlations in quantum
systems. Thanks to these strong correlations, the algorithm allows an accurate
detection of the leakage errors with substantially fewer experimental runs than
required by state-of-the-art leakage detection protocols. Efficiently and
precisely detecting specific information leakage errors is crucial for the
current advancement of state-of-the-art quantum computing platforms, and in turn
increases our ability to perform more precise quantum computing tasks with
relevance throughout science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific goals of this project is to develop quantum algorithm for detecting
potential leakage channels by using strongly-correlated (entangled) bipartite
quantum systems. The correlations between the systems are specifically designed
to probe and detect particular leakage error channels. The algorithm is suitable
and has the flexibility to detect any leakage channel of concern; it is
deterministic and allows one to detect the specific leakage channels with
probability one. The PIs and the student involved in this project are testing
and benchmarking the algorithm on currently available quantum computing devices.
The successful development and implementation of a leakage detection algorithm
thus enhances our ability to suppress them, and in turn enhances the performance
of currently available quantum computing platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.