* 2037899
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Experimental Facility with Twelve-Fan Wall of Wind 2021-2025
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Arindam Chowdhury, Florida International University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 3,439,870.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) is supported by
the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user national
facility to provide the natural hazards engineering research community with
access to research infrastructure that includes earthquake and wind engineering
experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure (CI), computational modeling and
simulation tools, high performance computing resources, and research data, as
well as education and community outreach activities. Originally funded under
program solicitations NSF 14-605 and NSF 15-598, NHERI has operated since 2015
through separate, but coordinated, five-year research infrastructure awards for
a Network Coordination Office, CI, Computational Modeling and Simulation Center,
and Experimental Facilities, including a post-disaster, rapid response research
facility. Information about NHERI resources is available at the NHERI web portal
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). Awards made for NHERI contribute to NSF's role
in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National
Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). NHERI Experimental Facilities will
provide access to their experimental resources, user services, and data
management infrastructure for NSF-supported research and education awards. This
award will renew the NHERI Twelve-Fan Wall of Wind (WOW) Experimental Facility
at Florida International University to support wind engineering research and
education from January 1, 2021 to September 30, 2025. The WOW is a large wind
simulation facility with cutting edge capabilities, including large- and full-
scale testing of building systems, components, and other structures in wind
speeds up to and including hurricane Category 5 on the Saffir-Simpson scale (157
mph and above), with a wind-driven rain option. The facility will provide access
and expertise to users across the nation, including annual user workshops, to
support frontier research and education to prevent wind hazard events from
becoming community disasters by advancing knowledge and fostering transformative
mitigation measures. The facility will provide educational experiences for K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students in science, technology, engineering,
mathematics, and related fields from academic institutions across the U.S.
Educational activities will include: (1) hosting external undergraduate students
for hands-on training under the NHERI Research Experiences for Undergraduates
program, (2) promoting learning-by-teaching with graduate students serving as
mentors for the undergraduate students, and (3) continuing the Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) program for middle and high school teachers to
work with students and facility staff to generate new knowledge and translate it
into classroom educational materials. The facility will help foster a diverse
research community of students, teachers, faculty, and professionals to
collectively address the nationâ€™s hazard-related challenges and achieve wind-
resilient communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The facility will provide unique
experimental capabilities for wind engineering that do not exist at other U.S.
universities at comparable scale. With its twelve-fan, large wind field cross
section, rain generation system, and automated flow conditioning roughness and
spires for atmospheric boundary layer (ABL) simulation, the facility can
simulate realistic hurricane wind speeds for various exposures. The facility's
experimental capabilities include: (1) high-speed holistic full- and large-scale
testing in simulated ABL flows at high Reynolds numbers (Re) to minimize scaling
errors, (2) system-level destructive testing to study progressive damage and
failure of components and connections to improve designs, (3) wind-driven rain
simulations to study water intrusion through building envelopes, and (4) testing
to assess innovative mitigation devices to attenuate wind damage and rain
infiltration. Recently, the facility expanded its capabilities to include
downburst simulation and whole-flow-field and fluid-structure interaction
characterization at high Re. These new capabilities will enable high fidelity
measurements to provide experimental data for validating computational
simulations, thereby reducing future reliance on physical testing. Research
conducted at the facility will provide new knowledge to improve current design
standards and practices. Experimental data generated from research conducted at
this facility will be archived in the Data Depot on the NHERI web
portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.