* 2037539
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   Data-Driven Risk-Averse Models and Algorithms for Power Generation Scheduling with Renewable Energy Integration
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Chaoyue Zhao, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2020
* USD 31,556.00

Renewable energy has been increasingly penetrating into the power grid system
during the past years due to its contribution toward cleaner and lower-polluting
American energy. Meanwhile, however, its intermittent nature brings challenges
to power system operators. One challenging problem is how to derive a cost-
effective and reliable power generation scheduling for thermal units in a short
time to accommodate renewable generation uncertainties. The other outstanding
question is how the data collected by the renewable facilities and intelligent
devices can be transformed into valuable information and actionable insights in
the decision-making process. To help address these challenges, this project aims
to explore innovative data-driven optimization models and develop corresponding
intelligent algorithms, as well as the implementation of the algorithms in high-
performance computing facilities, to achieve cost-effective and robust daily
power system operations. If successful, the proposed innovative approaches can
be implemented in the industry in a short time and help improve current
operations practices. The results of research outcomes will be incorporated into
course works, which will train students to utilize cutting edge data-driven
optimization methods to solve upfront power system problems with renewable
energy integration. Educational activities also include outreach to K-12
students to promote science and engineering and to under-represented minorities
in all aspects of this research effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
creative approach integrates statistical and optimization methods to derive
innovative decision-making under uncertainty models for optimal power flow and
unit commitment problems incorporating demand response and renewable energy. It
provides one of the first studies on data-driven optimization addressing
distributional ambiguity for power system operations. Starting from a given set
of historical data, a confidence set for the true unknown distribution is
constructed and accordingly data-driven risk-averse optimization models are
developed for both system operators and market participants. Besides ensuring
system robustness, the advantage of this approach is that the conservatism of
the proposed model is adjustable based on the amount of historical data and
eventually vanishes as the size of historical data goes to infinity. Also, the
proposed advanced techniques in strengthening the formulation by exploring the
problem structure and decomposition algorithms implementable at high-performance
computing facilities can help improve the computational efficiency to solve the
derived models. Finally, integration of innovative data-driven optimization
models and development of efficient algorithms will enrich the tool set and
advance the cutting edge technology to solve power generation scheduling
problems under uncertainty.