* 2037543
* Collaborative Research: Constraining the thermal conditions of the subduction interface by integrating petrology and geodynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Besim Dragovic, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2024
* USD 49,875.00

Subduction zones are places on Earth where one of Earth's tectonic plates dives
beneath another. They are the location of many societally-relevant hazards,
including the generation of Earth's deadliest earthquakes, such as the 2011
Tohoku earthquake and associated tsunami, and volcanic eruptions such as those
at Mt St Helens (1980) and Mt Pinatubo (1991). The processes that lead to these
earthquakes and volcanoes are ultimately dependent on the thermal structure of
subduction zones - that is how hot it is at great depths. Metamorphic rocks
exhumed from ancient subduction zones contain unique records of the temperatures
that they witnessed as they traveled down a subduction zone before being
exhumed. Geodynamic models and geophysical observations provide estimates of the
thermal structures of present-day subduction zones. Interestingly, the rock
record suggests significantly warmer conditions than those predicted for modern
subduction zones. The proposed work will investigate the reasons for this
discrepancy, which may lie in the way we interpret conditions from the rocks,
the way they are exhumed, or even in how we compare model predictions and the
rock record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to address the rock-model
discrepancy through two key questions: 1) Does our current interpretation of the
rock record accurately represent the thermal structure of the associated ancient
subduction zone? and 2) Did rocks get exhumed from ancient subduction zones that
were hotter on average than modern subduction zones? To address Question 1 this
team will determine P-T conditions for metamorphic rocks exhumed from five well-
characterized localities that represent a range of thermal structures using
relatively new analytical methods: trace element thermometers (e.g. Zr-in-
rutile) and mineral inclusion barometers (e.g. quartz-in-garnet barometry). To
address Question 2, they will develop geodynamical models of the ancient
subduction zones represented by the exhumed rocks. These models will incorporate
the effects of region-specific subduction dynamics, such as variations in slab
age and subduction rate with time, subduction initiation, ridge subduction, and
slab breakoff, when applicable. The model-predicted P-T conditions along the
subduction interface will be compared with the newly produced P-T estimates to
re-evaluate their disparity. The two-pronged approach of combining petrological
observations and geodynamical modeling allows quantitative exploration of the
thermal evolution of subduction zones. Subduction-related metamorphic rocks are
the only direct samples of material from the plate interface; evaluating the P-T
conditions using the latest thermobarometric approaches will provide the team
with a more accurate and precise way to untangle the complex history they have
experienced. Through geodynamical modeling, the effects of individual parameters
on the thermal structure of subduction zones can be isolated, and this targeted
approach will allow evaluation of possible explanations for the warm conditions
that are recorded by exhumed rocks. The application of the two-pronged approach
to the selected ancient subduction localities will allow researchers to
determine whether the disparity can be reconciled. The results of this work have
important implications for many processes, including geochemical cycling of
volatiles, construction of continental crust, and the conditions that lead to
arc volcanism. This work will engage graduate students and early career
scientists in new collaborations between scientists of different disciplines
(petrologists and geodynamicists) and at different institutions both in the US
and abroad. EarthCache (TM) sites will be created in California (Franciscan and
Catalina) as part of the project. These sites will engage the public in
geoscience through the popular activity of geocaching and will disseminate
information about subduction zone geology through information tied to direct
observations of geologic features exhumed from subduction
zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.