* 2037696
* Ecosystem Responses to Hurricanes Synthesis Workshop
* BIO,DEB
* 04/13/2020,12/31/2021
* Christopher Patrick, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 12/31/2021
* USD 22,421.00

Three major hurricanes (Harvey, Irma, and Maria) made landfall in the United
States during the fall of 2017. Catastrophic human, economic, and ecological
effects occurred from the storm surge, saltwater intrusion, wind damage, and
flooding. The number of storms, their intensity, the number that made landfall,
and the catastrophic damage was remarkable. Global models predict hurricanes
will increase and effected areas will change over the next century. Thus,
synthesizing responses to severe tropical storm disturbances is needed to
understand general patterns of impact and recovery. This award will provide
workshop funds for researchers, experts, managers, and graduate students to
develop a synthetic understanding of hurricane impacts on freshwater, estuarine,
and terrestrial ecosystems. The proposed workshop will provide important
opportunities for career advancement and training of underrepresented and early
career scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unprecedented landfall of multiple
major hurricanes in the United States presents a rare opportunity to document
generalizable patterns in ecosystem response to extreme disturbance. The
workshop will leverage the significant investment of the National Science
Foundation in Hurricane Research following the devastating impacts of storms
Harvey, Irma, and Maria in 2017 to generate a novel cross-system disturbance
ecology synthesis. The synthesis will result from three major activities
including: recruitment and workflow design, a three-day workshop, and post-
workshop analysis and synthesis. The workshop will bring together research teams
studying multiple ecosystem types (estuarine, freshwater, terrestrial) and
ecosystem responses (physical, biogeochemical, organismal ? mobile vs sedentary,
microbial, animal, and plant) to these hurricanes. The participants will merge
diverse datasets into a common statistical framework and conduct synthetic
analyses to identify shared and unique responses to different types of hurricane
stressors. Both workshop and post workshop activities will yield an
understanding of how ecosystems respond to severe disturbance and contribute a
generalizable conceptual framework that is applicable across ecosystems and
ecosystem components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.