* 2038352
* INTERN DCL â€“ Enhancing Social Capital in Innovation and STEM Entrepreneurship
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Jeffrey Robinson, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 12/31/2020
* USD 49,771.00

In a 2016 study entitled "The Demographics of Innovation in the United States",
the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation (ITIF) found that only 12%
of U.S. innovators are women, and only 8% are members of U.S. minority groups
(including Asians, African Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, and other
ethnicities). As demographic characteristics of the U.S. population change, a
key question is, "How can the U.S. remain competitive without engaging the
talents and abilities of all of its citizens?" To address this question, this
EAGER proposal will conduct exploratory research focusing on integrating
research-based strategies and best practices to achieve diversity and inclusion
in the NSF I-Corps program, which prepares scientists and engineers to
transition their research out of universities with the goal of
commercialization. By funding the exploratory research and pilot initiative
outlined in this EAGER proposal, the project will support efforts to identify
and integrate effective strategies for diversity and inclusion into the national
I-Corps innovation network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed work will support
graduate research and is based on the following. In year one, the team will
collect qualitative data from various stakeholders to understand the current
practices of the NSF I-Corps program and compare these practices to the most
current academic research and reports on inclusive innovation. As a result, a
research paper will be written to describe best practices for Inclusive
Innovation in technology entrepreneurship. During the 2nd quarter of 2020, this
research will be presented at a stakeholders meeting such that working groups
can leverage the information to develop new strategies for increasing the
participation of underrepresented minorities in the NSF I-Corps program. At this
stakeholders meeting, several new partnerships will be facilitated between the
entrepreneurship organization and advocacy groups that promote diversity in tech
entrepreneurship and the I-Corps Site and Nodes. In year 2, the research team
will work with two I-Corps Sites to test a preliminary model for inclusive
innovation developed by the stakeholder organizations. This pilot initiative
will demonstrate and evaluate new approaches to achieving diversity goals in
technology entrepreneurship/commercialization. The findings from this research
have the potential to enhance and transform the participation in the I-Corps
program at all levels, and complement NSF efforts to broaden participation of
women and underrepresented minorities in science/technology entrepreneurship
towards the overall effort to enhance and maintain the global competitiveness of
America's innovation economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.