* 2038515
* Pelvic Organ Prolapse Mesh Replacement: Evaluation of Mesh Elasticity and Pore Geometry on Cell Responses and Mesh Degradation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Toshikazu Miyoshi, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 140,891.00

Non-Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pelvic organ prolapse (POP) occurs
when decreased pelvic muscle strength results in pelvic organs such as the
bladder or ovary, distending into the vagina, causing significant pain and
discomfort and leading to a lower quality of life. Till recently, POP was
addressed surgically by the use of synthetic polypropylene meshes to
mechanically support and hold up the pelvic organs. However, the biological and
mechanical properties of polypropylene are very different from those of pelvic
organs. Hence, this difference created inflammation and damage of the pelvic
tissues, which in turn caused oxidation of the meshes leading to their eventual
breakdown. This cycle of events leads to eventual organ damage and chronic pain.
Due to such complications in a large number of women, the FDA has withdrawn
permission for the use of such meshes for POP and currently there are no
surgical meshes available for POP. Hence, there is a critical need for
examination of alternative materials as replacements for polypropylene and to
understand the features of the mesh materials that lead to deleterious
reactions. This study will design and 3D print a set of polyester and
polyurethane meshes as alternatives for polypropylene meshes. Subsequently,
these meshes will be tested to determine how cells react to the mesh chemistry
and geometrical features. In addition, the mechanical strength and elasticity of
the meshes will be examined before and after treating them in conditions that
cause oxidative damage to the meshes. Such systematic studies will provide a
deeper understanding of the chemical and physical features of mesh materials
that affect biological reactions. The results from this study will also be
useful for the FDA in their evaluations and regulation of POP meshes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancing age or
multiple childbirths increase the probability of pelvic organ prolapse (POP),
which is the herniation of the pelvic organs into the vagina due to the
weakening of the pelvic floor muscles and connective tissues. Each year, about
240,000 prolapse procedures are performed in the United States and 11% of women
will undergo corrective surgery in their lifetime to address prolapse. Till
recently, propylene meshes were used to support the distending pelvic organs by
attachment to the sacrospinous ligament and/or the arcus tendineus fascia
pelvis. However, polypropylene meshes are both biologically and mechanically
incompatible with the soft and elastic tissues of the pelvic cavity and have
been shown to promote inflammatory reactions leading to eventual mesh failure.
Due to the poor biomechanical compliance and resultant complications such as
chronic pain, organ perforation and recurrent infections, the FDA has banned the
use of existing surgical meshes for transvaginal POP repair. Hence, there is an
unmet need for POP meshes that will provide mechanical support without causing
inflammatory reactions or pelvic organ damage. The project will compare a set of
biomaterials and mesh architectures to identify critical parameters that
influence mechanical stability and cellular responses with the aim of providing
a deeper understanding for the design of materials for POP repair. The data
generated through this study will be useful for the FDA for the evaluation and
regulation of synthetic materials as replacements for polypropylene. A set of
pendant functionalized polyesters and polyurethanes will be used to fabricate 3D
printed meshes with auxetic geometries and these will be used to evaluate
proliferation and cytocompatibility of fibroblasts on the meshes. Furthermore,
macrophage behavior and ROS production in presence of the meshes will be
evaluated. It is hypothesized that oxidation of the meshes, either due to
external or biological oxidants, result in catastrophic loss of mechanical
properties of the meshes. Hence, the mechanical properties of the meshes, both
before and after exposure of the meshes to external oxidants will be evaluated.
In addition, the mesh degradation products will be characterized through various
methods including HPLC, NMR, UV-Vis, ATR-FTIR and SEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.