* 2038704
* LTREB Renewal: Mechanisms driving facultative switching in a partially migratory large-herbivore population
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Mark Hebblewhite, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 04/30/2026
* USD 540,420.00

Migratory species are crucial to ecosystem function because by migrating they
can attain higher abundance, and thus often drive ecological processes. Yet
migratory species are also declining worldwide because of human disturbance,
habitat loss, and environmental variability. In particular, large ungulates
(e.g., deer, elk) are both ecologically and economically important (e.g.,
hunting), and yet their migrations are also in decline. Understanding the causes
of declining migratory ungulates has important implications for their
conservation and management. However, across migratory species, there are
usually individuals who migrate and individuals who do not migrate within a
single population. Previous research also showed individual ungulates can be
flexible in their migratory behavior, deciding whether to migrate or not, or
where to migrate, based on changes in their environment. This research will take
advantage of a 19-year, long-term study of migratory elk in a western North
American montane landscape to understand both the causes of migratory decision-
making in elk, as well as the population consequences of changes in migratory
behavior to the management of elk. This research will have broad implications
for population and habitat management for a wide range of economically-important
migratory ungulate species such as deer and elk across western North America.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will extend our long-term 19-year
demographic study of a partially migratory elk population on the border of Banff
National Park, Alberta, to address the mechanisms driving partial migration. The
core data for this research is understanding the demography of over 400
individually marked female elk of known ages, their reproductive rates, and
juvenile survival, combined with spatial analyses of their migratory behavior
measured by Global Positioning System (GPS) collars. We will test whether elk
switch between migratory strategies in a manner consistent with intrinsic
factors (e.g. age, body condition), extrinsic factors (e.g, climate), or
density-dependent mechanisms. By monitoring intrinsic factors such as age and
reproductive history, as well as extrinsic variation in forage and predation
risk, we will test amongst competing and interacting hypotheses to understand
why a long-lived mammal switches between migratory strategies in the face of
environmental change. We will then develop a flexible Bayesian integrated
population model to test the consequences of migratory switching on population
dynamics. This model will be generalizable to other partially migratory
species&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.