* 2038118
* RTG: Computational Mathematics for Data Science
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* James Nagy, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2026
* USD 924,136.00

Computational and data-enabled science has become the third pillar of science,
completing theory and experimentation. Its success has been fueled by
breakthroughs in scientific computing, the explosion of available data, and our
ability to formulate mathematical models and calibrate them to measured data.
Recent success stories range from numerical weather prediction, which has seen
tremendous achievements in accuracy over the past years, to speech recognition,
which has dramatically improved in the last decade by systematically learning
from data. The aim of this project is to implement a comprehensive vertically
integrated Research Training Group (RTG) on the central theme of Computational
Mathematics for Data Science. In addition to being areas of fundamental and
strategic importance to the United States (e.g., for the development of new
medicines, technologies, and defense capabilities), both computational
mathematics and data science are areas that can have a tremendous societal
impact and will attract a broad range of students. The RTG themes of this
project include applications ranging from statistical data assimilation to
machine learning, which are among the most transformative technologies of our
times and have captured substantial public interest with many potential
applications from drug discovery to driverless cars. Despite many advances,
there still is a pressing need for more mathematical theory and rigor, which
provides ample research opportunities for all levels of mathematicians, from
undergraduate students, graduate students, postdocs, and senior
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support 3 graduate students
per year, 1.5 undergraduate students per year and at lease 1 postdoc per year.
At its core, data science uses mathematical methods and computational approaches
to extract knowledge and information from data. Harnessing the data revolution
requires new mathematical breakthroughs in the form of theory, models, and
computational algorithms. Breakthroughs are particularly needed to enable
mathematicians and application scientists to analyze and synthesize larger and
more complex datasets in an effective, reliable, and explainable manner. To this
end, the research conducted in this project will unify and further develop the
mathematical theory and computational tools used in applications ranging from
data assimilation to machine learning. This comprehensive approach will be based
on knowledge from, and make novel contributions to mathematics, computational
science, and data science. Particular focus will be on the mathematics of deep
learning and data assimilation and their application in impactful areas of
medicine (cardiac modeling, medical imaging), the weather and environment
(hurricane storm surge modeling), and disease outbreak modeling. Common threads
in these areas are their mathematical foundations, most importantly differential
equations, optimization, linear algebra and advanced techniques from
computational science, such as parallel and distributed computing. This RTG
program is anchored around year-long research themes that include one or more of
the above mentioned core research themes. Training will by multi-faceted, to
include education, potential career skills and experiences, soft skills,
scientific integrity, and promoting an appreciation for
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.