* 2038035
* EAGER: Full STEAM Ahead:  Powering Connections Among Different Generations of Geoscientists
* GEO,RISE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Leticia Williams, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 01/31/2024
* USD 295,885.00

To expand upon the success of NSF’s GOLD Program, this "Full Steam Ahead"
project seeks to improve career progression and sense of belonging in the
geosciences through an innovative, hybrid mentoring program which pairs early-
career leaders from a successful federal education program (e.g., the NOAA
Educational Partnership Program) with established leaders (“champions for
diversity”) from academe, government agencies, industry, and other geoscience
organizations. Participants across the generations of geoscience will be
immersed in multiple virtual platforms that leverage cutting-edge educational
technology and allow mentoring relationships to be initialized and cultivated
regardless of location. In addition, the mentoring experience will culminate in
a professional development conference that integrates a strong social science
component. Virtual and in-person mentoring is essential to not only establish a
cohort of diverse geoscience leaders, but also to provide opportunities centered
on workforce development, network enrichment activities, as well as effective
mentorship and advisement techniques and/or best practices. This project seeks
to leverage strong diverse networks that include the NOAA EPP and former GOLD
project participants in order to drive the next generation of geoscience leaders
full STEAM ahead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Full Steam Ahead project proposes to
develop networking and mentorship activities for both in-person and virtual
platforms. The general elements of activities will include: 1) Participant
orientation - sessions will provide participants with tools (e.g., best
practices, online curriculum) for developing effective mentoring relationships,
2) Career and Workforce development - symposia and panels to facilitate
discussions about how to navigate the workplace, microaggressions, technology in
the workplace, emotional intelligence in the workplace, and
intercultural/organizational communication dynamics, 3) Psychosocial support -
symposia and panels will focus on the importance of psychosocial support, mental
health, dealing with imposter syndrome, general emotional support, identity and
sense of belonging, and role modeling, and 4) Networking enrichment activities -
mentors and mentees will participate in Meet and Greet receptions and team
building activities to foster relationships and build connections. These
activities were selected to foster unique mentor and networking opportunities
for participants across sectors in the geoscience community (e.g., government
agencies, academe, industry, NGOs), and strengthen collaboration between
geosciences and social sciences through an interdisciplinary project design and
research approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.