* 2038432
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Constraint Aware Planning and Control for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Shai Revzen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

The objective of this work is to generate new fundamental science for computer
controlled complex physical systems, a broad class of cyber-physical systems
(CPS) and demonstrate this science in aerial vehicles and walking robots. The
new science enables autonomous planning and control in the presence of failures
and abrupt changes in system variables. A framework for the design of algorithms
that exploit awareness of the physical and design constraints to autonomously
self-adapt their motion plan and control actions will be generated. The approach
exploits elements from geometry, adaptive control, and hybrid control to advance
the knowledge on modeling, planning, and design of CPS with constraints, non-
smooth, and intertwined continuous and discrete dynamics. Unlike current
approaches, which separate the task associated with planning the motion from the
design of the algorithm used for control, the algorithms to emerge from this
project self-learn and self-adapt in real time to cope with unexpected changes
in motion and specification constraints so as to enable autonomous systems to
perform robustly and safely, and degrade gracefully under failure conditions.
Specifically, the new algorithms will learn and monitor the physical and design
constraints in real time and adapt both planner and controller by selecting the
appropriate constraints to enforce, with robustness and safety guarantees. The
capabilities of the new tools will be demonstrated on multi-legged robots in
harsh environments that make them prone to failures, and on aerial vehicles in
contested/adversarial environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed plan
contributes to Science of Cyber-Physical Systems by addressing modeling, motion
planning, and design of CPS with constraints, non-smooth, and intertwined
continuous and discrete dynamics. The merits of the proposal fall into four
broad categories: (i) a framework to mathematically formulate learning-based
planning and control for CPS with awareness of its constraints, (ii) novel
architectures that lead to robust adaptive constraint satisfaction, (iii) deep
understanding of roles and priorities of system constraints in CPS, and (iv)
tools and design techniques that permit engineers to deploy constraint aware
algorithms. The results of this work are broad in their application to all kinds
of CPS that require planning and control, in particular, autonomous systems in
transportation (air and ground). Synergistic collaborations with researchers at
Samsung, the start-up Ghost Robotics, and at the University of Bologna are
instrumental in disseminating the application of our results to industry and
academia. A synergistic outreach program at UCSC and the University of Michigan
impacts high school students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.