* 2038512
* Collaborative Research: Mechanics of Structural Toughening in Sutured Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Lewis Cox, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2024
* USD 351,846.00

This grant will investigate the mechanics of how suture geometry influences
composite performance. Biological armors and carapaces employ suture joints,
which are wavy, compliant interlayers that connect rigid material domains, and
these sutures can manifest at length scales ranging from a few nanometers to
millimeters in size. It is generally assumed that suture joints amplify the
strength and toughness of biological composites in the presence of complex
loading conditions, but the underlying mechanisms are not understood. Recent
advancements in processing and characterization of material structure at
requisite length scales will enable this project to provide the first systematic
experimental investigation and theoretical modeling of suture mechanics. This
new knowledge could provide the basis for a new additive manufacturing paradigm
for printing polymer composites with improved performance. Education and
outreach programs will be developed to engage kindergarten to graduate students,
exposing them to engaging concepts in mechanics and materials science.
Activities include course development, undergraduate student research, outreach
lessons, and a Rocky Mountain Mechanics Symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goal of the project is to establish structure-property relationships
between suture geometry and three key stages of composite failure: crack
nucleation, crack trapping, and mechanical interlocking. This project will seek
answers to the questions such as: which structural suture parameters promote or
inhibit each of the three stages, and how can parameters be balanced to amplify
composite strength and toughness, and increase service life? More specifically,
the research objectives of this project include: (i) understanding single-suture
mechanics in thin films; (ii) understanding suture-suture interactions in thin
films, (iii) establishing a two-wavelength additive manufacturing platform to
extrapolate knowledge from thin films to 3D architectures where performance in
the presence of bending, torsion, and compressive loadings can be studied. In
pursuit of these objectives, two-stage reactive polymers will be employed to
fabricate composites comprised of sutures with varying wavelength, amplitude,
line width, and interlocking angles; atomic force microscopy will be used in
fast force mapping mode to characterize variations in suture properties with
nanometer resolution; finite element modeling will be leveraged to relate suture
geometry to bulk composite performance. Results will offer new insights on
structural toughening mechanisms and fracture behavior in hierarchical
composites, and will lead to a single-resin, two-wavelength 3D composite
printing methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.