* 2038706
* Collaborative Research: CPS: TTP Option: Medium:  i-HEAR: immersive Human-on-the-loop Environmental Adaptation for stress Reduction
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jin Wen, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,988.00

There is no question that indoor environments are often uncomfortable or
unhealthy for occupants. This is an even more critical issue in healthcare
facilities, where patients may experience the stressful effects of poor thermal,
luminous, and acoustic environments more acutely. With complementary expertise
from engineering and psychology, the proposed research is focused on creating a
human-on-the-loop, responsive indoor environmental system with the potential to
offer better quality of care in hospitals. The outputs of this project will have
profound societal impacts on the wellbeing of both healthy individuals and on
recovering sick individuals. Research outcomes will enable real time human-built
environment interaction to minimize stress and optimize performance in any built
environment, and ultimately lead towards economic benefits achieved through
wellness and higher productivity. Improved indoor environmental quality in
hospital settings will improve patient healing, which is an important societal
benefit. Similar strategies can be used for educational facilities, and office
buildings. This research encourages Broadening Participation through inclusion
of individuals from underrepresented groups (female and Latinx Co-PIs), female
and minority students, and a minority serving lead institution from an EPSCoR
state. Results will be disseminated broadly through scientific publications and
seminars, and K-12 outreach, including STEM competitions, and summer
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Indoor environmental quality (IEQ) not only
impacts the physical health of patients, but also their psychological health.
Yet environmental controls for heating, cooling and ventilation, noise
attenuation, and lighting in hospitals are based on outdated models of how
hospitals function, who occupies these settings, and what emerging technologies
are available. As a result, many hospitals are just functionally adequate, often
likely to be too cold or hot, too loud, or too bright. In order to capitalize on
the healing potential of the hospital’s built environment, we propose a three-
year collaborative effort between the University of Hawaii at Manoa, Arizona
State University, and Drexel University to develop innovative biosensor
technologies, deep-learning health data analytics, and user-centric control
algorithms to connect these three domains in which the interdependencies of the
physiological, physical, and psychological will be investigated, quantified, and
addressed. The team is partnering with the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia
(CHOP) to validate the approach. Specific anticipated engineering/science
contributions include: 1) innovative cyber-physical system architecture using
heterogeneous biosensing and data analytics for real-time control; 2) new sensor
fusion based technology for non-invasive, precise physiological measures that
are surrogate stress indicators; 3) progressive development of innovative human
centric deep model linking physiological biometrics to psychological measures,
and connecting environmental factors to psychological measures facilitated with
physiological biometrics; 4) new stress responsive real-time supervisory control
strategies including optimal environmental adjustment, and 5) multi-level system
evaluation via virtual, laboratory, and field testing at a hospital environment
at CHOP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.