* 2038903
* CPS: Medium: Resource-Aware Hierarchical Runtime Verification for Mixed-Abstraction-Level Systems of Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Tichakorn Wongpiromsarn, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

Piloting an aircraft is popularly described as hours of abject boredom
punctuated by periods of abject terror. Similarly, a spacecraft in transit to a
distant target remains largely dormant but for periodic heightened activity
required for maintenance and staying on course. Aircraft and spacecraft are
complex systems of systems that must seamlessly work together, switching control
through a carefully orchestrated hierarchy representing different levels of
abstraction, e.g., exemplified by different timescales for events. Each on-board
system presents its own verification challenge; verifying that the symphony of
all of them playing together at the same time, in the face of potentially
unexpected environmental inputs, is particularly daunting. We can supplement
design-time verification with efficient runtime verification engines, but they
need to grow to be able to reason about the hierarchical nature of complex
systems-of-systems, where single requirements may need to encapsulate multiple
levels of abstraction. The final result must be able to execute in real time,
within system resource constraints. Existing tools for runtime verification
aren't capable of obeying constraints imposed by running them on real systems
(or in real missions), and don't have parameters to focus their computational
demands on the tasks most impactful on system safety. Achieving safe CPS depends
on growing the tools and algorithms of real-time verification to integrate
realistic safety checks into their control architectures and dynamic
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project adapts techniques from formal
methods, control theory, hardware-software integration, and software engineering
to design runtime monitors that inspect cyber-physical systems of systems
without interfering with their normal operation. The project designs, analyzes,
and implements fundamental runtime verification techniques by dealing with three
general and orthogonal problems: mixed-abstraction-level granularity in
specifications, resource-awareness to ensure non-intrusiveness of runtime
monitors, and augmenting monitors with model-prediction to enable on-deadline
mitigation triggering. Key innovations stem from this rigorous foundation in
establishing a new formal semantics for hierarchical, mixed-abstraction-level
specification, and evaluating formal specifications without interfering with the
system's normal operation, while maximizing utilization of resources within
realistic constraints of embedded CPS. The project generalizes the new theory
into specification patterns for hierarchical functional requirements and
synthesize predictive models to enable better, more automated creation of
runtime verification configurations to meet scalability demands of modern CPS.
Flight tests of small aircraft swarms are used to validate this
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.