* 2038207
* EAGER: The Bacterial Magnetosome may be a Potential Energy-Harvesting Pseudo-organelle for Magnetotrophy
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ratnasingham Sooryakumar, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 282,033.00

Magnetotactic bacteria (MTB) have evolved a unique suite of genetically-encoded
proteins that are used to synthesize magnetic crystals within an intracellular
compartment called the magnetosome. The conventional wisdom is that the
magnetosome functions as a sort of internal compass enabling these cells to
navigate to their ideal niche using the Earth's magnetic field as MTB swim
through bodies of water. While this is an elegant explanation for magnetotaxis,
the disparity between the high cost of synthesizing the magnetosome and
infrequent alignment of MTB in nature suggests another function. This proposal
will investigate the potentially transformative hypothesis that the magnetosome
is not used for navigation/orientation but rather it is part of a previously
unknown form of metabolism. If this hypothesis is validated then this would add
a radically different form of metabolism (magneto-trophy) to established
pathways to generate energy like autotrophy and heterotrophy. This new form of
metabolism would actually be widespread because MTB are found in just about any
environment with liquid water and these bacteria evolved billions of years ago.
Knowledge gained from this research will be of great interest to educators
across broad disciplinary bounds and promote the progress of science by helping
to address fundamental questions integral to the connection between life science
and physical science. These research activities will promote STEM training for
underrepresented minority students as well as high school teachers embedded in
the investigators' labs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments will be performed to
test whether the magnetosome plays a role in generating metabolic energy for
MTB. Custom-made growth chambers will be used to culture MTB under a range of
external magnetic-field strengths. Bacteria specimens will include wild-type
strains of MTB and mutants that lack the genetic repertoire to synthesize their
internal magnets. Magnetic measurements will be used to determine the presence
(or absence) of the magnetosome and characterize the field-strength of internal
magnetite in wild-type cells. Bacteria growth and activity will be monitored
through absorbance measurements, cell counts, swimming speed, and assays for
energy-carrying molecules. Omics and incorporation of isotopically-labeled
compounds for wild-type versus mutant strains will permit identification of gene
networks and products (proteins and metabolites) impacted by magnetic fields.
Integration of data from these distinct yet complementary experiments will allow
to carefully test the novel hypothesis that the magnetosome evolved to maximize
energy uptake and/or endure in organic-carbon depleted environments that MTB
often occupy in nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.