* 2038027
* EAGER: QAC-QSA: Hamiltonian Reconstruction for Ansatz Selection and Validation of the Variational Quantum Eigensolver
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Eun-Ah Kim, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Peter McMahon and Eun-Ah Kim of Cornell University are supported by an EAGER
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop new methods for using quantum computers to
solve quantum-simulation problems. The Condensed Matter and Materials program in
the Division of Materials Research also cofunds this award. Professors McMahon
and Kim are collaborating to develop computational methods to check that a
quantum computer has computed the correct answer to a quantum chemistry or
physics simulation problem. A challenge with quantum computers is that they are
able to do computations that classical computers cannot, and so it is necessary
to develop new methods to determine if the answer produced by a quantum computer
is valid or not because one cannot simply check the answer against what a
classical computer can produce. The methods being developed by McMahon and Kim,
and their respective groups, both allow the answer to be checked, and, if the
answer is incorrect, give information on how to improve the algorithm being run
on the quantum computer. This work has immediate broader impacts in the quantum-
computing industry in the United States, where there is substantial effort
underway to use quantum computers to solve both chemistry and physics simulation
problems, but for which verification methods are needed. The development and
testing of methods being conducted in this work will be transferred to industry
practice through the open sharing of code and results. Graduate students working
on this research will develop transferable skills that will help them gain
employment in quantum information sciences careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
longstanding challenge in quantum-condensed-matter research is the development
of methods to find or approximate the ground states of frustrated quantum spin
systems. McMahon and Kim are adapting previously developed Hamiltonian-
reconstruction methods so that it is possible to infer, from measurements of the
quantum states produced in a quantum computer by the Variational Quantum
Eigensolver (VQE) algorithm, the Hamiltonian that is most likely to have given
rise to the VQE state. In order to assess what classes of states (i.e., VQE
ansaetze) are appropriate for a particular problem, it is necessary to be able
to verify that low-energy states in that class are consistent with the
Hamiltonian one is trying to find the ground state of. It is for this purpose
that McMahon and Kim are using the Hamiltonian-reconstruction method with VQE.
McMahon and Kim are applying the method with an example use case of solving a
quantum spin model that has so far resisted all classical methods, and that is
defined on a 2D square lattice, making it amenable to execution on many near-
term quantum computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.