* 2038005
* EAGER: QAC-QSA: A HYBRID QUANTUM-CLASSICAL PATH-INTEGRAL METHOD FOR CHEMICAL DYNAMICS
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Nandini Ananth, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Nandini Ananth and Peter McMahon of Cornell University are supported by an EAGER
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop new methods for using quantum computers to
solve dynamics in quantum-simulation problems. Computer simulations that fully
solve the fundamental quantum mechanical equations that describe the way
electrons, atoms, and molecules interact and move in time hold the key to
predicting and characterizing chemical reactions. It has long been appreciated
that this task requires quantum computers which, unlike classical computers,
can, in principle, solve the most complex of quantum mechanical equations. With
the advent of near-term (first generation) quantum computers, substantial effort
is underway to develop new algorithms to solve chemical problems on these
devices. While there has been some success in methods to characterize the static
energies of molecular systems, dynamic algorithms capable of being run on
current hardware are lacking. Ananth and McMahon are developing a hybrid
algorithm that combines both classical and quantum computers to perform quantum
dynamics simulations, where the quantum computer need only run short programs
(circuits) that are suitable for execution on near-term machines. This research
has immediate broader impacts in the quantum-computing industry in the United
States and may open the door to an array of new applications and scientific
research. The development and testing of methods from this project will be
transferred to industry practice through the open sharing of code and results.
Students trained in this research will join the next generation workforce in
quantum information systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These hybrid quantum-
classical scheme may enable, for the first time, quantum dynamic simulations on
a quantum computer, moving beyond the current algorithms that are focused on
primarily static properties like spectra. Conventional wisdom is that dynamics
beyond trivially short timescales will require fault-tolerant quantum computers
because standard long-time dynamics simulations require the sequential
computation of a large number of short-time propagation steps leading to
significant error accumulation. Ananth and McMahon are developing a hybrid
quantum-classical algorithm for long-time dynamic simulations that overcomes
this limitation. Specifically, they are using the path-integral framework to
represent a longtime dynamics simulation as a series of independent short-time
propagation steps that can be performed using near-term quantum computers. The
hybrid nature of the algorithm arises from combining efficient classical Monte
Carlo methods to sample important real-time paths in configuration space
weighted by quantum transition probabilities. This research may demonstrate the
feasibility of condensed phase quantum dynamic simulations and enable finite
temperature simulations of quantum systems on near-term quantum computers. This
effort may significantly expand the range of chemical problems that can be
studied to include reaction rate calculations and characterization of mechanisms
and non-linear spectra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.