* 2038441
* EAGER: Project TPV: An open-source platform for modeling and design of thermophotovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Andrej Lenert, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 07/31/2021
* USD 78,000.00

Thermophotovoltaics (TPVs) have emerged as a promising heat engine for a wide
range of applications because they can respond quickly and efficiently to remote
and sudden electricity demands. High-efficiency TPVs could facilitate the growth
of renewable sources such as solar and wind through the development of thermal-
energy electrical storage (TEES) and distributed combined heat and power (CHP).
As an alternative to batteries, TEES is one of the most affordable approaches
for grid-scale storage of electricity. Distributed CHP, on the other hand, is a
promising alternative to centralized power plants that waste approximately two-
thirds of primary energy and offer limited dispatchability. Recent progress in
optical and photovoltaic materials have advanced TPVs toward practical
implementation. However, further progress requires a more complete understanding
of which aspects of current TPV designs are favorable and where opportunities
for improvements remain. This is challenging for TPVs because of the broad
application space, wide range of operating conditions, and a lack of available
modeling tools that facilitate design. Addressing these barriers through the
development of an open-access platform is the goal of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project TPV will facilitate an Explore-Design-Report
closed-loop process. Users can interact with the platform to Explore leading
approaches which have been identified by comparing each conversion step to its
respective, experiment-specific thermodynamic limit. Meaningful comparisons will
allow researchers to learn which aspects of current TPVs are favorable and to
translate improvements from one material system to another, accelerating
progress in the field. The Design module will let users predict the performance
of existing and hypothetical architectures using a TPV quasi-one-dimensional
simulation tool (TPV-Q1D). TPV-Q1D will advance fundamental understanding of
energy loss mechanisms in TPV cells and bridge the existing gap in open-access
tools by accounting for variable emitter parameters, dopant-mediated parasitic
absorption, spatially dependent photoexcitation and recombination, and
nanostructured layers. The Report module will allow users to upload the results
of their experimental measurements, including dark and illuminated current-
voltage characteristics and spectral properties of emitters and cells. Upon
verification by the project team, these data will become available in the
Explore module, closing the design loop. To engage the broader community, guided
learning activities will show users how to interact with Project TPV to
understand fundamental energy conversion steps and design principles that have
led to major improvements over the years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.