* 2038309
* Future Ready Engineering Leaders
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Marianna Savoca, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 05/31/2024
* USD 349,601.00

This project will prepare female leaders for the engineering workforce. Graduate
students will acquire the skills demanded by engineering employers, while
developing their self-confidence to overcome obstacles. As universities are not
naturally structured to marshal disparate resources scattered across departments
to maximize support, this project will cross organizational boundaries and cut
through silos to create a multi-divisional and multi-organizational ecosystem of
support for students. The short term and long-term impact of the programmatic
interventions and mentoring components on women’s engineering identity and
efficacy, career decision making and persistence in engineering will be studied.
The project is aligned to the NSF BPE Program as it focuses on enhancing the
diversity and inclusion of underrepresented populations in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will transform graduate education
by marshaling resources from both academic and student affairs’ entities while
engaging industry partners, and providing holistic support for students’
academic, social, and career success. Female graduate students in engineering
will acquire the career competencies employers want through curricular and
practical experiences monitored by peer and industry mentors, that will connect
students’ accomplishments to the job market. Industry-endorsed micro-credentials
will be awarded to recognize, and display knowledge, skills, and abilities
acquired. The research plan will synthesize elements of psychosocial models of
academic and social engagement and will investigate, through a longitudinal,
repeated measures design, the underlying psychosocial mechanisms that promote
(or undermine) academic and career development and engagement as well as social
engagement among the participants. This project will create a powerful ecosystem
and will demonstrate strong collaborations between different campus offices to
leverage industry connections and knowledge to maximize support for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.