* 2038210
* EAGER: Live Cell Imaging using Low Dose 4DSTEM
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Jamie Warner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Modern biological research is driven by a need to observe living cells and
structures at ever-finer levels of detail. Most of the live-cell cell imaging
work relies on visible or fluorescent light imaging because higher resolutions
methods, like transmission electron microscopy (TEM) use higher energies and
sample preparation methods that are lethal to cells. The current limitation of
beam induced damage to live cells is thus preventing this field from moving to
the next phase of nanoscale live biological imaging. Researcher supported by
this award will overcome this challenge by developing new, non-lethal TEM
imaging methods to enable live cell imaging in unparalleled detail. Knowledge
gained form these studies will be integrated into the ‘Practical Electron
Microscopy’ course at UT Austin. In addition, undergraduate research projects
will be offered at UT Austin as part of the EUREKA program and participation
from underrepresented groups will be actively encouraged. The studies will also
be featured at public science activities like the annual ‘Girl Day’ at UT
Austin, where over 8,000 elementary and middle school students visit UT Austin
and have hands-on experience with science and engineering; and at the annual
‘Black Excellence in STEM’ event at UT Austin during Black History Month. The
researchers will also participate in the annual ‘Explore UT’, the open day where
thousands of out-of-town residents visit campus to participate in high-touch,
interactive, hands-on programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale imaging of live
cells and biological processes will be undertaken using advanced low-dose 4D
scanning transmission electron microscopy (4D-STEM). High contrast imaging to
observe live cells with non-lethal electron doses will be done using a liquid
cell in situ holder and highly sensitive ultrafast pixelated direct electron
detectors. Studies will start with the observation of cell membranes interacting
with nanoscale objects such as exosomes and virus to provide new dynamical
insights of live cells in various biological processes. Observing live cells
with nanoscale resolution opens a new field of real time dynamics in biology at
length scales that are current inaccessible. The imaging methods, informatics
and experimental procedures developed through this award will be used in studies
for a wide range of biological systems, including intercellular communication,
virus:cell membrane interactions, bacteria replication and cell motility.
Results from the studies will be published in peer-reviewed journals, presented
at scientific meetings, and through public outreach events. This award is
jointly supported by the Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.