* 2038960
* CPS: Medium: GOALI: Design Automation for Automotive Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* James Anderson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,199,995.00

This project aims to transform the software development process in modern cars,
which are witnessing significant innovation with many new autonomous functions
being introduced, culminating in a fully autonomous vehicle. Most of these new
features are indeed implemented in software, at the heart of which lies several
control algorithms. Such control algorithms operate in a feedback loop,
involving sensing the state of the plant or the system to be controlled,
computing a control input, and actuating the plant in order to enforce a desired
behavior on it. Examples of this range from brake and engine control, to cruise
control, automated parking, and to fully autonomous driving. Current development
flows start with mathematically designing a controller, followed by implementing
it in software on the embedded systems existing in a car. This flow has worked
well in the past, where automotive embedded systems were simple – with few
processors, communication buses, and simple sensors. The control algorithms were
simple as well, and important functions were largely implemented by mechanical
subsystems. But modern cars have over 100 processors connected by several miles
of cables, and multiple sensors like cameras, radars and lidars, whose data
needs complex processing before it can be used by a controller. Further, the
control algorithms themselves are also more complex since they need to implement
new autonomous features that did not exist before. As a result, both
computation, communication, and memory accesses in such a complex
hardware/software system can now be organized in many different ways, with each
being associated with different tradeoffs in accuracy, timing, and resource
requirements. These in turn have considerable impact on control performance and
how the control strategy needs to be designed. As a result, the clear separation
between designing the controller, followed by implementing it in software in the
car, no longer works well. This project aims to develop both the theoretical
foundations and the tool support to adapt this design flow to emerging
automotive control strategies and embedded systems. This will not only result in
more cost-effective design of future cars, but will also help with certifying
the implemented controllers, thereby leading to safer autonomous cars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the goal is to automate the synthesis and
implementation of control algorithms on distributed embedded architectures
consisting of different types of multicore processors, GPUs, FPGA-based
accelerators, different communication buses, gateways, and sensors associated
with compute-intensive processing. Starting with specifications of plants,
control objectives, controller templates, and a partially-specified
implementation architecture, this project seeks to synthesize both controller
and implementation architecture parameters that meet all control objectives and
resource constraints. Towards this, a variety of techniques from switched
control, interface compatibility checking, and scheduling of multi-mode systems
– that bring together control theory, real-time systems, program analysis, and
mathematical optimization, will be used. In collaboration with General Motors,
this project will build a tool chain that integrates controller design tools
like Matlab/Simulink with standard embedded systems design and configuration
tools. This project will demonstrate the benefits of this new design flow and
tool support by addressing a set of challenge problems from General
Motors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.