* 2038403
* CPS: Medium: Smart Tracking Systems for Safe and Smooth Interactions Between Scooters and Road Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Ju Sun, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

This Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) grant will study smart tracking systems on
scooters for ensuring safe and smooth interaction with other vehicles and
pedestrians on the road. The smart system consists of inexpensive sensors,
active sensing based estimation algorithms, and deep learning based robust image
processing to enable trajectory tracking of all nearby vehicles on the road. If
the danger of a scooter-vehicle collision is detected, an audio-visual alert is
automatically provided to the car driver to make them aware of the presence of
the scooter. The system also monitors the scooter rider’s behavior, provides
real-time feedback to improve rider compliance with traffic signals and sidewalk
rules, and documents the information as a part of the rider’s safety record. The
key attractive features of the system are that it is inexpensive (&lt; $500), is
immediately useful on today’s roads without requiring the vehicles on the road
to be equipped with additional technology, and is potentially commercializable.
The project contributes to the society by improving safety of micro-
transportation systems, and broadens participation in computing via
undergraduate research activities and promoting significant cross-disciplinary
collaboration between faculty in engineering, computer science and human
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct research to develop two
novel vehicle tracking technologies. The two technologies, one based on use of a
low-cost single-beam laser sensor and another based on a low-cost low-density
Lidar sensor, can have applications in protecting vulnerable transportation
users such as bicyclists, motorcyclists, scooter riders, users in developing
countries and also in other cyber-physical systems such as indoor robots. The
computer vision system will handle rain, snow and low lighting which pose a
major challenge by corrupting normal image data. New robust deep-learning-based
recognition techniques will be developed that can effectively deal with
corrupted image data sets. This will be achieved by novel nonlinear modeling of
the low-complexity structures in both the clean data and in the image corruption
using deep learning and allowing for mixed corruption types, varying severity
and possible corruptions in the training data itself. To ensure human-in-the-
loop robustness, the project utilizes human subject studies to evaluate the
effectiveness of a variety of audio and visual mechanisms for alerting the
motorist and the scooter rider, including innovations such as providing visual
cues of biological motion on the scooter to improve localization of the scooter
by motorists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.