* 2038493
* CPS:Medium: Safe Learning-Enabled Cyberphysical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Octavia Camps, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 894,749.00

In spite of tremendous advances in machine learning, the goal of designing truly
autonomous cyber-physical systems (CPS), capable of learning from and
interacting with the environment to achieve complex specifications remains
elusive. This research seeks to address this apparent paradox (advances in
machine learning/relatively low levels of autonomy) by developing a new class of
verifiable safe learning- enabled CPS, capable of adapting to previously unseen
dynamic scenarios where the data is generated, and decisions must be made, as
the system operates. It addresses the CPS challenges posed by the data
revolution and highly dynamic systems by creating a new framework at the
confluence of dynamical systems, machine learning and viability theory,
specifically tailored to learning and safely acting in uncertain, data deluged
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is organized around three tightly
interacting thrusts -- R1: Joint learning of sparse latent features and
manifolds, R2: Real-time inference in dynamic scenarios; and R3: Verifiable
decision-making algorithms -- that exploit the underlying sparse structure
induced by the dynamics of the CPS to obtain fast solutions to problems that
challenge current techniques. A key feature of the proposed framework is its
ability to take advantage of the tight coupling between thrusts to obtain
tractable problems. Examples are low-complexity real-time inference methods that
leverage parsimonious structures unveiled during learning, and control
strategies that verify closed-loop properties by using these structures to
recast the problem into a hybrid system analysis
form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education is proactively integrated into this
project. At the pre-college level, summer STEM programs for urban high school
students will be developed. Participants will explore CPS concepts and complete
a final project endowing autonomous vehicles with limited learning capabilities.
At the undergraduate level, ideas put forth in this proposal will be infused
through the curriculum. The hallmark of the educational program will be its
integration through the central metaphor of learning-enabled CPS. At the
graduate level, this integrative theme across the disciplines represented by the
Co-PIs will be continued, including teaching of a course that includes
experiential assignments. In addition, this project will provide opportunities
and support for graduate students to engage as members of an interdisciplinary
team. The strategy to broaden participation is two pronged: on one hand, it will
leverage, in addition to the summer STEM programs for urban youth, NUPRIME
(NEU's Program in Multicultural Engineering). On the other hand, it will take
advantage of the co-PIs leadership roles in their respective societies to
organize events targeting high schoolers and underrepresented groups at
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.