* 2038872
* Machine Learning and Multi-omics Network Approaches to Predict Protein Functions in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Karolina Mukhtar, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,027,270.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) is the simulation of intelligence using advanced
computer algorithms on diverse large-scale datasets including finance,
healthcare, consumer and market science, cybersecurity, and transportation.
Recently, AI has been emerging as a prominent tool for biological data analyses
including assisting with medical diagnostics as well as the detection of
disease-related mutations in genetics and genomics. We aim to employ AI to
improve and refine gene functional annotations as well as predict functions for
previously unclassified genes in Arabidopsis, a model plant system. Given that
biological systems including plant-pathogen interactions are exceedingly complex
and genes to phenotype relationships require an understanding of diverse layers
of biological information, we will utilize a deep learning- and network-based
framework that can integrate multiple heterogeneous datasets to obtain more
accurate inferences of gene functions. We will validate our computational
findings using experimental approaches. Specifically, we will focus on a set of
genes that are related to “Sulfur”, which is considered “the 4th major
phytonutrient” using genetics and plant pathology approaches. We expect a
variety of deliverables to a wide range of users including researchers both
nationally and internationally, educators in high schools, systems biology and
bioinformatics specialists, and the plant research community in general. This
will provide biological insights, gene prioritization, and testable hypotheses
to plant researchers. Moreover, we will discern the molecular mechanisms of
newly identified genes in plant defense. This project will also significantly
contribute towards local education and outreach priorities through a minority-
oriented program, PlantGIFT (Plant Genomics Internship For Teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network science and deep learning,
a subtype of machine learning enable predictive modeling from large and multi-
dimensional datasets and elucidate the complex relationships among various
layers of –omics to predict the function(s) of the proteins. We aim to apply a
hybrid method encompassing network biology and deep learning computational
approach to predict gene functions for the unclassified genes as well as refine
the Gene Ontology for the inadequately annotated genes. Specifically, we will
generate a suite of diverse co-expression networks using transcriptome studies
derived from a wide spectrum of biotic and abiotic stress treatments including
plant-pathogen interactions. These co-expression networks will be integrated to
transcription factor-targets and protein-protein interaction networks. Network
topological features will be extracted from the above-described diverse –omics
networks and integrated into the predicted function(s) for each node. Moreover,
we will predict Arabidopsis genome-wide gene functions using a deep neural
networks-based integrative framework that can efficiently perform network
embedding on heterogeneous networks. The precision of these computationally
derived gene function predictions will be independently validated through
genetics- and pathology-based experimental assays. In particular, we will focus
on a GO term “sulfur” and investigate the biological functions of 60 genes and a
pair of regulatory transcription factors in biotic and abiotic stresses
including plant defense. We will also establish PlantGIFT (Plant Genomics
Internship For Teachers) to integrate research, education, and outreach for
minority participation in genomics and plant sciences. In summary, this project
will generate resources that will benefit the plant research community and local
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.