* 2038019
* EAGER: QAC-QSA: Can classical machine learning beat variational quantum algorithms at their own game?
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Francesco Evangelista, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 292,824.00

Professor Francesco Evangelista of Emory University is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computation Program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop algorithms that combine machine learning and quantum
computing. Quantum computers carry out computations using the principles of
quantum mechanics and these quantum computers may have an enormous advantage
over classical computers in many tasks. A particularly promising application of
quantum computers is the simulation of electrons and nuclei: the elementary
constituents of atoms, molecules, and materials. Many open questions regarding
the properties and the ways molecules react cannot be answered even using the
fastest supercomputers. Quantum computers can potentially address even the most
challenging chemistry problems. Realizing this potential requires the
development of practical quantum algorithms for molecular simulations. Professor
Evangelista develops methods that combine classical machine learning with
quantum algorithms to create more efficient ways to perform molecular
simulations. This project's broader impacts include organizing a winter school
to train a broad and diverse generation of researchers and educators in quantum
computing. The project also supports the development of open-source computer
codes that implement these new algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
explores adaptive versions of the variational quantum eigensolver method. These
approaches have been demonstrated to produce very compact quantum circuits.
While successful in this regard, the current approaches are impractical in
applications based on near-term quantum computers due to the high number of
measurements they require. A new strategy is pursued based on machine learning
to avoid the high measurement cost of current adaptive variational quantum
algorithms. The selection of a compact quantum circuit for variational quantum
algorithms is formulated as a game in which the goal is to find the best
variational solution with fewer quantum gates. More fundamentally, this project
explores ways to generate machine-learned quantum circuits optimal for a
specific instance of a computational problem. Therefore, it could lead to an
approach broadly applicable to other problems in quantum information science,
where compact quantum circuits are sought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.