* 2038502
* I-Corps: Self-powered, Low-Cost Smart Traffic Detection and Warning System
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Sara Ahmed, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a traffic monitoring system that may have a great economic impact
by saving lives at intersections. The state and municipalities transportation
engineers will benefit from integrating the sensing technology with the data
collected in order to improve intersection design and adjust signage and
approaching speeds. The technology also will provide real-time data that may be
used in post-event inspection and traffic analysis. The impact of this system
may benefit rural communities by reducing crashes and fatalities as a result of
improved driver awareness of active signage. In addition, the energy sector may
benefit since renewable energy will be used to activate these low cost sensors
allowing them to function independent of the utility grid. The system may impact
other areas/applications, such as improving pedestrian traffic as well as the
safety of railroad intersections. The goal is to identify potential customers,
including government agencies such as Department of Transportation engineers,
city public works directors, consultants, and industries to make the system
adaptable across a variety of industries and use
cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a self-powered and low-cost active traffic monitoring system to be used at
unsignalized intersections to warn vehicles of traffic control devices. This
system uses one multi-pixel passive infrared sensing detection module with a
horizontal viewing angle to detect passing vehicles and estimate the traffic
parameters of a two-lane, two-way roadway, and then provide active signage to
alert the motorist of potential dangers. The detection module is designed to be
an off-pavement system that is quickly and easily installed on pre-existing
infrastructure without impeding traffic. The sensor consumes low power, has a
large field of view, and is able to collect a wide range of data while
protecting the privacy of the motorist. Multiple novel sets of algorithms have
been developed to enable this type of sensor to detect traffic, calculate
velocity, determine the classification of passing vehicles by their thermal
signatures, and send a warning transmission. The warning module activates the
traffic control device for a dynamic period of time that is determined using the
calculated velocity of the vehicle. The goal of this project is to achieve a
better understanding of the customer needs and requirements to achieve
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.