* 2038922
* CPS: Medium: Secure Constrained Machine Learning for Critical Infrastructure CPS
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Kevin Tomsovic, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,215,600.00

Machine learning has found many successes in modern commercial application
domains like computer vision, speech analysis, and natural language processing.
However, its broader use in critical infrastructure cyber-physical systems (CI-
CPS), such as, energy, water, transportation, and oil and natural gas systems,
has been far less than ideal. This is mainly due to concerns with the
reliability of existing machine learning techniques and the lack of
explainability of the learned models. Moreover, CI-CPS often borrow techniques
directly from commercial applications that fail to consider physical and
topological constraints inherent in these systems. Security of machine learning
has been extensively studied recently, revealing vulnerabilities of machine
learning models and the effectiveness in deviating learning outcomes by
polluting the model input. This is especially devastating in CI-CPS where
learning is used for safety-critical operations and such deviation can cause
irreversible harm to people and physical assets. Secure machine learning that
models unique CI-CPS constraints is thus a much needed research area and is the
focus of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal intersects three
fields - security, machine learning, and CI-CPS - to enhance the safety and
resiliency of essential infrastructures in modern society. We use two CI-CPS,
power systems and transportation systems, as target application domains to
illustrate the general applicability of the proposed approach. The proposed work
is carried out by four research tasks. First, the project will devise a suitable
threat model under which adversarial machine learning attacks, ConAML, are
developed subject to CI-CPS constraints. Second, the project will propose a
mitigation method for ConAML attacks by introducing random input padding in both
training and inference. Third, the project will propose a new “data-
representation-model-task” association framework that realizes secure
constrained machine learning from ground up, by designing a variation Dirichlet-
network that bridges the input data with machine learning models in the
representation space instead of the raw data space. Lastly, the project team
will apply the proposed secure constrained machine learning to electric load
forecasting and traffic forecasting, implement these applications in testbeds,
and evaluate their security and performance under ConAML attacks. The proposed
research seeks to improve the security, reliability and resiliency of CI-CPS. It
contributes to the knowledge base of secure machine learning for CI-CPS, and
applies to all safety-critical large interconnected CPS. The multi-disciplinary
nature of the proposed work lends itself to cross-disciplinary education and
training of future scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.