* 2038722
* Advanced Roll-to-Roll Manufacturing of High-Performance Printed Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Satish Kumar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 11/30/2023
* USD 674,184.00

This grant addresses the need for improved fundamental understanding of the
manufacturing of flexible printed electronics. Flexible printed electronics has
tremendous potential for a spectrum of exciting products in fields spanning
health care, robotics, security and distributed sensing. However, the growth in
the field has been limited by the lack of roll-to-roll manufacturing processes
that are efficient, reliable and produce high-performance electronic circuits.
This grant carries out research on the manufacturing fundamentals needed by the
field overall and for a specific roll-to-roll additive manufacturing platform
called Self-Aligned Capillarity-Assisted Lithography for Electronics, or SCALE.
SCALE combines two industrially established technologies, imprint lithography
and inkjet printing, to achieve a high-throughput manufacturing platform for
printed electronic devices with smaller feature sizes and layer-to-layer
alignment of electronic materials needed for high-performance flexible
electronic circuits. The research will contribute fundamental knowledge in
electronics, fluid mechanics, materials development and manufacturing processes,
impacting not only the printed electronics research community and industry, but
also multiple fields and industrial sectors, such as microfluidics, conformal
optics, soft robotics, and distributed sensing. The research team brings
together expertise in electronic materials and devices, manufacturing, fluid
mechanics and modeling. The research involves graduate students as well as K-12
students and industry through outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports fundamental research
to overcome formidable challenges facing the flexible printed electronics field,
including integration of multiple materials, creation of streamlined
manufacturing processes, and achievement of the high-performance requirements of
modern electronics. Using the SCALE platform, the team will conduct research to
understand and predict the capillary flow and solidification of electronic inks,
develop new electronic device designs, improve roll-to-roll manufacturing
processes, and explore the connections between processing, materials and
mechanical performance of flexible electronic devices. One important goal is the
fabrication of devices capable of high-frequency operation, which demands
precise control of the size, distribution and thickness of electronic materials.
The research includes both computational modeling of ink flow and material
distribution as well as innovative designs and experiments that elucidate the
process fundamentals and the performance of the resulting devices and
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.