* 2038761
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Scalable Intelligent Backscatter-Based RF Sensor Network for Self-Diagnosis of Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Branko Glisic, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 399,966.00

This Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) grant will advance structural health
monitoring of concrete structures by relying on data acquired by a novel sensing
technology with unprecedented scalability and spatial resolution. Modern society
depends critically on sound and steadfast functioning of a variety of
engineering structures and infrastructures, such as bridges, buildings,
pipelines, geotechnical structures, aircrafts, wind turbines, and industrial
facilities. Due to aging, massive urbanization, and climate change, there is a
growing need for accurate and reliable assessment of the health condition,
performance, and operation of these structures in order to ensure their
continuous functioning and safe use. The researched technology enables pervasive
and scalable sensing of concrete structures with high resolution by transforming
concrete into a smart self-sensing material, thereby enabling reliable long-term
structural health monitoring. This in turn contributes to the nation’s
sustainability and resilience and to advancing the nation’s prosperity, welfare,
and security. The project advances multiple core research areas in structural
health monitoring including CPS system architectures using embedded devices,
multi-parameter sensing and networking based on radio frequency sensors, and
machine learning for accurate and reliable data analytics. The research outcomes
are highly translational to various other CPS domains. The project also
contributes to secondary education and outreach activities in multiple ways as
well as to undergraduate and graduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim
of this project is to create a novel sensing system comprised of radio frequency
sensors that are pervasively embedded in large volumes of concrete structures
and that sense their localities using radio frequency properties. The objective
is the assessment of key parameters that reflect the behavior of the monitored
structure under operational conditions, such as deformation, temperature, and
humidity, as well as detection and characterization of damages. The project has
the following intellectual contributions: 1) Passive radio frequency-based
sensing that operates over a wide range of frequencies; architectures of smart
exciters and networked radio frequency sensors that communicate among themselves
via backscatter modulation; solar-powered radio frequency exciter platform that
powers the sensors. 2) Energy-based sensing and network optimization of the
radio frequency sensor network in terms of its monitoring ability and network
connectivity given the constraints on the available harvested power at the
exciters. 3) Machine learning methods for function estimation based on the
principle of ensemble modeling with Gaussian processes and applied to self-
localization and to inference of three-dimensional distributions of material
parameters within large volumes of concrete
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.