* 2038255
* 2021 Gordon Research Conference and Seminar on Geochronology: Evolution of the Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Blair Schoene, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2023
* USD 38,390.00

The second Geochronology Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Seminar (GRS) will
pull in a diverse group of scientists who are at different career stages to
report on cross disciplinary research and develop new collaborations. This
recurring meeting focuses on new approaches to measuring geologic time and their
application to a variety of problems related to the evolution of the Earth and
Solar System. This award will support the participation of 29 early career
scientists to attend both the 2021 GRC and GRS, where they will come together
with a diverse set of scientists to share cutting-edge research and build
bridges between geochronologists and specialists on other disciplines of Earth
and Planetary science. The GRS is a two-day workshop organized by and focused on
graduate students and postdocs, which builds on the informal and collaborative
atmosphere to share science and build professional and mentoring
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2021 Geochronology GRC and GRS will be held
in Mount Snow, Vermont, and will have a focus on “the evolution of the
lithosphere.” Specific topics include the birth of the continents, plate
tectonics through time, landscape evolution, volcanic and plutonic magmatism,
building mantle lithosphere, and developing models for mountain belts and
subduction zones. Speakers and other participants will have the opportunity to
discuss developments in geochronology as applied to these and other topics, and
identify opportunities for future research in an informal and immersive setting.
Support for early career participants from this NSF award will be selected to
receive registration and travel support so that they can attend the GRC and GRS.
Announcement of the application procedure for this support will be broadcast as
widely as possible through established mailing lists and websites. The program
organizers have planned mentoring events, including a GRC sponsored women in
science "power hour". This atmosphere is an ideal opportunity for participants
at all career stages to build a network of collaborators and mentors from across
various fields for future research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is supported by
both the Petrology &amp; Geochemistry and Tectonics
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.