* 2038632
* Explaining Civilian Support for Political and Criminal Armed Groups
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Erica De Bruin, Hamilton College
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 218,197.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What determines whether and how civilians
support the armed groups that aim to govern their communities? Scholars have
found that one of the most important determinants of civilian collaboration is
the degree of control that an armed group has over a territory. Yet in many
communities, multiple armed groups, including rebel groups, state security
forces, drug trafficking organizations, and/or gangs compete for control. This
project investigates how civilians in areas of contested control choose which
groups, if any, to support. Doing so is important because civilian support can
help tip a community towards one group or another and thereby affect conflict
outcomes. We focus in particular on the role of exposure to violence,
connections to elites, and the public goods that armed groups provide in
determining civilian support. In drawing connections between individual- and
community-level characteristics that may influence civilian support, this
project helps address the disjuncture many scholars have identified between
master cleavages of civil wars (what they are "about") and violence on the
ground. In uniting the study of political and criminal armed groups, the project
also seeks to uncover common logics in civilian decision-making when facing
prototypically political actors versus those commonly considered criminal
actors. The findings will give scholars and policymakers new tools with which to
better predict (and prevent) civilian collaboration with armed groups, improve
counterinsurgency and anti-crime efforts, and facilitate the demobilization of
combatants in post-conflict settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will survey civilians in Colombia
about their attitudes and behavior towards political and criminal armed groups.
The country provides an ideal setting in which to answer our research questions:
in addition to its ongoing civil war, which features multiple rebel groups,
Colombia is also affected by high levels of organized criminal and gang
activity. Surveying civilians in violence-prone areas is complicated by safety
concerns, preference falsification, and the potential for non-random
participation. To mitigate these concerns, our surveys will employ indirect
methods of questioning, including list experiments to measure respondents'
behaviors and endorsement experiments to capture attitudes towards competing
groups. Although the project surveys civilians in a single country, most
conflicts today involve multiple armed actors with the capacity to control
territory and as a result we expect the results to generalize well beyond
Colombia.