* 2038325
* GOALI: Stochastic Optimization Framework for Energy-Smart Re/Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Pratik Parikh, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 11/30/2024
* USD 472,911.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award will
contribute to the national welfare by developing models to support the efficient
integration of manufacturing and remanufacturing production lines.
Remanufacturing is important to sustainable production by extending product life
and reducing the environmental impact of manufacturing. Uncertain customer
demand, along with highly variable product returns in both quantity and quality,
have proved challenging to manufacturers in planning to allocate production
capacity between new and returned products. The project, a collaboration between
University of Louisville, Northeastern University, and IBM Corporation, will
consider production scheduling and inventory levels, energy impact, uncertainty
in demand, returns quantity, and returns quality to produce a production plan
that is scalabile to industry-scale problems. The researched modeling approach
is expected to inform the way such hybrid systems are designed, operated, and
sustained, and will promote awareness of manufacturing-related e-waste
considerations. The project will benefit US manufacturing by enabling the
development of best practices for production-inventory management and
recommendations for energy consumption and minimization of the energy
footprint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a novel three-stage
stochastic optimization model that integrates tactical (production and energy)
and operational (inventory) decisions under a single integrated framework. The
third-stage operational decisions reflect three levels of uncertainty (demand,
returns quantity, and returns quality). The second-stage, NP hard server-to-bank
allocation problems (in the second stage) is addressed through a dual bin-
packing model approach. The overall solution approach employs a scenario-based
decomposition framework. A high-fidelity simulation model for the overall system
will allow benchmarking of real-world strategies against solutions generated by
the new approach. The industrial partner will pilot an implementation of the
most promising policy from the benchmarking exercise, which will enable
translation of the findings and fine-tuning of the approach. The project
contributes to the training of next generation engineers via computational tools
(e.g., optimization, virtual reality and simulation) and case studies to
complement in-class instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.