* 2038055
* Collaborative Research: Magnetic mapping of bio-inspired clusters of iron oxide nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Gunjan Agarwal, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 09/30/2024
* USD 489,404.00

Man-made iron oxide nanoparticles have widespread importance for labeling cells
and molecules both inside and outside the human body. Besides synthetic
particles, many organisms also generate naturally occurring iron oxide
nanoparticles, known as ferritin, to store and regulate iron within their
bodies. Whether man-made or natural, these iron oxide nanoparticles have a
magnetization that can be used as a tool for manipulation or sensing in
biological environments. However, nanoparticles often aggregate in complex bio-
environments, and the effect of aggregation on their collective magnetic
properties is not well understood. The overall objective of this work is to
explore the relationship between nanoparticle clustering and resultant magnetic
properties. Findings from this work can be potentially used to engineer
magnetism-based sensing tools for more accurately tracking iron nanoparticles in
biological systems. Data from this project can also advance other biomedical
applications of iron oxide particles, such as their uses in magnetic
hyperthermia for cancer therapy or as contrast agents for medical imaging.
Besides advancing the field of bio-magnetism and nano-biotechnology, this
research project will help train the next generation of scientists and engineers
by providing research experience to students in state-of-the-art techniques for
synthesis and characterization of nanoparticles, by enhancing infrastructure for
research and education through the development of new techniques for magnetic
characterization and by broadening participation of underrepresented groups in
science and engineering activities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Iron-oxide
nanoparticles have become crucial tools in biomedicine and bio-nanotechnology
due to their magnetic behavior. These include synthetic magnetite nanoparticles
(~5 to 10 nm in diameter), and naturally occurring ferrihydrite core (~ 5 to 8
nm) present in ferritin, the largest iron-storage protein in the human body.
Determining the spatial localization and quantification of these iron-oxide
nanoparticles in cells and tissues is critical for a number of applications in
health. Thus far our ability to characterize the spatial distribution and
quantity of iron oxide nanoparticles is limited to biochemical approaches like
histochemical staining, which are largely qualitative. Magnetically sensitive
detection offers an alternative, non-destructive, label free and quantitative
means for characterization of iron-oxide nanoparticles. However, in biological
systems, nanoparticles are often found in aggregates/clusters, which can impact
their local and global magnetic properties and complicate interpretation of
magnetic signals. The goal of this project is to understand how clustering of
bio-inspired iron-oxide nanoparticles affect their magnetic properties across
many length scales (nanometer to micrometer scale). Specifically, interactions
between individual particles, as well as between larger clusters of particles,
will be studied using a range of magnetically sensitive techniques. Biologically
derived clusters of particles as well as artificially engineered aggregates will
be used for the study. These include synthetic magnetite nanoparticles and
naturally occurring ferrihydrite cores present in ferritin. In some cases,
clusters will be nanofabricated using template guided assembly, so that
geometric parameters of clusters such as size, shape, and interparticle distance
can be varied systematically. Characterization of particle assemblies will be
performed using techniques such as analytical electron microscopy, magnetic
force microscopy, super-conducting quantum interference device magnetometry and
magnetic resonance imaging. Results from this study will be used to develop
advanced, magnetism-based metrology for localizing and quantifying aggregates of
iron oxide nanoparticles in biological environments. An understanding of the
effect of clustering on magnetic properties can enable quantitative histo-
magnetic detection schemes for mapping iron deposits in tissue sections. The
project activities will be accomplished by providing multidisciplinary and
inter-institutional research experiences for graduate and undergraduate students
and by establishing new research collaborations. The project will also include
outreach efforts to broaden participation, by developing and offering hands-on
workshops on engineering concepts to under-privileged middle school students at
a local school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.