* 2038457
* CRII: RI: Learning a Timely Semantic Resource from Social Media Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Wei Xu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2021
* USD 61,009.00

One key challenge in text mining and natural language processing research is
that a single meaning can be expressed in many different ways, i.e.,
paraphrases. There has been steady progress towards large paraphrase resources,
and a significant increase in its applications: from information retrieval,
information extraction, and natural language generation to IBM's Watson,
Google's Knowledge Graph, and many more. This research aims to create better
paraphrase acquisition techniques and larger scale semantic resources, which
could be of great use in various natural language processing tasks and social
media data analytics in social science, national security, and other related
fields. One example of potential applications is text simplification, which
automatically rephrases complex texts into simpler language for children or
people with reading disabilities.

The technical innovation of this study focuses on joint modeling of word- and
phrase-level alignments between sentence pairs to address the challenges of
extracting semantic knowledge from informal data sources (such as social media),
which exist in very large quantities rather than just formal sources, such as
newswire as per previous work. The model design extends multiple instance
learning via two methods, a graphical model and neural network, and can flexibly
permit the exploration of different assumptions and models the importance of
words or phrases. The modeling advancements can be generalized to other natural
language understanding tasks, which require analyzing sentences based on word-
level composition or word meaning in a given context, and natural language
generation tasks that benefit from learning what words and phrases to remove or
rephrase.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.