* 2038479
* I-Corps: Creating data sets that are distilled into collections of information that may be used to answer questions in real-time
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Anita Bell, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of low-cost, industry agnostic, artificial intelligence resources.
Presently, data analysts and data science teams face one primary problem: data
cleanliness. Data cleanliness is a measure of corrupt or inaccurate records from
a record set or table. To clean a database one must identify incomplete or
incorrect parts of the data and then replace, modify, or delete the bad data.
Machine learning models often perform well in lab conditions but fail in the
real world due to dirty data. Artificial intelligence solutions are inhibited in
real world applications due to too little signaling data amidst the noise. The
proposed technology solves the problems that face many data scientists who
dependent on the dirty data at hand. There is a demand for faster, better
decision making across virtually every industry. The goal is to strategically
solve the data cleanliness problem, with protectable intellectual property and
processes, for various industries after refining internal processes, user
interface, and value propositions for the initial technology target: financial
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of novel artificial intelligence resources to automate data
preparation, augmentation, and governance processes. These resources include
proprietary machine learning algorithms, unique data librarying processes,
dynamic training sets, next generation database technology, and intelligent
rules engines to reimagine the expensive, high-effort, and highly technical
space of data science. The novel approach of this project will automate over 60%
of a data scientistsâ€™ workload, reduce cost, minimize internal IT resource
demands, and increase information access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.