* 2038474
* RAPID: Monitoring hydrochemical effects of the 6.5 Monte Cristo Range Earthquake on groundwater systems in the Columbus Salt Marsh (central NV) and vicinity
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Michael Rosen, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 37,482.00

Earthquakes can have both immediate and long-term effects on wells and springs
fed by groundwater, including changes to water quality and flow rate. Chemical
properties, measured as water quality parameters, are influenced by where the
waters originate, and by how it interacts with rocks and minerals in the
aquifer. In the arid west, many rural communities depend on groundwater
exclusively, and it is important to understand potential threats to groundwater
quality and spring flow that earthquakes may pose. In Nevada, a 6.5 magnitude
earthquake occurred on May 15th, 2020 near Tonopah, a rural part of state known
to have active faults with recurrent earthquakes. This event is the largest to
have occurred in Nevada in over 60 years and was felt across more than 120,000
square miles with roughly 7000 aftershocks. The research team will continue a
preliminary sampling campaign to determine water quality and water flow rate
from wells and springs close to the epicenter. The team will continue to monitor
and sample these sites over the next year to look for any temporary or more
lasting earthquake-related effects to flow and water quality. This study will
provide valuable information to understand how earthquakes affects groundwater
in desert regions, especially when reconnecting water supplies, and
understanding what the health risks may be of using undamaged wells after major
earthquakes. This project will also train one student in field sampling and
laboratory chemical analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
determine the hydrochemical effects of the May 15, 2020 Mw 6.5 Monte Cristo
Earthquake (NV) on groundwater resources within a 30km of the epicenter. A year-
long monitoring program will be used to assess the seismic response and decay of
that signal over time, focusing on changes in elemental and stable isotope
chemistry, and flow rate of artesian wells. This earthquake provides a great
opportunity to investigate the linkages between crustal processes and
groundwater systems across distinct hydrographic basins in an active seismic
zone, the Walker Lane, along the eastern side of the Sierra Nevada mountains.
This study is important for community water supplies after earthquakes and has
not been done in Nevada before. Much of rural Nevada relies on groundwater,
including residential private wells and municipal wells. The monitoring program
has engaged community members and increased local awareness of seismic hazards
affecting well water and will continue to involve community members and train
university students in the sampling effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.