* 2038232
* EAGER: Exploring Convergence Research: An Initial Examination of What It Means and What It Hopes to Accomplish
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2020,04/30/2021
* Joy Frechtling, Westat Inc
* Standard Grant
* christina freyman
* 04/30/2021
* USD 299,921.00

This EAGER project will create and implement a promising, novel but untested,
approach for the evaluation of convergence research projects. The effort
proposed will create an evidence-based framework and set of appropriate
indicators of processes and results for convergence research; however, this
evaluation approach will also be relevant for most types of basic research. This
addresses a significant challenge in the field of evaluationâ€”given that basic
research processes often evolve and change from initial proposals and desired
results often emerge long after the grant funding ends. This project, if
successful, has the potential to make a significant contribution to the field of
evaluation and thus will also strengthen the capacity of agencies and other
funders of basic research to generate and use evidence about the efficiency and
effectiveness of their investments to inform decisions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important technical aspect of this proposal is
that it proposes a highly innovative use of bibliometric data and advanced
statistical modelling as inputs into the development of an assessment framework
(e.g., theory of change, logic model, evaluation questions, indicators).
Typically, these techniques are used to answer evaluation questions, not on the
front-end of design. The other data sources for this project include literature
reviews, agency stakeholder interviews, and scaffolding of information from
document review of convergence research resources. The deliverables from this
project include: a landscape study, a theory of change, and logic model for
convergence research, and a set of preliminary indicators. The anticipated
outcomes of this project include: (1) an increase in knowledge of key
convergence research concepts and change mechanisms, (2) the emergence of common
measures to guide the generation and use of evidence in ways that, (3) inform
and catalyze decisions across a broad landscape of funders in the field of basic
research and the scientific communities they serve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.