* 2038484
* CAS-MNP: Real time analysis of impact of nanoplastics on marine species using AI integrated microfluidics
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Terence Bradley, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 12/31/2023
* USD 397,120.00

The impact of micro (&lt;5mm) and nano (&lt;100nm) plastic accumulation on
marine ecosystems must be quantified to inform sustainable practices ranging
from manufacturing and waste processing protocols to the development of
nutritional guidelines for marine species consumption. This project will advance
the fundamental understanding of the impacts of nanoplastic exposure on the
early stage (embryonic and larval) development of marine fish; as these phases
are most susceptible, any abnormalities could have far-reaching ramifications
for the sustainable future. The present study focuses on mahi-mahi (Coryphaenae
hippurus), a commercially and nutritionally important fish species found around
the world. Microfluidic technology will be used to closely regulate the
simulated marine environment and nanoplastic exposure, while artificial
intelligence will be implemented to correlate real time visualization of
nanoplastic consumption and fish morphology with environmental conditions –
yielding essential data on the factors affecting nanoplastic consumption (e.g.,
size, concentration, stage of exposure) and the resultant effects on growth and
development (e.g., cellular and genetic changes, abnormal organ development,
growth retardation, changed feeding patterns). Data dissemination and
educational outreach to broad, non-specialized audiences will be conducted at
multiple educational levels –including the development of a series of age-
appropriate modules titled “Fishing plastics” for Florida International
University’s “Engineers on Wheels” program, where students and faculty give
hands on demonstrations to students at multiple educational levels. In “Fishing
plastic” students will explore pathways through which plastics accumulate in the
ocean, the impact on the ecosystem and strategies to minimize transmission. The
interdisciplinary nature of the project also offers aquaculture students at the
University of Rhode Island and engineers at Florida International University the
opportunity to learn one another’s languages and integrate academic research
with technology through funding for undergraduate students, undergraduate
Capstone projects and a graduate fellowship.&lt;br/&gt;Examining environmental
impact at the nanoscale is a new paradigm for end-end research into climate-
change and pollution where the predominant focus is on macroscale
manifestations. This study applies a mechanistic approach to rigorously measure
- in situ and in real time – the bioaccumulation of nano plastics as a function
of environment (size, concentration) and uptake mechanism (active vs passive)
and the resultant developmental changes in fish from the embryonic through
larval stages. This approach will inform our fundamental understanding of the
relationship between these factors and the role of nano plastics beyond the
black and white terms of toxicity and morphology to provide insight into the
cellular processes that cause these outcomes. Sensors embedded in microfluidic
chambers containing a singly embryo/larvae generate real-time electrochemical
data to be correlated with continuous visual measurements of the
transparent/semi-transparent fish. Environmental impact will be rigorously
categorized using machine learning to establish a relationship between applied
conditions (nanoplastic composition/concentration), developmental stage, uptake
mechanism (passive respiration/drinking versus active feeding) and visual
measurement of bioaccumulation and morphology which will be correlated with
continuous measurement of metabolic indicators Oxygen (O2) and total ammonia
nitrogen (TAN:NH3/NH4). The implementation of artificial intelligence to
correlate multiple data types obtained in real time and in situ is a unique
approach which enables a more comprehensive understanding of the environmental
impact as well as paving the way for future comparative studies. Data
dissemination and educational outreach to broad, non-specialized audiences will
be conducted at multiple educational levels –including the development of a
series of age-appropriate modules on the environmental impact of plastics for
Florida International University’s “Engineers on Wheels” program. The
interdisciplinary nature of the project also offers aquaculture students at the
University of Rhode Island and engineers at Florida International University the
opportunity to collaborate through funding for undergraduate students, Capstone
projects focusing on microfluidic system design and sensor integration and a
graduate fellowship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.