* 2038246
* Fundamental limits and trade-offs of stratospheric aerosol geoengineering
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Benjamin Kravitz, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 398,143.00

Reducing net emissions of CO2 and other greenhouse gas (GHG) is essential to any
response to climate change, but may not occur fast enough to avoid significant
climate impacts. Model projections of stratospheric aerosol geoengineering
suggest that it could reduce some climate impacts, and thus might potentially
become an additional element of a comprehensive climate change strategy.
However, current knowledge is insufficient to support informed decisions. A
critical question in evaluating geoengineering is what are the fundamental
limits or trade-offs in how well geoengineering can manage the climate response
from increased GHG? That is, what can geoengineering do, and what can it not do?
Building on recent research, this project will address this essential question.
The fundamental motivation for this research is to understand a potential option
to reduce future climate impacts. Better information is needed both to support
future decisions around deployment, and support the development of governance
capacity that will be needed to make these decisions. This research will enable
a more complete view of the impacts of deploying geoengineering than has
previously been possible, by generating simulations that capture a more
comprehensive set of deployment options rather than just one or two; and
furthermore will assess the extent to which different objectives can or cannot
be simultaneously met.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate a set of
climate model simulations that each make different choices for which climate
goals to prioritize relative to others, and use this to identify potential
tradeoffs (sets of objectives that are mutually exclusive) and boundaries (which
objectives are achievable and which are not). Throughout this process, the
research team will engage policy and governance experts, regarding the potential
range of climate goals that might motivate different actors, and on the
governance implications of identified trade-offs. The full range of possible
strategies has never been explored, in part because optimization over the space
of available degrees of freedom – primarily latitudes and seasons of aerosol
injection – is complicated by uncertainty and nonlinear interactions (from both
microphysics and aerosol-heating-induced changes in stratospheric circulation),
and compounded by combinatorial computational complexity. To address these
challenges, the research team will combine three innovations. First, the key
enabler to this research is an initial assessment on the “size” of the design
space; how many usefully-independent degrees of freedom are there? This reduces
the combinatorial problem. Second, the computational burden can be reduced by
separating the simulations needed to understand the spatial- and seasonal-
distribution of stratospheric aerosol optical depth (AOD), which can be short
but require a complete stratosphere model, from those needed to assess the
climate response to a specified aerosol distribution, which require multi-
decadal simulations but not an accurate stratosphere. And third, nonlinearities
and uncertainty can be managed through feedback that adjusts injection rates;
this enables comparing simulations based on specified objectives rather than
specified injection rates. The research team will design a suite of simulations
that individually meet different objectives and collectively span the space of
possible outcomes. From this, the key tool in evaluating and visualizing trade-
offs is through Pareto-optimal surfaces: how do strategies and their responses
change as a function of the optimization criteria. Although the simulations will
be focused on understanding physical science tradeoffs, social and governance
dimensions play a critical role in understanding which objectives may be most
important to achieve or which strategies are simply politically infeasible, thus
limiting the space in ways not revealed by climate modeling. Therefore, the
research team will interface with governance experts throughout to ensure
research informs policy. Simulations will also be made available to the wider
international community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.