* 2038420
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Investigating the link between modern spring activity and associated paleospring mounds in Death Valley, NP
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Brian Hedlund, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 06/30/2024
* USD 191,470.00

In the coming decades, climate change is projected to reduce water availability
in dryland regions and the already water-stressed regions of the southwestern
United States. In order to implement sustainable water resource policies, a
thorough understanding of regional climate history is essential. The PIs will
investigate previously undescribed terrestrial limestone rocks that form from
spring activity (travertine) from Keane Wonder Spring (KWST), Death Valley,
National Park to reconstruct the timing of past wet events. In addition to their
potential as past recorders of the regions’ hydroclimate, travertine deposits
serve to better understand how microbial communities that inhabit the spring
water and associated sediment become part of the fossil record, thus informing
the interpretation of the earliest records of life on Earth. Results from this
research will help elucidate past changes in the regions’ hydroclimate and help
inform our understanding of the pathways that govern microbial fossilization.
This study will support three early to mid-career faculty, two graduate students
and five undergraduate students at three institutions (two of which are
minority-serving institutions). Training for students and class field trips will
provide unique research opportunities for undergraduates including field surveys
and lab processing methods. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recent work summarizing
global trends in travertine deposits indicates that peaks in deposition
correspond with local times of high precipitation or wet conditions. Travertine
deposits are common in Death Valley, but their reliability as hydroclimate
archives has not been fully vetted across multiple climate transitions and
necessitates comparison with well-calibrated, proximal hydroclimate records. In
addition to their paleoclimate archive potential, travertine deposits are
sensitive recorders of interactions between microbial communities and their
environment, making travertine a target setting to assess the morphology and
function of fossilized microorganisms. The PIs will use a suite of geochemical
and microbiological analyses of modern spring water and associated modern
travertine growth along distinct facies types of a spring flow transect to
reveal the extent to which active travertine accretion records and preserves
microbiological, geochemical, and hydrologic signatures. The PIs will analyze
Quaternary travertine deposits at KWST and use a suite of geochemical and
geochronological analyses to establish the timing of hydroclimatic changes in
the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.