* 2038460
* STTR Phase I:  Allogeneic Stem Cell Delivery for Efficacy-Enhanced Equine Biotherapeutics
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,11/30/2022
* John Oakey, CellDrop Inc
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project involves the development of technology to extend
the therapeutic window of cell-based tissue regeneration therapies. This
technology will significantly enhance the scientific understanding of cellular
therapies, and enable the healing of injuries more rapidly and less invasively
than current techniques. A significant need for this technology exists in the
competition horse market. 98% of competitive horses suffer from soft tissue
injuries and more than 80% develop suspensory ligament defects. Injuries to
suspensory ligaments can take years to heal and are the leading cause of missed
performances owners. The proposed technology provides veterinarians a means of
healing suspensory ligament injuries significantly faster, resulting in fewer
missed performances, reduced financial losses, and most importantly, improved
quality of life for the animal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will address the problem of slow
healing suspensory ligament injuries for racehorses. 98% of vets use stem cell
injections to aid in recovery of these injuries, but this strategy has limited
efficacy due to poor viability of injected cells and short cell retention times
at the site of injury. This problem is addressed by developing technology to
preserve and localize mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) at an injury site through
delivery in inert, injectable hydrogel microparticles. The research objectives
of this proposal are twofold; 1. Quantitively assessing metrics of cell
viability and stromal cell-like behavior of hydrogel microencapsulated cells and
compare them to baseline unencapsulated cell metrics, and 2. Provide explicit
evidence that the encapsulation process localizes cells and preserves their
viability, is nontoxic and non-immunogenic, and demonstrates markers of superior
tissue regeneration in a small animal model similar to that of its intended
commercial use. This study is expected to enable the quantitative elucidation of
cell viability and biomolecular response to encapsulation in hydrogel
microenvironments and establish preliminary safety and efficacy results of
hydrogel-encapsulated MSCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.