* 2038057
* A Multiscale Investigation of Fatigue Induced Damage Progression in Tendon
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Nelly Andarawis-Puri, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 01/31/2024
* USD 663,834.00

Tendon is a load-bearing tissue that is loaded through millions of cycles over a
lifespan. These intense cyclic loads can lead to injury. This study will lay the
groundwork for understanding the complexities in deteriorating structural
integrity of tendon due to repeated loading. Tendon is a biological material
with hierarchical “building blocks” that span several length scales. Therefore,
it is important to understand the mechanical behavior and degradation due to
fatigue loading at each scale. This work will use experiments at multiple
scales, computational modeling, and advances in multiscale simulations to reveal
how structural damage of the tissue affects the micro-environment of the tendon
cells responsible for the repair of the tissue. Uncovering the mechanisms
underlying tendon’s remarkable resilience to repeated loading will also guide
the design of next generation engineered soft materials. This project will
include contributions from students from underrepresented groups, including
undergraduate students, and will contribute to summer outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will probe multiscale tendon mechanics
with a series of clearly defined objectives, namely: 1) characterizing
microscale fatigue response and damage of collagen fibrils, 2) developing a
macroscopic model for fatigue induced damage, and 3) identifying damage-induced
multiscale structural alterations that modify the tenocyte micro-environment.
The absence of basic understanding and predictive capabilities for fatigue
induced multiscale damage progression in tendon limits the progress of other
basic studies including cell mechanics, translational studies, and development
of mechanistically informed therapeutics. There is still a substantial gap in
understanding the hierarchical cascade of plasticity in tendon during cyclic
loading and how it correlates with tendon damage. Starting from collagen fibril
experiments and coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations at the same scale,
this work will develop macroscopic theories and models for tendon that will be
able to capture the response to tensile fatigue loading including damage
initiation and failure. To facilitate predictions at the continuum level, a
finite element framework for damage and plasticity at finite deformation will be
developed and the simulation results calibrated against macroscopic (tendon-
level) experiments for fatigue loading. This work has the potential to provide
mechanistic understanding for fatigue induced tendon damage, uncover how
alterations to the tenocyte micro-environment drive healing, and provide
predictive capabilities that will ultimately inform exercise based treatments to
tendinopathy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.