* 2038030
* Collaborative Research: EAGER-QSA: Variational Monte-Carlo-Inspired Quantum Algorithms for Many-Body Systems and Combinatorial Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Shravan Veerapaneni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 02/29/2024
* USD 185,000.00

Simulation of many-body quantum systems is an extremely challenging scientific
problem that pushes the limits of existing and foreseeable classical computing
capabilities. The ability to simulate such systems efficiently would open the
possibility of resolving longstanding scientific questions in high-temperature
superconductivity as well as facilitating the design of new drugs and materials.
General-purpose solvers for quantum systems in greater than one spatial
dimension are beyond the reach of classical hardware and are natural candidate
problems for exploiting quantum resources. This project investigates how recent
progress in variational Monte Carlo simulation can be used to inspire new
quantum simulation techniques. The project will also undertake educational,
mentoring, and outreach activities that are integrated with the research effort.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will capitalize on recent intellectual
bridges formed between the fields of variational quantum algorithms, variational
Monte Carlo methods, and quantum information geometry. It consists of three
research thrusts focused on fermionic systems simulation, combinatorial
optimization, and quantum information geometry. Specifically, this project will
design variational quantum algorithms that avoid nonlocal fermion-qubit mappings
by exploiting first-quantized and gauge-theoretic reformulations of fermionic
systems. Efficient methods for imposing constraints in quantum-inspired solvers
for combinatorial optimization problems will be explored. Building upon
classical numerical analysis tools, acceleration techniques for the quantum
natural gradient will be developed by exploiting higher-order invariance of the
Riemannian metric. Because the real-time evolution process by which physical
states evolve according to the Schrodinger equation is of fundamental
importance, the project will furthermore investigate generalization of the
quantum natural gradient from imaginary to real time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.