* 2038080
* RTG: Mathematical Foundation of Data Science at University of South Carolina
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Wolfgang Dahmen, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,695,413.00

This Research Training Group (RTG) project is a joint effort of Mathematics,
Statistics, Computer Science and Engineering. It aims to develop a multi-tier
Research Training Program at the University of South Carolina (UofSC) designed
to prepare the future workforce in a multidisciplinary paradigm of modern data
science. The education and training models will leverage knowledge and
experience already existing among the faculty and bring in new talent to foster
mathematical data science expertise and research portfolios through a vertical
integration of post-doctoral research associates, graduate students,
undergraduate students, and advanced high school students. A primary focus of
this project is to recruit and train U.S. Citizens, females, and
underrepresented minority (URM) among undergraduate and graduate students, and
postdocs through research led training in Data Science. The research and
training infrastructure implemented through this RTG program will not only
support the planned majors and master’s degrees, but also provide systemic
educational curricula for students and researchers from other areas whose
research would benefit from Data Science within UofSC and in the vicinity. The
training materials created by this RTG program will also be widely available to
other institutions across the country. The RTG project will help build a highly
educated workforce for academia, government and industry, in the area of data
science, artificial intelligence, and machine learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a response to emerging demands of modern
technology-oriented societies for an innovative workforce with expertise in all
areas related to Data Science. Based on a comprehensive view of Data Science,
the program aims at providing students and postdocs with the necessary concepts
that enable them to form their own research agenda. Our program covers, on the
one hand, emerging developments in network science, artificial intelligence,
machine learning, and optimization methodologies from computer science and
statistical perspectives primarily for the Big-Data regime with applications
such as autonomous systems. In addition, problems typically posed in a Small-
Data regime can relate these concepts to relevant methodologies, such as Physics
Informed Learning, needed to understand mathematical models, usually formulated
in terms of Partial Differential Equations (PDEs), so as to understand key
techniques for synthesizing models and data in the context of Uncertainty
Quantification. Properly interrelating these activities in the broader Data
Science landscape, will enable students to successfully tackle new problem areas
at later stages of their career and address important challenges in sciences and
engineering. The corresponding theoretical training is reinforced by
accompanying practical training modules that are able to engage students across
all levels as well as young researchers in synergistic activities, even reaching
out to local industries. It is a feedback-loop between research and education
that distinguishes the project. The educational component is designed with an
ultimate goal of developing an innovative research training program to educate
future workforce in a structured curriculum that offers a major, a master’s
degree and a 4+1 dual degree in Data Science at UofSC. The project facilitates
team-teaching by relevant experts and uses direct links to research projects
that students will participated in. The built-in vertical and horizontal
pedagogical synergies as well as the hierarchical mentoring scheme expose
participating students to extensive educational and research experience offered
by the program. This project is jointly funded by Computational and Data-enabled
Science and Engineering in Mathematical and Statistical Sciences
(CDS&amp;E-MSS), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), and the Workforce Program in the Mathematical Sciences, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.