* 2038056
* RTG: Training Tomorrow's Workforce in Analysis and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Jonathan Mattingly, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,430,263.00

Twelve faculty members at Duke University will lead postdoctoral fellows,
graduate students, and undergraduates in a collection of Research Training Group
activities designed to enhance research skills and deepen educational and
training experiences. Activities including summer schools, undergraduate
research conferences, seminars, professional development events, and innovative
courses will draw in a broad population of students and junior researchers. The
undergraduate students will be welcomed early to the exciting world of
applications of mathematics and mathematical research. The project will seek to
promote the mathematics major at the University and connections of mathematics
to practical applications, with a focus on recruitment of students of
disadvantaged backgrounds. The graduate students and postdocs will benefit from
a vibrant research atmosphere, innovative teaching options, and professional
development workshops. Graduate students will have access to industry
internships, and postdoctoral fellows will gain experience in mentoring graduate
and undergraduate students in vertically integrated research projects. This in-
depth training will be facilitated by a broad set of existing successful
programs and by novel initiatives designed to raise effectiveness of
recruitment, education, and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RTG team is an
interconnected research group in Analysis, Probability, Differential Equations,
and Computational Mathematics, including experienced senior faculty who are
leaders in their fields, active mid-career mathematicians, and early career
dynamic researchers. In modern mathematics, analytic and probabilistic tools and
techniques play a crucial role in a broad range of directions. The research
themes for this project include challenging analysis questions (such as the Clay
Institute millennium prize problem on the Navier-Stokes equation), as well as
new applied analysis and probabilistic questions arising from modern
applications (such as image processing, machine learning, and biological
modelling). Among others, research training themes include: PDE of fluid
dynamics, singularity formation, stochastic forcing; inverse problems and
imaging; PDE analysis for machine learning; modeling and analysis of complex
systems, with applications to life sciences; interfacial dynamics and free
surface problems in materials science. The RTG graduate students and
postdoctoral trainees will be exposed to the most recent advances in important
research directions, and they will be trained to combine cutting edge analytic,
probabilistic, and computational tools with the intuition and broad expertise of
an applied mathematician.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.