* 2038422
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: Subpolar North Atlantic Processes - Dynamics and pRedictability of vAriability in Gyre and OverturNing (SNAP-DRAGON)
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Patrick Heimbach, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 75,932.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation's
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with their own
country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subpolar North Atlantic Ocean, stretching
between the UK, Greenland, and Canada, plays a crucial role in local and global
climate. This is the critical region where much of the warm water flowing
northward in the upper North Atlantic releases its heat to the atmosphere and is
converted to cold, dense water, before flowing southward again at depth in what
is known as the Atlantic overturning circulation. The large amount of heat this
circulation carries northward and releases to the atmosphere impacts the track
of storms and determines the weather over western Europe. The overturning
circulation also has profound implications for African rainfall and hurricane
development via its effect on sea surface temperature at lower latitudes. In
addition, the sinking of water in the subpolar region ventilates the deep ocean,
transferring heat and carbon away from the surface and moderating the impact of
anthropogenic greenhouse gases on surface temperature. Any warm water which does
not sink in the subpolar region recirculates or carries its heat further north
towards the Arctic, influencing sea-ice conditions and polar marine ecosystems
before it too sinks and flows south. This study aims to produce a step change in
our understanding of the processes that link atmospheric changes to subpolar
ocean variability, their implications for ocean and climate predictability in
this region, and the degree to which we can trust their representation in
climate models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, the first ever observations of
the overturning circulation in the subpolar North Atlantic have been made by the
Overturning in the Subpolar North Atlantic Program (OSNAP, www.o-snap.org).
These have revealed large amplitude variations in the overturning and raised
questions about the locations and processes that give rise to this variability
and its likely impact on surface ocean conditions and climate. Representing this
region properly in climate models is essential for making useful climate
predictions on seasonal, interannual, decadal and longer timescales. However,
the current generation of models struggle to represent the processes known to be
important here and disagree with the observations on the locations in which warm
water is transformed into dense water. The disagreements limit our confidence in
model predictions. The scientific community cannot assess model performance
properly because there is limited understanding of all the links between
atmospheric conditions and ocean circulation variability. This project will
combine OSNAP and other observations with numerical models that can represent
small-scale processes to reveal the cause of the variations in subpolar ocean
circulation. Once it is clear which processes are most important and how they
work, the team will be able to establish what climate models are getting wrong
and suggest improvements. This will improve predictions of ocean and climate
variability in the subpolar North Atlantic and beyond. The team will investigate
how cold, dense waters find their way into the boundary currents that export
them to the south. It will establish the role that winds play, which is likely
more complicated than we have assumed in the past and it will determine the
impact on overturning variability of changes in freshwater export from the
Arctic and Greenland. To characterize and quantify these key processes, in
addition to using ocean observations, the investigators will perform "What if?"
experiments in ocean models, asking questions such as: what happens to the
subpolar ocean circulation if the atmospheric jet stream over the Atlantic
shifts or strengthens? They will use statistical methods more common in weather
forecasting to figure out how subpolar ocean properties and overturning connect
to potentially predictable larger-scale atmospheric circulation patterns.
Innovative ways of combining models with observations will be used to determine
a best estimate of the evolution of the subpolar North Atlantic over the OSNAP
observation period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.