* 2038507
* RAPID: Gig Service Workers and the COVID-19 Pandemic: Assessing Financial Impacts, Relief Attitudes, and State Policies
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Julia Ticona, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 02/28/2022
* USD 176,565.00

This RAPID research project aims to investigate the financial impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic on the low-wage gig workers who are providing essential
services on the front lines of transportation, domestic work, and food delivery.
Although the CARES Act expanded some forms of governmental assistance to
independent contractors, gig workers continue to fall through the gaps of
existing benefit and relief programs. As information clearinghouses, the online
platforms they work for shape workers’ access to information about shifting
state responses to health and safety regulations and available financial
assistance. However, little is known about gig workers’ attitudes toward
financial relief, or the role online platforms play in communicating this
information. This project will investigate how factors such as platform design,
messaging, and algorithms affect workers’ financial well-being. The research
will also examine how relationships between online platforms and state
governments affect workers’ knowledge of and attitudes towards financial
assistance during the pandemic, and how workers make trade-offs between health
and economic opportunity in the face of rapidly changing conditions.
Understanding the ways that platform companies cope with this crisis holds
broader value for understanding changes in the relationship between
technologies, workers, and companies. Many organizations have transitioned from
conducting work at the office to work from home and it remains unknown how long
this shift will last. As a result, organizations are forced to rely on digital
technologies to communicate with a dispersed workforce in much the same was as
platforms communicate with gig workers. The findings from this research will
surface emergent tensions and trade-offs for more equitable communication,
algorithmic design, and platform design that affect gig workers, with
implications for workers who have more traditional relationships with
employers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project brings together disciplines
including sociology, anthropology, economics, engineering, computer science, and
human-computer interaction. The project team is structured to achieve multiple
convergent goals. First, drawing on sociology and anthropology, this project
will use in-depth interviews and ethnography to understand online gig workers’
experiences and decision-making around work related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as
well as their knowledge and attitudes about benefits and financial relief
programs. Second, drawing on economics, this study will use interviews, surveys,
and publicly available data to examine how pandemic conditions affect employer
and worker relationships, particularly in the contexts of debates over the
contested status of gig workers as independent contractors. Third, in
collaboration with engineers and computer scientists, researchers will present
this research at conferences to reach audiences in these disciplines. This
project has been funded by the Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier
cross-directorate program to promote deeper basic understanding of the
interdependent human-technology partnership in work contexts by advancing design
of intelligent work technologies that operate in harmony with human
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.