* 2038967
* CPS: Medium: Bio-socially Adaptive Control of Robotics-Augmented Building-Human Systems for Infection Prevention by Cybernation of Pathogen Transmission
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Shuai Li, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,199,129.00

Microbial pathogen transmission in buildings is an urgent public health concern.
The pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) adds to the urgency of
developing effective means to reduce pathogen transmission in public buildings
with minimal disruptions in building functions. With the ultimate goal to
develop healthy buildings that minimize risks of infectious diseases, this
project will develop smart control strategies for buildings and assistive robots
to mitigate pathogen transmission and occupant exposure. New techniques will be
developed to monitor and predict pathogen spreading, automate building
ventilation, enable intelligent recognition of contaminated objects, and perform
precision disinfection to reduce pathogen transmission through air circulation
and surface contacts. Findings from this project will also guide occupants and
facility managers to develop and implement effective behavioral interventions
and hygiene practices. If successful, this research will revolutionize the
control of built environments to enable protection against infectious diseases,
which will have vast public health and economic benefits to the nation. This
project will also create new and unique opportunities to stimulate the academic
interests of students and support the development of next-generation workforce
adequately equipped with interdisciplinary computing and engineering skills
needed to address challenges facing the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this research are: 1) Advance understanding of linkages among
physical, biological, and social processes that drive the dynamics of human-
pathogen interactions in building environments; and 2) Develop a novel cyber-
physical system of integrated monitoring, building control, robot adaptation,
and human-in-the-loop interactions to reduce the transmission of infectious
pathogens. This research pioneers a novel digital-twinning approach that
integrates building information modeling, privacy-preserving internet of things
sensing, spatiotemporal molecular and metagenomic sequencing, and machine
learning to map building-human-pathogen interactions for predicting
contamination and infection risks at multiple spatiotemporal scales. New methods
will be developed to connect and manage the buildings, occupants, and robots to
reduce pathogen burdens. These methods include: model-based and dynamic-data-
enabled optimal control of building ventilation; learning algorithms for robotic
identification of contaminated spots; adaptive disinfection processes with
behavioral considerations; and co-optimization of building operations and
robotic disinfection with real-time sensing. In addition, user-centric systems
will be developed to analyze contextual information and recommend hygiene
practices, organizational operations, and crowd management to prevent disease
spreading and maintain functionalities within
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.