* 2038612
* CPS: TTP Option: Medium: Discovering and Resolving Anomalies in Smart Cities
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Stephen Smith, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,247,997.00

Understanding complex activity due to humans and vehicles in a large environment
like a city neighborhood or even an entire city is one of the main goals of
smart cities. The activities are heterogeneous, distributed, vary over time and
mutually interact in many ways, making them hard to capture and understand and
mitigate issues in a timely manner. While there has been tremendous progress in
capturing aggregate statistics that helps in traffic and city management as well
as personal planning and scheduling, much of this work ignores anomalous
patterns. Examples include protests, erratic driving, near accidents,
construction zone activity, and numerous others. Discovering and resolving
anomalies is challenging for many reasons as they are complex and rare, depend
on the context and depend on the spatial and temporal extent over which they are
observed. There are potentially a large number of anomalies or anomalous
patterns, so they are impossible to label and describe manually.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will conduct research to address automatic
discovery and resolution of anomalous patterns in smart city visual data. The
PIs will leverage the large amount of visual data they have access to ranging
from cameras at many intersections in Pittsburgh, around the Carnegie Mellon
University neighborhood, cameras installed on public buses, and physical
distribution networks in the city. The project will include the following four
closely integrated research thrusts: (1) Extracting anomalies in the presence of
noise due to visual processing algorithms, (2) Automatically discover anomalies
at different spatial and temporal scales with intelligent coordinated and
distributed planning, (3) discovering the relationship with anomalies and
context, and (4) Resolving Anomalies through Hard and Soft Actuation using both
automatic and human-in-the-loop methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will
enable the following applications: Safer and more efficient roads, monitoring
the roadway infrastructure and roadside, maximizing the distribution services
and informing decisions on health policy (including COVID-19). The project will
be conducted in collaboration with several stakeholders - multiple
infrastructure and traffic management startups and local city government - in a
comprehensive transition to practice program designed to deploy the research in
the real world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.