* 2038071
* 2020 Waterman Award
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* John Dabiri, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

Dr. Dabiri is the Centennial Professor of Aeronautics and Mechanical Engineering
at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech). His research focuses on
unsteady fluid mechanics and flow physics, with particular emphasis on topics
relevant to biology, energy, and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research has led to the discovery of principles of optimal vortex formation used
by biological systems from jellyfish to the human heart, in order to function
efficiently in nature. Dr. Dabiri has used these bioinspired engineering
concepts to design a new generation of wind turbine arrays with the potential to
concurrently reduce the cost, size, and environmental impacts of wind farms.
Concurrently, he has developed new experimental techniques to explore biological
fluid dynamics in the ocean. This includes a recent demonstration of bionic
jellyfish---freely swimming organisms with embedded microelectronics that swim
both faster and more efficiently than their non-robotic counterparts, giving
them promise as a tool for low-cost ocean exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Dabiri is a MacArthur Fellow and a Fellow of the American Physical Society.
Other honors include the Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and
Engineers (PECASE), the Office of Naval Research Young Investigator Program
Award, MIT Technology Review Magazine’s “35 Innovators Under 35”, Popular
Science Magazine’s “Brilliant 10”, and numerous named lectureships. Dr. Dabiri
holds patents including ocean instrumentation, wind energy technology, and
tissue engineering. He serves on the National Academies’ Committee on Science,
Technology, and Law. He is also a member of the editorial boards of the Journal
of Fluid Mechanics and the Journal of the Royal Society Interface. He has
previously served on the U.S. National Committee for Theoretical and Applied
Mechanics (USNCTAM), the Defense Science Study Group, and as an Advisor to X at
Alphabet (formerly GoogleX). His work has appeared on the covers of Nature,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Science Advances, and other
major scientific journals, as well as in the popular press. Dr. Dabiri’s
commitment to teaching was recognized by the 2018 Eugene L. Grant Award for
Excellence in Teaching at Stanford University. He is also committed to mentoring
a diverse cadre of future leaders in science and engineering, as exemplified by
his 15 Ph.D. alumni to date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.