* 2038528
* Trade-offs, limits to adaptation, and multiple solutions: rules elucidated by selective breeding for high activity levels
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Theodore Garland, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 562,316.00

This project focuses on understanding how organisms make trade-offs in energy
allocation to different activities and how multiple solutions to enhance
locomotor activity may evolve. Biological diversity encompasses not only numbers
of species but the functional diversity that they exhibit. Organisms work in a
variety of ways, and often exhibit trade-offs and multiple solutions. One
example of a trade-off is the negative relationship between the number of
offspring produced and the size of individual offspring, as documented in many
groups of plants and animals. This trade-off is often attributed to a constraint
on the total amount of energy available for reproduction. Multiple solutions are
apparent in the various ways that flight has evolved (e.g., birds versus bats).
This research project addresses both of these phenomena in the context of a
novel experiment that involves selective breeding for high voluntary levels of
exercise in house mice. Two hypotheses will be tested: (1) selection for high
activity is associated with reductions in lifetime reproductive success,
representing a trade-off between locomotor activity and fitness, and (2) the
trade-off between average running speed and duration that has evolved among the
high-activity mouse lines is reflected in corresponding differences in
characteristics of their muscle tissues. The project will help to elucidate the
fundamental nature of biodiversity. The results will be disseminated in
scientific publications and Wikipedia pages will be created and updated. An
online Open Educational Resource version of Ecological and Evolutionary
Physiology, an undergraduate course, will be developed. This project will
involve training for both graduate students and undergraduates in a
collaborative, integrative, and cross-disciplinary research setting. To increase
participation and diversity, students from underrepresented groups and
educationally or economically disadvantaged backgrounds will be
recruited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trade-offs and multiple solutions are
inherent to life and appear to underlie a substantial amount of the variation in
biodiversity over time. However, few studies have used experimental evolution to
address these topics. The proposed research will use selection for high
locomotor activity, in a model organism (laboratory house mice), to elucidate
trade-offs and multiple solutions during locomotor evolution. Because locomotor
activity is a key component of the life history of animals, results of these
studies should provide insight into general principles. The research will take
advantage of a unique resource comprising four replicate lines of High Runner
mice that have been selectively bred for more than 90 generations for voluntary
locomotor activity, and an additional four lines that serve as non-selected
Controls. Aim 1 will test for reduced lifetime reproductive success in the
selected lines and whether this trade-off manifests in different ways in the
replicate lines (e.g., reduced litter size vs. reduced length of reproductive
lifespan). Aim 2 will test whether trade-offs in muscle function underlie the
trade-off between average running speed and duration that has evolved among the
four selected lines, and if multiple solutions at the level of muscle
performance are involved. The mouse lines will be made available to other
researchers, and the online course materials and Wikipedia content to be
developed will be broadly disseminated. Several undergraduate and graduate
students, recruited from groups traditionally under-represented in science, will
participate in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.