* 2038083
* Collaborative Research: Understanding and Tailoring the Anode-Electrolyte Interfacial Layers on the Stabilization of Lithium Metal Electrode
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Ye Cao, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/29/2024
* USD 192,271.00

Metallic lithium (Li) is considered as one of the promising next-generation
anode materials to replace conventional graphite in Li-ion batteries because of
its high theoretical specific energy capacity and low reduction potential.
However, dendrite growth on the electrode and unstable solid-electrolyte
interphase (SEI) formation have created safety concerns in Li batteries and
hindered practical applications. Introducing an artificial protective layer on
the Li metal electrode is an effective strategy to stabilize the Li electrode,
yet how this protective layer interacts with the electrochemical process of Li
metal anode is not well understood. This project will integrate experiments and
simulations to understand how the physical and chemical properties of the
protective layer affect the electrochemical performance of the Li metal
electrode. The fundamental knowledge gained will guide development of novel Li
metal electrodes with high performance and improved safety for electric vehicles
and other high-energy-density electrical storage devices. The project will also
involve the education of graduate, undergraduate students, and K-12 students by
course development, summer camp, and outreach activities in local
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to develop
a new understanding of the key physical and chemical properties of the
protective layer that leads to stable charge/discharge processes of the Li metal
electrode. The state-of-the-art guideline is insufficient, and the model only
considers the influences of the limited mechanical properties of the protective
layer on the stabilization of the Li metal electrode. In this project, by an
effective integration of experimental synthesis, characterization and phase-
field simulations, a new understanding will be generated on electrochemistry and
deformation/failure mechanism of suppressing dendrites, including mass
transport, electric potential, stress, and deformation. The research goal will
be reached by working on several objectives: (1) Effect of mechanical properties
of the protective layer on the suppression of Li dendrite growth; (2) Effect of
ionic mass transfer behaviors of the protective layer on the stabilization of
the Li metal electrode; (3) Novel protective layer on Li metal for the high-
performance assembled cells. The elucidated correlation between physical and
chemical properties of the protective layer, and the electrochemical processes
of the electrode is expected to open pathways for the novel design and
fabrication of Li metal electrodes, leading to stable and high-performance next-
generation energy storage devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the CBET Electrochemical Systems program and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.