* 2038410
* CPS: Medium: A meta-learning approach to enable autonomous buildings
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jianghai Hu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 06/30/2024
* USD 994,592.00

Buildings are vitally important because they contribute to the well-being and
productivity of their occupants - however, these benefits come at a high
environmental cost. Collectively, buildings account for 40% of the US primary
energy usage and CO2 emissions and 70% of the electricity consumption.
Furthermore, buildings put a tremendous strain on the power grid as they are
largely responsible for the peaks in energy demand. Making buildings smarter
through the deployment of sensors, actuators, and controllers, which
collectively serve as the backbone of building cyber-physical systems (CPS), can
achieve more than 30% annual energy savings and can also significantly smooth
peak demand. Thus, smart buildings are vital to a sustainable energy future.
However, the road to large-scale realization of smart buildings is inhibited by
their heterogeneity, which requires engineering customized, site-specific, and,
thereby, costly solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop a CPS solution for autonomous buildings that will enable non-expert
building managers to deploy asset-specific, smart control policies. The
advantage of the proposed solution relies on the fact that the approach can be
applied on a large-scale even without any human intervention. The resulting
software solution is the Artificial-Intelligence-Enabled Building Energy Expert
(AI-BEE) and it will be demonstrated using simulations and experiments at the
Center for High Performance Buildings at Purdue University. The proposed
research will result in foundational contributions in core CPS areas, including
machine learning and control, that will be translational to other application
areas, such as large-scale energy systems (power grid), transportation, civil
infrastructure, and unmanned vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
details of our approach are as follows. First, a taxonomy of building types is
being developed. The idea is that the energy behavior of every building should
be completely specified by a finite set of variables in a machine-readable
format. Second, each complete building description is associated with a set of
dynamical systems that describes the energy consumption. In this way, non-
experts will be able to specify building characteristics and get a set of
plausible dynamical systems that include a description of the building. This set
of dynamical systems is what is called the relevant model universe to the
building at hand. Third, meta reinforcement learning is being used to discover a
self-improving control algorithm that works well for all dynamical models in the
relevant model universe. The final step is to deploy the discovered algorithm to
the building and let it self-improve further.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.