* 2038048
* International Symposium on Aviation Psychology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Kelly Steelman, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 12/31/2021
* USD 27,563.00

The 21st International Symposium on Aviation Psychology (ISAP) is scheduled to
take place May 18-21, 2021, in Portland, OR. ISAP showcases cutting-edge
research on human cognition and performance, fosters collaboration between
researchers and operators, and envisions and empirically tests design solutions
that match aviation technology to human capabilities. The symposium encourages
researchers to focus basic research on applied needs. It is founded on the idea
that meaningful interactions between basic researchers and front-line
practitioners are necessary to advance knowledge and turn it to society’s
benefit. Although aerospace is the focus of ISAP, the meeting’s interest in the
basic science of human performance encourages cross-fertilization with other
areas of application, including medicine, ground transportation, and military
command and control. The knowledge generated therefore is not limited to
aviation applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topics of interest at ISAP include
human-system integration, display design, training and simulation, human
interaction with autonomous systems, personnel selection, and sociotechnical
system effectiveness, all as applied within systems on the ground, in the air,
and in space. In plenary panel sessions, practitioners (e.g., pilots, air
traffic controllers, maintenance personnel) present the critical safety issues
that they face, and researchers present the latest scientific and technological
approaches to achieving solutions. Three additional plenary sessions feature
invited speakers, selected to represent a breadth of scientific disciplines and
topics pertinent to aviation. Over the course of the symposium, researchers have
the opportunity to present their latest scientific, engineering, or
methodological work in either a spoken or a poster session. ISAP also places a
special emphasis on fostering student involvement by conducting a Best Student
Paper Competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.