* 2038179
* CAREER: Paleoseismicity along the North American-Caribbean Plate Boundary: Research, Education and Outreach
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Jonathan Obrist Farner, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2026
* USD 670,772.00

Large intracontinental strike-slip fault systems (where one plate moves sideways
against another) cut across heavily populated regions and have caused
devastating earthquakes in the past. Comprehensive investigations of these fault
systems are needed to understand past earthquake frequency and how these
earthquakes affect fault evolution, providing crucial information to better
prepare societies for future catastrophic events. This project focuses on
reconstructing the earthquake history of a fault system located at the southern
boundary of the North American Plate in Guatemala. The fault system is similar
to the San Andreas Fault System in California, but its earthquake history
remains poorly understood. By integration of geophysical methods and
sedimentological investigations, this project will unravel the evolution of the
fault system in time and space. The project will investigate the processes
governing the frequency and location of earthquakes by examining sediments in
five lakes near the fault system. In addition to the scientific outcomes, this
project will provide educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students by training them in geophysics and sedimentology through participation
in an international research project, contributing towards a stronger geoscience
workforce. The project will also reach a broad public audience through the
development of geoscience class modules for elementary and middle school science
classes and educational geoscience workshops for K-12 science
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite continuous efforts to understand
intracontinental strike-slip fault systems, several grand challenges related to
the processes governing earthquake initiation, frequency, and location remain.
Partly, these issues are related to the fact that historical records and
instrumental measurements are insufficient to understand the long-term evolution
and seismogenic behavior of fault systems, information that is paramount for
seismic hazard evaluation. This project investigates the paleoseismic record
preserved in five lakes in proximity to the Polochic-Motagua Fault System, the
intracontinental strike-slip plate boundary fault system that separates the
North American and Caribbean plates. This plate boundary setting is similar to
that of the San Andreas and North Anatolian faults, but the earthquake record is
largely unknown. Through seismic reflection data acquisition and
characterization, and sedimentological interpretation of sediment cores, this
project will contribute to the field of subaqueous quantitative paleoseismology
and improve our understanding of the spatial and temporal evolution of
earthquakes along this strike-slip plate boundary. The project will involve two
graduate and several undergraduate students, supporting geoscience workforce
development through training of geophysical and sedimentological data
acquisition, processing, and interpretation. The project will also reach out to
a broader audience by involving K-12 students and teachers in several
educational activities, by visiting science classrooms in Missouri, by
developing teacher workshops for elementary and high school teachers, and by
presenting and sharing research results during STEM days for elementary and
middle school female students at the Missouri University of Science and
Technology. Finally, this project will provide a better foundation for assessing
seismic risk along an understudied fault system in Guatemala. Involvement and
collaboration with several Guatemalan higher education institutions and
government agencies will facilitate international research opportunities and
collaborations among U.S. and Guatemalan institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.