* 2038149
* Collaborative Research: LIA: Genomic Mechanisms Controlling the Slow Development of the Antarctic Urchin Sterechinus Neumayeri
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Jacob Warner, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 08/31/2025
* USD 356,975.00

Antarctic marine invertebrates exhibit extraordinarily slow rates of
development. This phenomenon has arisen repeatedly in independent Antarctic
lineages, including sea urchins, sea stars, brachiopods, and ribbon worms.
Despite these observations, little is known about the molecular mechanisms
responsible for slow developmental rates in Antarctic marine invertebrates. This
proposal is developing the Antarctic sea urchin, Sterechinus neumayeri, as a
model invertebrate organism to evaluate cold water organismal adaptation and
development. Urchins collected from McMurdo Sound are being studied in carefully
controlled laboratory experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is
specifically identifying the gene regulatory network components responsible for
regulating developmental timing in S. neumayeri and, more generally, which gene
regulatory network elements evolved during adaption to the extreme environment
of the Southern Ocean. The lab-based work is focusing in two specific areas: 1)
Identify unique gene regulatory network components of S. neumayeri that evolved
during its developmental adaptation to the Southern Ocean, and 2) Analyze
spatial expression and functions of key genes in the early S. neumayeri gene
regulatory networks controlling specification and patterning of territories
along the early anterior-posterior axis. A comparative analysis of better
studied urchins from warmer regions will be used to inform this work. This
effort is relevant to several fields of biology ranging from polar biology,
developmental biology, evolution, and genomics while explicitly tying genotype
to phenotype. Broader impacts: The proposal included three early career
investigators who are new to Antarctic research programs working alongside a
well-established Antarctic investigator. The team has developed an ambitious
program for science and technology training in computer coding and biology
targeted for underrepresented students. They also have developed web-based
bioinformatics training blog, “2-bitbio”, which aims to decrease the ‘barrier to
entry’ into the field of bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.