* 2038817
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Real-time Criticality-Aware Neural Networks for Mission-critical Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Tarek Abdelzaher, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 460,009.00

Advances in artificial intelligence (AI) make it clear that intelligent systems
will account for the next leap in scientific progress to enable a myriad of
future applications that improve the quality of life, contribute to the economy,
and enhance societal resilience to a broad spectrum of disruptions. Yet,
advances in AI come at a considerable resource costs. To reduce the cost of AI,
this project takes inspiration from biological systems. It is well-known that a
key bottleneck in AI is the perception subsystem. It is the part that allows AI
to perceive and understand its surroundings. Humans are very good at
understanding what’s critical in their environment and the human perceptual
system automatically focuses limited cognitive resources on those elements of
the scene that matter most, saving a significant amount of “brain processing
power”. Current AI pipelines do not have a similar mechanism, resulting in
significantly higher resource costs. The project refactors data analytics and
machine intelligence pipelines to allow for better prioritization of external
stimuli leveraging and significantly extending advances in scheduling previously
developed in the real-time systems research community. The refactored AI
pipeline will improve the efficiency and efficacy of AI-enabled systems,
allowing them to be safer and more responsive, while at the same time
significantly lowering their cost. If successful, the project will help bring
machine intelligence solutions to the benefit of all society. This is achieved
through interactions between research, education, and outreach, as well as
integration of multiple scientific communities, including (i) researchers on
embedded computing who offer platforms and schedulers, (ii) researchers on IoT
and networking, and (iii) researchers on intelligent applications and
application domain experts. The work is an example of cyber-physical computing
research, where a new generation of digital algorithms learn to exploit a better
understanding of physical systems in order to improve societal outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project removes systemic priority inversion from
machine intelligence pipelines in modern neural-network-based cyber-physical
applications. In general, priority inversion occurs in real-time systems when
computations that are less critical (or with longer deadlines) are performed
ahead of those that are more critical (or with shorter deadlines). The current
state of machine intelligence software suffers from significant priority
inversion on the path from perception to decision-making, resulting in vastly
inferior system responsiveness to critical events, thereby jeopardizing safety
and increasing the cost of hardware to meet application needs. By resolving this
problem, this project shall improve system ability to react to critical inputs,
while at the same time significantly reducing platform cost. The intellectual
merit of the project lies in investigating the intersection of two core areas in
cyber-physical computing: (i) data analytics and machine learning and (ii) real-
time systems. Specifically, the project refactors data analytics and machine
intelligence pipelines to remove priority inversion. Mitigation of priority
inversion problems in different systems has been one of the key contributions of
the real-time community. Removal of priority inversion from machine intelligence
pipelines makes several other scientific contributions. Namely, (i) the
refactored AI pipeline improves the efficiency and efficacy of AI-enabled
mission-critical systems, (ii) it enables autonomous systems to be more
responsive, while lowering their cost, and (iii) it contributes to safety of
intelligent systems by ensuring that critical inputs are processed first. The
project expects to demonstrate significant improvements in performance of modern
machine-learning-based inference protocols, while offering service
differentiation that dramatically improves predictability and timeliness of
reactions to critical situations. If successful, the project will significantly
reduce the cost of deploying machine intelligence solutions in future cyber-
physical systems, while improving predictability and temporal guarantees. In
addition to delivering the technical contributions of this project, an explicit
purpose of the work is to advance education and workforce development on
Intelligent CPS topics. This is achieved through interactions between activities
for research, education, and broadening participation, as well as integration of
multiple communities, including (i) researchers on embedded computing who offer
platforms and schedulers, (ii) researchers on IoT and networking, and (iii)
researchers on intelligent applications and application domain
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.