* 2038145
* Drivers of Antarctic Krill Reproductive Output
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Kim Bernard, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 03/31/2024
* USD 734,458.00

Warming at the northern Antarctic Peninsula is causing fundamental changes in
the marine ecosystem. Antarctic krill are small shrimp-like animals that are
most abundant in that area. They are also an essential part of the marine food
web of the waters surrounding Antarctica. Meanwhile, a rapidly growing
international fishery has developed for krill. Understanding changes in krill
populations is therefore critical both to the management of the fishery and the
ability of scientists to predict changes in the Antarctic marine ecosystem. This
project will have two broader societal impacts. First, the project will support
the training of students for careers in oceanography. The students will be
recruited from underrepresented groups in an effort to increase diversity,
equity and inclusion in STEM. Second, results from this project will develop
improved population models, which are essential for the effective management of
the Antarctic krill fishery. In collaboration with US delegates on the
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, the
researchers will produce a report outlining the key findings from the
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective population modeling relies on empirical
and theoretical understanding of how environment drives krill reproduction.
There are two critical egg development stages in Antarctic krill that impact
population growth. They are early egg development, and advanced egg
development/spawning. The timing and duration of early egg development
determines the number of eggs produced and the number of seasonal spawning
events a female can undergo. The research team will use samples of Antarctic
krill collected over the last 30 years in late winter/early spring, summer and
early fall. The reproductive development stages of individual females in these
samples will be assessed. These data will be modeled against climatological and
oceanographic data to test three hypotheses. First, they will test if colder
winter conditions correspond to early preparation for spawning. Second, they
will test if favorable winter-summer conditions increase early spawning.
Finally, they will test if favorable winter-summer conditions lengthen the
spawning season. The study will advance current understanding of the
environmental conditions that promote population increases in Antarctic krill
and will fill an important gap in current knowledge of the reproductive
development and output of Antarctic krill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.