* 2038087
* EAGER: RCN: Wastewater Surveillance of SARS-CoV-2
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Alexandria Boehm, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2021
* USD 299,995.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has infected &gt;10 million people and disrupted the
global economy. Tracking the spread of the disease is critical to protecting
public health and assessing the success of pandemic response. Wastewater
surveillance for COVID-19 is based on measuring genes from SARS-CoV-2 (the virus
that causes COVID-19) in municipal wastewater. This information tells us whether
COVID-19 is present and how it is spreading in a community. While this technique
holds promise, major knowledge gaps must be addressed to allow widespread
application of this technique. The goal of this Research Coordination Network
(RCN) project is to connect researchers from across the Nation who are studying
this problem to maximize the discovery potential. This RCN will be completely
virtual to enable widespread participation during the pandemic and allow for
‘open-door’ participation of any interested research groups or individuals.
Specific activities include virtual conferences, workshops, training videos, and
seminars for dissemination of knowledge. Data will be maintained in a
centralized data repository to facilitate sample exchange and archiving.
Exchange and knowledge transfer will be facilitated on a global scale by
connecting with other international wastewater surveillance networks and
efforts. Beyond aiding in the COVID-19 pandemic response, the proposed RCN will
contribute to the scientific literacy of the Nation through student and postdoc
training, data sharing, and broad dissemination of research findings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The infectious agent SARS-CoV-2, a member of the
Coronavirus family, is the causative agent of COVID-19, a respiratory illness
first detected in Wuhan, China in December 2019. COVID-19 has since grown into a
global pandemic, causing &gt;10M illnesses and &gt;500K deaths globally. The
outbreak has led to severe economic impacts resulting from interventions such as
social distancing and stay at home ordinances to slow the spread of the disease.
A significant challenge in responding to COVID-19 is the difficulty of measuring
the prevalence of COVID-19 in a given community. SARS-CoV-2 RNA is shed in the
stool of infected individuals, thereby affording the opportunity to rapidly
monitor for coronavirus presence in centralized wastewater collection systems.
Wastewater surveillance for SARS-CoV-2 RNA has thus emerged as an alternative
for rapid assessment of COVID-19 presence within a community. However, despite
its potential for efficient surveillance, there are numerous critical research
questions that remain to be addressed before widespread adoption of this
technique can occur. The team of investigators from the University of Notre
Dame, Howard University, Stanford University, and Arizona State University will
convene a one-year Research Coordination Network (RCN) effort with the goal of
connecting teams from across the country studying SARS-CoV-2 in wastewater to
address these knowledge gaps. Network activities will be held virtually to
maximize participation during the pandemic. Specific activities include virtual
conferences facilitated by the Water Research Foundation, workshops, training
videos, and seminars for dissemination of knowledge. Exchange and knowledge
transfer will be facilitated on a global scale by connecting with other
international wastewater surveillance networks and efforts. Successful
completion of this RCN will accelerate the transfer of knowledge leading to more
rapid adoption of best practices that can facilitate the development of
wastewater surveillance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.