* 2038406
* Using Coevolutionary Algorithms to Identify Distractor Answers for Multiple Choice Questions Used for Peer Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Rudolf Wiegand, Winthrop University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 222,878.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
computer science education. To do so, it plans to assist instructors in
generating high quality, multiple choice questions that provide insights into
the areas where students struggle. The project will accomplish this goal by
using coevolutionary algorithms to identify appropriate distractor (i.e.
incorrect) answers for multiple-choice questions used for peer instruction. A
frequently used form of peer instruction starts when the instructor presents
students with a multiple-choice question and asks them to submit an individual
answer. The students then discuss their answers in a group of peers and submit a
group consensus answer, which may or not be the same as the individual answers.
Finally, the instructor discusses the solution and the distractors. The project
will develop software to algorithmically select distractor answers that best
reveal student understandings and misunderstandings. The resulting multiple-
choice questions will be usable in quizzes and tests, and as questions for peer
instruction activities in physical or virtual courses. The system will also
provide instructors with data analytics and visualizations, thus helping them
better understand how students are performing and where they are struggling.
Finally, because the software can use open-ended answers generated by students
or faculty to any question, the software will not be specific to computer
science, but could be used for courses across STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is based on the novel application of
coevolutionary techniques as an approach for understanding both student-student
interactions and to generate teaching artifacts that adapt to changing student
populations. The work focuses on ways to develop new coevolutionary techniques
that also involve students in the process of authoring peer instruction
multiple-choice questions. This approach leverages techniques generally found in
Human-Based Evolutionary Algorithms. Such techniques are crucial to enabling the
artificial evolution of semantically complex teaching artifacts, such as
multiple-choice questions, that could not be automatically generated otherwise.
The first stage of the project will apply various coevolutionary algorithms to
select distractors from a pool of instructor-authored options. The second stage
of the project will provide a software tool that will allow students to select
distractors from the instructor-authored pool for questions given to their
peers. The third stage of the project will allow students to author their own
distractors. The project will study which algorithms are able to generate the
most pedagogically sound distractors and how the algorithmic approach compares
to human-selected distractors. This project is supported by the NSF Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources. The IUSE:
EHR program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This project is in the Engaged
Student Learning track, through which the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.