* 2038010
* EAGER-QAC-QSA: Variational Quantum Algorithms for Nonequilibrium Quantum Many-Body Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Peter Orth, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,988.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is made on an EAGER
proposal invited through the Quantum Algorithm Challenge Dear Colleague Letter.
It supports research and education to develop and implement algorithms to run on
quantum computers that currently exist or will exist in the near future. A
perfect quantum computer is expected to solve certain problems of practical
interest much faster than any conventional computer, also called a classical
computer. Examples include factoring large numbers into primes with Shor's
algorithm and using Lloyd's algorithm to predict the time evolution of an
interacting quantum system away from equilibrium. The latter could help in
optimization and design of new biomaterials, drugs, and functional quantum
materials. While the past few years have brought tremendous progress in efforts
to build a perfect quantum computer, the current noisy intermediate-scale
quantum (NISQ) technology is potentially decades away from being able to run
Shor's and Lloyd's algorithms at practically relevant scales. The underlying
reason is that NISQ computers possess of the order of hundreds of qubits as
opposed to the millions required to fully correct for errors that arise from
noisy gate operations. This severely limits the complexity of quantum algorithms
compatible with NISQ hardware and exposes a critical need for further
algorithmic advancement to achieve practical quantum
advantage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PIs develop algorithms
tailored to NISQ quantum processing units (QPUs) that can address fundamental
challenges in nonequilibrium physics. Specifically, the research team proposes
new hybrid quantum-classical variational algorithms to simulate nonequilibrium
dynamics and highly excited states in novel materials such as disordered quantum
magnets. The algorithms will be implemented on QPUs from IBM and Rigetti and
carefully benchmarked against existing state-of-the-art quantum and classical
algorithms. In addition to finding opportunities for near-term quantum
advantage, this project will provide new insights into fundamental questions of
how systems of interacting particles relax to thermal equilibrium and how they
respond to strong external fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component of this project addresses the national priorities of educating a
quantum-enabled workforce and enhancing the participation and inclusion of
traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM areas. Within this project, the
PIs will educate and train one graduate student, one undergraduate student, and
one postdoctoral scholar in applying quantum computing algorithms to challenging
open scientific questions. The PIs will also design a hands-on outreach workshop
on quantum computing and present it at "Go Further," a STEM career conference
aimed at female middle- and high-school students. Finally, the PIs will create
and maintain an online blog for the general public that highlights career
options in quantum information science and informs readers about recent trends
in quantum algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is made on an EAGER proposal invited
through the Quantum Algorithm Challenge Dear Colleague Letter. It supports
research and education to develop and implement algorithms to run on quantum
computers that currently exist or will exist in the near future. Noisy
intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) computing devices have computing capabilities
that are beyond the reach of any classical supercomputer, as has recently been
demonstrated by the Google team. Whether they also offer a practical quantum
advantage for calculations of interest in physics, chemistry or materials
science is an open question. Simulations of nonequilibrium dynamics and highly
excited states in quantum many-body systems are a promising yet challenging
target, since classical algorithms for such simulations suffer from the
exponential complexity and highly entangled nature of generic excited states.
The development of resource-efficient quantum algorithms for current NISQ
hardware can unlock their potential to address important challenges in
nonequilibrium many-body physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, the PIs propose two
novel variational quantum algorithms that are based on the variational quantum
eigensolver (VQE) algorithm, which has been demonstrated on NISQ hardware.
Instead of targeting ground states as in previous works, the PIs propose to use
different cost functions to explore the manifold of highly excited and time-
evolved quantum states. After careful benchmarking against known quantum and
classical algorithms, both algorithms will be used to address fundamental open
scientific questions in the fields of many-body localization, nonlinear response
and nonequilibrium dynamics in strongly disordered and interacting quantum
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance the capabilities of
variational algorithms beyond exploring properties of low-energy states. Results
of this research will provide insights into the properties of highly excited
states in strongly disordered interacting spin chains, and address the existence
of many-body localized phases and mobility emulsions, which violate the
eigenstate thermalization hypothesis. The research team will also shed light on
the correlation and entanglement properties of prethermal quantum states that
emerge in post-quench dynamics and test the hypothesis that their temporal
stability is related to a small energy variance, making them approximate
eigenstates. Finally, by implementing efficient NISQ quantum algorithms for the
computation of higher-order and out-of-time-ordered correlation functions, the
PIs will determine whether these functions can disentangle effects of disorder
and interactions on quasiparticle properties and explore the onset of quantum
chaos in spin models. By addressing fundamental challenges in condensed matter
physics, the research team will contribute to the open question of whether NISQ
technology offers a practical quantum advantage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.