* 2038609
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Timeliness vs. Trustworthiness: Balancing Predictability and Security in Time-Sensitive CPS Design
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Nathan Fisher, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2024
* USD 240,000.00

Many cyber-physical systems (CPS) have real-time (RT) requirements. For these
RT-CPS, such as a network of unmanned aerial vehicles that deliver packages to
customersâ€™ homes or a robot that performs/aides in cardiac surgery, deadline
misses may result in economic losses or even fatal consequences. At the same
time, as these RT-CPS interact with, and are depended on by, humans, they must
also be trustworthy. The goal of this research is to design secure RT-CPS that
are less complex, easier to analyze, and reliable for critical application
domains such as defense, medicine, transportation, manufacturing, and
agriculture, to name just a few. Since RT-CPS now permeate most aspects of our
daily lives, especially in the smart city and internet-of-things (IoT) context,
this research will improve confidence in automated systems by users. Research
results will be disseminated to both academia and industry, and permit timely
adoption since the hardware required in this research is already publicly
available. This project will result in a pipeline of engineers and computer
scientists who are well-versed in the interdisciplinary nature of securing RT-
CPS, as well as course modules and red-teaming exercises for undergraduate
students in all engineering disciplines and interactive learning modules and
internship experience for K-12 students in D.C., Detroit, Dallas, and St.
Louis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to design secure RT-CPS
from the ground up while explicitly accounting for physical dynamics of said RT-
CPS at runtime to achieve resilience via prevention and detection of, and
recovery from, attacks. This will be accomplished by (i) securing the scheduling
infrastructure from the ground up, (ii) using a formal framework for trading off
security against timeliness while accounting for system dynamics, and for the
cost of security to be explicitly quantified, and (iii) performing state- and
function-dependent on-demand recovery. Said RT-CPS will be able to proactively
prevent attacks using moving target defenses, as well as detect and recover from
attacks that cannot be avoided. This research will pave the way for RT-CPS and
internet-of-things (IoT) to be implemented with confidence: their timely and
correct operation guaranteed. Specific contributions of this research are: (i) a
trusted scheduling infrastructure that can protect the integrity of the real-
time tasks, the scheduler, its task queues, and I/O, and which can recover from
(intentional) errors, (ii) a probabilistic real-time/security co-design
framework that exploits trusted execution to protect the security of the real-
time tasks, (iii) novel schedulability analysis techniques, (iv) an incremental
recovery mechanism for continuous operation, and (v) validation on automated
ground vehicles, drones, and robot arms. Contributions expanding the knowledge
base will be made to the fields of CPS, IoT, real-time systems, security, and
control systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.