* 2038372
* RAPID: Tribal capacity to evaluate COVID-19 using wastewater-based epidemiology
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Erin Driver, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has greatly impacted society. These impacts are
particularly hard on Native American communities due to healthcare disparities,
multi-generational housing, and limitations in sanitation infrastructure. As a
result, mandatory curfews, border closures, and shutdowns have been implemented
to prevent further spread of COVID-19 in Tribal communities. However, it is
difficult to assess the success of such measures without routine testing. The
goal of this project is to determine whether wastewater-based epidemiology can
be used to monitor SARS-CoV-2 in Tribal communities to rapidly assess COVID-19
outbreaks. Results from this assessment will help Tribal health care
professionals assess the impact of quarantine and lock-down strategies. Training
and outreach materials will be developed to help Tribal leaders protect the
health and welfare of their communities both during the current pandemic, and in
future outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted Native
American communities particularly hard due to the prevalence of communal living,
lack of potable water infrastructure, limited access to internet and cable
services which restricts the flow of public health information, and health
disparities that affect infection rates and outbreaks. Tribal leadership across
the country has implemented strict mandatory curfew and lock-down ordinances,
border closures, and government shutdowns to slow the spread of the pandemic.
However, routine testing of COVID-19 is not feasible in these resource-limited
communities, making it difficult to assess the effectiveness of control
measures. The goal of this project is to investigate the feasibility of using
wastewater-based epidemiology (WBE) to monitor SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes
COVID-19) in Tribal communities. This goal will be achieved through an
evaluation of wastewater permit data to target Tribal communities where SARS-
CoV-2 will be measured in wastewater treatment systems. Results will be used to
develop culturally appropriate WBE research training and educational materials
for wastewater utility operators, health professionals, and Tribal leaders.
Successful implementation of WBE would enable Tribal communities to rapidly
evaluate community health and assess the success of intervention
measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.