* 2038499
* Collaborative Research: Mechanistic Understanding of Chemical Activation in Shear-Driven Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Ashlie Martini, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2024
* USD 260,775.00

Chemical reactions are the basis of many manufacturing processes and play
important roles in their performance and energy utilization. Many manufacturing
processes involve heating source materials to drive reactions to form desired
products. However, another way to drive reactions is through the use of
mechanical force. This project focuses specifically on reactions driven by
friction force at sliding interfaces. Such tribochemical reactions underpin
manufacturing processes including chemical mechanical polishing and the
formation of protective films on the surface of mechanical components. As such,
a fundamental understanding of tribochemical reactions can lead to the
development of more energy efficient, sustainable manufacturing processes. This
research topic lies at the intersection of chemical and mechanical engineering
and, as such, the students involved in the research necessarily receive
interdisciplinary training. This research is integrated into undergraduate and
graduate courses and engages students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In mechanistic studies of shear-driven chemical
reactions, researchers often employ a mechanically assisted thermal activation
model from which a parameter referred to as the ‘critical activation volume’ can
be defined. Recent advancements in experimental techniques have enabled
measurement of this activation volume for various tribochemical reactions and
the measured values have been compared with a variety of physical volumes.
However, such comparisons are unfounded since the thermal activation model
describes an energy difference between the reactant and transition states of a
reaction and does not contain molecular information of a molecular description
associated with these states. This work hypothesizes that activation volume is
determined by the propensity of molecules or surface atoms to deform relative to
their equilibrium geometries under interfacial shear, and that its magnitude is
governed by the geometric structure of precursor molecules, chemisorption to the
sliding substrate or formation of interfacial bonds across a shear plane, and
environmental conditions such as co-adsorbates, temperature, etc. This
hypothesis is investigated through complementary tribochemical experiments and
reactive molecular dynamics simulations using model systems with controlled
molecular parameters that enable isolation of the individual contributions to
the specific set of independent variables and their synergistic
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.