* 2038418
* Acquisition of a SEM-EDS-CL microanalytical system for research, teaching, and outreach in Geology at Colby College, a Primarily Undergraduate Institution (PUI)
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Bess Koffman, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 299,500.00

This grant funds the acquisition of a new state-of-the-art scanning-electron-
microscope (SEM) for high-resolution imaging and analysis of Earth materials,
such as volcanic dust, meteorites, and fault rocks. This new instrument will be
used to support and enrich ongoing research in the Geology department at Colby
College, and it will provide valuable training opportunities for undergraduate
students in Geology and other STEM fields. This new SEM system also is ideal for
classroom use and will be integrated into all levels of Colby’s geology
curriculum, from introductory geology to senior capstone experiences. Colby
faculty in the Biology and Physics Departments also will incorporate the SEM
into their teaching and research programs, thus increasing the overall impact of
the new instrument. The SEM will be used by a diverse group of students across
campus, including incoming first-year students in Colby’s immersive summer
program for students from underrepresented or disadvantaged groups who are
interested in science. Geology faculty also will share research results with the
mostly rural, underserved population of central Maine through their
participation in community outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
to Colby College is for the acquisition of a variable-pressure scanning electron
microscope equipped with a low-vacuum secondary (SE) detector, a high-
sensitivity back-scatter-electron (BSE) detector, an energy-dispersive-
spectrometer (EDS), and a color-cathodoluminescence (color-CL) detector. The new
SEM system will support a variety of research initiatives at Colby College,
including: 1) understanding the physical and chemical mechanisms that weaken
rocks in fault zones and help control earthquake-generating fault slip events;
2) elucidating the early evolution of our solar system as recorded in fragments
of asteroids that fall to Earth as meteorites; and 3) constraining the effects
past volcanic eruptions on climate and assessing the impacts of atmospheric dust
deposition on the productivity of marine ecosystems. The SEM system will
increase the research capabilities of faculty in the Geology Department at Colby
College, and will enable ~60 undergraduate Geology majors to engage in research
over the next decade. Access to the SEM will allow student users to develop
cutting-edge skills that will be useful for future careers in a wide range of
STEM fields. Faculty in other STEM fields also will incorporate the SEM into
their teaching and research programs, thus increasing the overall impact of the
new instrument. The SEM will help Geology faculty recruit and retain students
from under-represented or disadvantaged backgrounds through their ongoing work
the Colby Achievement Program in the Sciences—a 6-week immersive summer program
for incoming first-year students from underrepresented groups who are interested
in STEM majors. This award received co-funding from the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.