* 2038032
* EAGER: QAC: QCH: Holographic Quantum Algorithms for Simulating Many-Body Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Andrew Potter, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Accurately modeling materials is essential for
guiding materials discovery and designing advanced electronic devices. However,
simulating the quantum-mechanical properties of materials on a microscopic scale
poses tremendous computational challenges that often exceed the capabilities of
even the most advanced supercomputers. Quantum computers offer a potential means
to circumvent these challenges by harnessing the same aspects of quantum physics
that make material simulation challenging for conventional computers. While a
promising approach, there is a large gap in size and accuracy between quantum
computers that can be built with current technology and those needed to make
progress on real-world relevant materials challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
close this gap, this project will develop quantum software and hardware
prototypes in which quantum computations are performed on efficiently compressed
quantum data, to dramatically reduce the resources required to simulate large-
scale material models. These techniques are dubbed “holographic” as they encode
high-dimensional data on a lower-dimensional physical system, much like a
hologram. This research will expedite the application of near-term quantum
computers, with limited memory and accuracy, to realistic materials and chemical
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop holographic quantum simulation techniques that indirectly
encode the quantum state of a material in an efficiently compressed
representation that greatly reduces the number of required qubits, and
fundamentally limits the impact of noise and errors. This compression is
achieved by an algorithm that alternates between coherent entangling gates and
measurement of a selected subset of qubits. This approach represents a dramatic
departure from conventional quantum algorithmic frameworks and will require a
fundamental rethinking of quantum algorithm and hardware
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct research to establish a
basic theoretical and experimental proof-of-principle for holographic simulation
techniques. Advanced holographic simulation techniques will be developed to
treat electronic materials, 2d and 3d models, and compute non-equilibrium
electronic and thermal transport and optical spectra relevant for real-world
devices. The fundamental capabilities and limitations of holographic
representations of quantum states will be rigorously characterized. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project team will fabricate a circuit quantum electrodynamics
(cQED) testbed in which a two-level superconducting qubit controls a multi-level
superconducting cavity mode. The multi-level cavity mode provides a larger
quantum memory than a conventional two-level qubit, and the hybrid qubit/cavity
system provides powerful methods to create quantum entanglement. Together, these
advantages will enable simulation of more complex material states with the same
number of quantum devices compared to conventional qubit-only systems. The
project team will demonstrate the developed holographic algorithms on this cQED
testbed and benchmark its performance against complementary simulations on
commercial quantum computing platforms. Lessons learned from this exploratory
phase will be used to design scalable cQED devices for holographic simulations
of large-scale problems that exceed the capabilities of current classical
supercomputers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award by the Division of
Materials Research is jointly supported with the Division of
Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.