* 2038059
* 2020 Waterman Award
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Emily Balskus, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) has named Dr. Emily Balskus one of the two
2020 recipients of its Alan T. Waterman Award. This award is NSF's highest honor
that annually recognizes an outstanding researcher who is 40 years or younger or
not more than 10 years beyond receipt of the Ph.D. degree, by December 31 of the
year of the nomination. The award funds the recipient's research in any field of
science or engineering. This year, each awardee will receive a $1 million grant
over a five-year period for further advanced study in his or her field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Balskus is a professor of chemistry and chemical
biology at Harvard University. Her research focuses on delineating the
relationships between microbiomes and their hosts. It has led to the ability to
take control of newly discovered chemical reaction pathways in microorganisms,
so as to develop new routes for making organic molecules that are of great value
to the energy, biomedical, and industrial communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has led to methods for identifying and
isolating molecules containing cyclopropane rings and demonstrating that they
cause DNA damage upon organism exposure to toxins, which has been linked to
cancer; unprecedented chemically-guided genome mining approaches that have led
to the discovery of choline utilization genes, characterization of the
structures and functions of associated key enzymes, and the design of small
molecule inhibitors of these enzymes that are being pursued as tools and
therapeutics; and the identification of gut microbes and their enzymes that
metabolize the L-DOPA (3,4-dihydroxylphenylalanine)widely utilized for the
treatment of Parkinson's disease, with the discovery of small molecules that
increase L-DOPA bioavailability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Balskus has received
recognition for her work from a diverse group of professional and technical
societies through a variety of awards, including the Tetrahedron Young
Investigator Award (2020), the Laureate in Chemistry of the Blavatnik National
Awards for Young Scientists (2019), the Arthur C. Cope Scholar Award (2018) and
the Pfizer Award in Enzyme Chemistry (2018) from the American Chemical Society,
being named an HHMI-Gates Faculty Scholar (2016), receiving an NSF CAREER Award
(2015), being named one of the top 35 innovators under 35 by the MIT Technology
Review (2014), and receiving a Sloan Research Fellowship (2014). Furthermore,
her contributions have been honored by lectureships and have been identified as
being at the cutting edge through leadership roles in international conferences,
which include giving the Saltman Award Lecture at the Metals in Biology Gordon
Research Conference (2019) and being co-organizer of the 2019 Keystone
Conference on chemical and biological considerations of the gut microbiota. Her
work has been featured in Nature Communications, Science, and other major
scientific journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Balskus deems mentoring of
students and outreach to rising female scientists as integral components of her
role as an educator and scientist, as evidenced by her leading activities in the
scientific and general communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.