* 2038244
* Developing and Assessing Engineering Students' Cognitive Flexibility in the Domain of Sustainable Design
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Robin Anderson, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2021
* USD 65,747.00

Due to global trends in rising resource consumption and environmental
degradation, numerous professional organizations like the National Academy of
Engineering and the National Society of Professional Engineers have called on
the engineering profession to address sustainable development in their projects
and decision-making. For engineers to effectively contribute to global
sustainable development, they must learn to understand and apply sustainability
concepts in problem-solving and design. Typically in design classes,
undergraduate students have difficulty integrating or building on knowledge from
other engineering and non-engineering courses to evaluate the broader context
for their decision-making. Therefore, the goal of this project is to develop and
assess a sustainable design framework for instruction in upper-level design
courses that develops students' ability to apply complex knowledge across
different problem contexts. As potentially cross-cutting features of engineering
curricula, "design" and "sustainability" represent an opportunity for
integration and development of a unifying thread for engineering problem-
solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research uses a novel application of
cognitive flexibility theory to the complex and ill-structured domain of
sustainable engineering design, intended to prepare students for solving
societal challenges of sustainable development. The project team seeks a better
understanding of how students learn and how they use and transfer knowledge of
sustainable design thinking, tools, and processes in new settings. Of particular
importance is how these experiences help to make better engineers and could lead
to better outcomes for all career destinations. The team will employ a mixed-
methods approach to measure the depth and breadth of such learning. Guided by
four research questions, it is anticipated that: (a) classification of real-
world sustainable design problems will lead to an understanding and
characterizing of complex problem solving domains and processes, (b) students'
learning outcomes (cognitive, affective, social, and professional) will be
assessed in order to understand how these problems enable cognitive abilities,
(c) innovative instruments and assessment tools, that can be transferred across
institutions, programs, departments, and experiences, will be developed, and (d)
strategies for implementing complex sustainable design problem solving in
engineering education will be investigated. Through this project a broad
community of practice of engineering educators will be established across
disciplines, as design instruction is incorporated into all accredited
engineering programs and as the challenge of sustainable development is a call
to all engineers.