* 2038373
* 2020-2024 Provision of log data reduction and database services for scientific ocean drilling
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* David Goldberg, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Allan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,956,865.00

Part 1: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the previous Integrated Ocean Drilling Program,
NSF supported operation of the U.S. drillship JOIDES Resolution (JR) through a
contract to the Consortium for Ocean Leadership (COL). COL, as prime contractor,
oversaw subcontracts to Texas A&amp;M University (as "Prime Contractor" for
operating the JR) and Columbia University (as "Logging Contractor"). The
Borehole Research Group (BRG), under PI Goldberg, provided downhole logging
services that included management of the logging subcontractor Schlumberger as
well as logging data reduction and quality control, and management of the IODP
logging database. These logging services are primarily geophysical measurements
done remotely in the drilled borehole, such as borehole wall rock or sediment
(formation) resistivity, geochemistry, seismic properties, or magnetic
properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the current International Ocean Discovery
Program (IODP), a new NSF Cooperative Agreement to Texas A&amp;M University as
JOIDES Resolution Science Operator (JRSO) replaced the contract for FY2015. At
the time of this award, it was recognized that a need existed to maintain the
IODP logging database and the data reduction and quality control activities
provided under the previous logging subcontract, activities that the JRSO at
award could not easily or inexpensively provide. Thus, NSF made previous 3 year
awards to the PI to provide these services in FY 2015-2017 and FY 2018-2020, an
arrangement that has worked very well with no issues identified during review by
independent NSF panels examining JR facility operations performance in FY2015,
2016, 2017, and 2019. An NSF panel examined JR facility operations fo FY2018 and
further identified no performance issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
represents a new award to the PI to continue to provide these shipboard downhole
logging data services, including data reduction, quality control, support of a
user-accessible database containing these logging data, and archiving of the
data in easily retrievable form in an international database and in a deep
archive supported by there U.S. Government. This award will support these
services for four additional years, through the end of the
IODP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will provide
support for four years of the following services: &lt;br/&gt;1) Rapid data
reduction and quality control of logging data acquired aboard JOIDES Resolution
drillship International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP) Expeditions by the
logging subcontractor Schlumberger, with subsequent return of the reduced data
in near real-time to the Expedition Science Party aboard the drillship;
&lt;br/&gt;2) Archiving of raw and reduced logging data within the existing IODP
logging database LogDB housed at Columbia University;&lt;br/&gt;3) Storing the
logging data following FAIR (findable-accessible-interoperable-reusable)
criteria in the CERN-supported international data base, publishing Digital
Object Identifiers (DOI's) for each well log dataset;&lt;br/&gt;4) Maintain and
enhance web services for automated query and retrieval of data from LogDB;
&lt;br/&gt;5) Submit full sets of raw and processed data for deep archiving to
the National Centers for Environmental Information; and &lt;br/&gt;6) Provide
support for LogDB users, especially neophytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.