* 2038381
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating Correlations Between Solvation Structure and Electrochemical Behavior of Water-in-Salt Electrolytes for Highly Reversible Zinc Metal Anode
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Xiulei Ji, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/29/2024
* USD 389,972.00

Renewable energy from wind energy and solar power offers a solution to reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and their impact on climate change. Unfortunately, the
power that can be generated from these renewable sources is intermittent and
typically asynchronous with electrical energy demand. Thus, large-scale energy
storage is indispensable for a sustainable economy with reduced reliance on
fossil fuels. Representing a promising solution to this energy storage need,
aqueous zinc (Zn) metal batteries can store energy at a low cost, with low
environmental footprint and high intrinsic safety. However, Zn metal batteries
suffer from short cycle life, primarily due to corrosion of the Zn metal anode
by water. This corrosion drastically curtails the cycle life of Zn metal
batteries and causes a safety concern due to the generation of explosive
hydrogen gas—two challenges that require outside-the-box solutions. The recent
emergence of highly concentrated “water-in-salt” electrolytes offers a unique
opportunity to re-define the stability between the Zn metal anode and the
aqueous electrolyte. This project seeks to transform the cyclic stability and
increase safe operation of aqueous Zn metal batteries. If successful, this will
mark a significant breakthrough for energy storage technologies in the United
States. For educational impacts, the investigators will leverage institutional
programs their universities to increase the participation of community college
students and high school students in summer research experiences. The training
of graduate and undergraduate students will feed the workforce need of the next-
generation energy sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will elucidate the
water stability properties in extremely concentrated solutions by integrating
research activities in materials electrochemistry, femtosecond Raman
spectroscopy, and ab initio computation. These complementary methods are highly
synergistic, providing insights from different vantage points that when
integrated can enable deep understanding. In the concentrated electrolytes of
study there are few water molecules per solvated ion; therefore, the solvation
sheaths are often thinner or incomplete compared to standard dilute solutions.
Such solvation structures significantly alter the properties of the solvated
ions and the dynamic water molecules as a solvent. Preliminary results have
revealed that water molecules exhibit unusually high electrochemical stability
against hydrogen evolution and display an intriguing blueshift of vibrational
frequencies in stimulated Raman studies. First-principles calculations indicate
that there exist peculiar properties of water molecules to be explored in these
concentrated solutions. This project will generate an in-depth understanding of
the correlation between solvation structures of the concentrated electrolytes
and the corresponding stability in contact with the Zn metal anode. The values
of such knowledge will transcend different disciplines of physical sciences and
engineering and impact a broad range of STEM learners and practitioners in
academic and industrial settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.