* 2038984
* CPS: Medium: Hybrid Twins for Urban Transportation: From Intersections to Citywide Management
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2025
* Gil Zussman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,300,000.00

This Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) grant will focus on the development of an
urban traffic management system, which is driven by public needs for improved
safety, mobility, and reliability within metropolitan areas. Future cities will
be radically transformed by the Internet of Things (IoT), which will provide
ubiquitous connectivity between physical infrastructure, mobile assets, humans,
and control systems. In particular, IoT and smart traffic management have the
potential to significantly improve increasingly faltering transportation systems
that account for over 25% of greenhouse gas emissions and over one trillion
dollars of annual economic and social loss. The project develops a hybrid twin
that operates in parallel with the real world at real-time resolution,
leveraging machine learning and edge computing, to monitor surrounding traffic,
send safety warnings to connected vulnerable users, and provide learning-based
controls to traffic lights and automated vehicles. As such, the broader impacts
include advancing the understanding of urban traffic modeling, computation, and
simulation, and enriching transportation science with data science. The
accompanying educational plan aims to broaden participation in computing and
engineering by underrepresented minorities and women via outreach programs,
including programs for Harlem public school teachers and K-12 students, as well
as new graduate course development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projectâ€™s goal is
to develop a hierarchical and distributed hybrid twin to support urban traffic
management systems while leveraging Artificial Intelligence (AI), edge cloud
computing, and next generation communication networks. A hybrid twin consists of
a virtual (i.e., existing traffic simulation) and a digital twin, which
integrate physics-based models and assimilate data acquired from infrastructure
and in-vehicle sensors for traffic modeling, prediction, and management. The
foundational research contributions are data analytics and machine learning
including real-time learning for control. The traffic management system will be
validated and evaluated via computer simulation and experimentation in the NSF
PAWR COSMOS city-scale wireless testbed that is being deployed in West Harlem
next to the Columbia campus. This unique urban testbed will provide a realistic
environment for the system design and evaluation process, and will also serve as
a platform for local community outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.