* 2038293
* Collaborative Research: Microbial necromass decomposition: moving from predictions to principles
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Jennifer Pett-Ridge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2024
* USD 826,475.00

Microorganisms have been increasingly recognized as significant contributors to
the accumulation of organic matter in soil through the inputs of their own dead
cell material, collectively referred to as necromass. Despite progress in
quantifying the ecological factors affecting the rates of necromass
decomposition, which microorganisms actually drive this turnover and how
interactions among different functional groups affect degradation dynamics
remains poorly understood. The overarching objective of the proposed research is
to functionally characterize how bacteria and fungi, both alone and together,
degrade microbial necromass and how the carbon and nitrogen from necromass moves
into different ecosystem pools (both soils and plants). The cross-disciplinary
strengths of the research team will provide a holistic understanding of how
decomposer community functioning influences microbial necromass decomposition in
ways directly relevant to important ecosystem services such as soil carbon
storage and plant nutrient acquisition. Along with enhancing our understanding
of the functioning of necromass-associated microbial communities, the project
has multiple broader impacts activities focused on sharing knowledge with public
audiences and training a diverse pool of STEM-focused students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research aims include: Aim 1: Characterize
the genes and metabolic pathways involved in microbial necromass degradation
using well-studied fungal and bacterial decomposition systems; Aim 2: Determine
which soil microbes use resources derived from microbial necromass and how its
decomposition affects soil carbon and nitrogen pools; Aim 3: Track how trees
acquire microbial necromass-derived nitrogen via ectomycorrhizal fungal
symbioses. These aims will be addressed through an integrated set of experiments
that scale from individual microbial cultures to complex communities. In the
first aim, RNAseq-based lab experiments will generate a detailed profile of gene
expression during the decay of fungal necromass in an ecologically relevant and
diverse set of fungi and bacteria. The second aim will couple qSIP analyses of
the microbial communities on field-based decaying necromass with isotopic
analyses of surrounding soils and roots (using both IRMS and NanoSIMS imaging)
to quantitatively track carbon and nitrogen release from necromass types into
different ecosystem pools. Finally, in Aim 3, microbial communities present on
lab-incubated necromass will be experimentally manipulated to examine how
initial substrate chemistry and interspecific competition affect the amount of
necromass nitrogen transferred to trees by ectomycorrhizal fungi. Collectively,
this research seeks to transition the study microbial necromass decomposition
from a largely descriptive to a mechanistically predictive
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.