* 2038603
* CPS: Medium: An AI-enabled Cyber-Physical-Biological System for Cardiac Organoid Maturation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Jia Liu, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 898,225.00

The ability to determine and control the maturation of human-induced pluripotent
stem cell (hiPSC) derived tissues is critical to tissue engineering,
regenerative medicine, pharmacology, and synthetic biology, which requires the
interrogation and intervention of cellular activities across the three-
dimensional (3D) volume of tissues and over the time course of tissue
development at cellular resolution. This proposal aims to build an AI-enabled
cyber-physical-biological system to monitor and control the maturation of hiPSC
derived cardiomyocyte (hiPSC-CM) organoids during development. The proposed
research will develop “tissue-like” nanoelectronics that can be integrated into
the developing cardiac organoids, distributing the electronic sensor and
actuator network throughout the entire 3D volume of the tissue and enabling
tissue-level recording and control over the entire time course of development at
single-cell resolution. In situ single-cell RNA sequencing will be used to
integrate gene expression data with continuous physical sensing data. Machine
learning and statistical models will be built for interpreting the online
sensing data, and cyber-control methods will be developed for the closed-loop
online control of the cardiac organoid maturation. The developed hardware and
software can be applied to virtually any current biological systems, in which
the change of cellular states can be reliably recorded and controlled through
the electronic sensors and actuators. The success of this proposal will further
merge the field of AI, nanoelectronics, and biology, bringing unlimited
opportunities for access and control to biological and biomedical engineering.
The multidisciplinary teamwork will represent a successful case that schools of
thought from diverse fields including bioengineering, machine learning,
statistics, control theory, etc. inspire and complement each other to create
state-of-the-art research results in each field. The research team will also
collaborate with internal and external partners to launch educational and
societal activities for students from diverse backgrounds, such as providing
e-seminars, workshops and new courses for undergraduate students on advanced
nanoelectronics fabrication, and workshops and tours for local K-12 students to
explore stem cell culture, online videos to disseminate new research in
genomics, mathematical and computational modeling, integration of AI,
nanoelectronics, and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to develop a
seamless integration of cyber-physical systems with biological systems, enabling
a closed-loop control, capable of real-time, bidirectionally, and long-term
stably interrogating and intervening cellular activities across the 3D volume of
tissue networks at single-cell resolution. As a demonstration, we will apply
this cyber-physical-biological system to the hiPSC-CM organoids, promoting and
accelerating their maturation. We will achieve our goal through the following 4
technical innovations: (A) developing technologies to integrate stretchable mesh
nanoelectronics with multifunctional sensors and actuators to the cardiac
organoids, enabling real-time monitoring and control of organoid development;
(B) precisely registering electronic sensors during in situ single-cell RNA
sequencing to determine the molecular maturation of cardiac organoids and
correlate spatial gene expression profiling with sensing data at single-cell
resolution; (C) developing novel machine learning models and tools to identify
the statistical interference between gene expression and organoid-wide
electrical and mechanical recording and also building online predictive models
to real-time determine the maturation of cardiac organoids; (D) developing
effective and scalable Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods to determine
optimized electrical activation patterns to promote the maturation of cardiac
organoids and to test its performance in patient-specific cardiac
organoids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.