* 2038102
* EAGER: Archaeological Investigation of Site Form and Function during the Settlement Period
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2021,11/30/2021
* Kathryn Catlin, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 11/30/2021
* USD 197,832.00

Iceland, one of the last land masses explored by humans, was first settled in
the late ninth century. Archaeologists have generally assumed that early
settlement took the form of large, centralized farms, yet discovery of an
increasing number of small, short-lived sites challenges this model. This EAGER
project investigates one of the oldest and earliest small sites in North Iceland
through coring and archaeological excavation. The objective is to determine the
nature of human activity at the site and whether site inhabitants lived
independent of wealthy farmsteads and pursued alternative subsistence
strategies. The discovery of small, permanent habitations during the early
settlement period would transform understanding of the process of initial
landscape colonization, forcing archaeologists to rethink their assumptions
about the nature of social organization, subsistence, and settlement patterns
during landn√°m.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeological study of this early
settlement-period site involves systematic coring to establish the preservation,
extent and character of the cultural deposits. Open-air excavation follows with
test trenching to expose the building identified during initial testing and to
determine its form, size, and age. Collection and comprehensive analysis of
artifacts, plant and animal remains, and soil samples complement study of the
structure and provide insight into daily activities, subsistence, and length of
habitation. This project will be conducted in association with a local museum,
engaging community members in their own past. The project will also provide
international fieldwork experience to U.S. university students and familiarize
them with testing and excavation methods and with the STEM fields employed in
archaeological research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.