* 2038312
* EAGER: CAS-MNP: Effect of Sunlight on Fate and Transport of Nanoplastics and Associated Organic Pollutants in Aquatic Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Matthew Tarr, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 245,507.00

With support from the NSF Division of Chemistry and the NSF 2026 Fund Program in
the NSF Office of Integrated Activities, Professor Matthew Tarr and Professor
Phoebe Zito at the University of New Orleans study nanoplastics. Very small
plastic particles (microplastics and nanoplastics) have been found in increasing
amounts in oceans and may be a threat to the health of aquatic organisms.
Rivers, lakes, and oceans are essential to human life. These systems contain a
complex web of organisms that can be severely impacted by pollutants.
Combinations of pollutants often have more damaging impacts than one pollutant
alone. Nanoplastics (which have sizes from a nanometer up to about a micron)
form in the breakdown of used plastic drink bottles, clothing fibers from
laundry, and other sources of plastic. This project studies how sunlight changes
nanoplastics and their impact on aquatic organisms. The energy in sunlight can
break down nanoplastics, but very little is known about the resulting materials.
The data from this project give new information on how and how fast sunlight
helps eliminate nanoplastics or causes them to be more dangerous to aquatic
organisms. The project also directly addresses one of the top thirty-three Idea
Machine entries: "Imagine a Life with Clean Oceans." The project provides
research opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Model nanoplastics are exposed to simulated
sunlight. Experiments assess both physical and chemical changes that occur.
Photochemical degradation products are determined using high resolution mass
spectrometry and infrared spectroscopy. Simple toxicity screenings monitor
potential impacts of the photoproducts. Physical changes are assessed using
dynamic light scattering and electron microscopy. Photoproduction of reactant
transients is observed using well-established chemical probe methods. Studies in
the presence of dissolved natural organic matter evaluate the impacts of
nanoplastics as free radical scavengers that alter indirect photodegradation,
which normally occurs in natural waters. The impact of nanoplastics on the
photochemistry of important molecular pollutants is evaluated through
irradiation of model pollutants with and without
nanoplastics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.