* 2038140
* MsRI-EW: Enabling Transformative Advances in Materials Engineering through Development of Novel Approaches to Electron Microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2021
* Peter Crozier, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The project supports a workshop bringing together experts from the engineering,
materials science, and data science communities to identify electron microscopy
(EM) infrastructure needs for advancing materials engineering across a broad
range of technological applications including construction, manufacturing,
catalysis, structures, communication, energy conversion/storage, and biomedical
devices. The workshop will 1) summarize the state of the art in current and
near-future instrumentation for electron microscope imaging, spectroscopy, and
diffraction characterization of materials, 2) elucidate key science drivers in
the areas of catalysis and separations, quantum technology, data science, and
the human/machine interface, and 3) identify optimal project management
practices facilitating instrumentation and related infrastructure enabling
transformative discoveries of engineered materials. The workshop will be held
virtually in August of 2020 and will include 80-100 participants representing
academic institutions, industry, and national laboratories. The workshop
participants will include a diverse group of attendees representing expertise in
materials science and engineering, microscopy, instrumentation, data science,
and research project management.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Materials have evolved to
play a critical and ubiquitous role in science and engineering. Many aspects of
interfacial effects in materials-related technologies such as catalysis,
separations, energy storage/conversion, environmental technologies,
optoelectronic devices, communication, and quantum systems remain unknown or
poorly understood. Extreme conditions, weak interactions or rapid dynamics
present overwhelming challenges to interfacial structure characterization with
current instrumentation – not only in resolution and sensitivity, but also in
data acquisition and analysis. Such limitations present roadblocks to addressing
fundamental knowledge gaps that may be addressed through advanced nanoscale and
atomic resolution probing of materials. Electron microscopy (EM) imaging,
spectroscopy and diffraction – when effectively integrated - provide a primary
tool for probing materials structures and properties at the nanometer and atomic
level. Tremendous advances have taken place over the last ten years that have
strengthened our ability to probe materials structure, chemistry, and function
at the sub-Angstrom level. Nevertheless, continuous improvements in EM
instruments, data acquisition and analysis, and supporting facilities are needed
to address the knowledge gaps that currently limit further advances in materials
engineering. To this end, the workshop will 1) conceive novel approaches to
microscopy infrastructure, 2) establish a framework for on-going interactions
between microscopists, detector/data science experts, and the engineering and
materials science research communities to develop and promote strategic long-
term EM infrastructure goals, 3) nucleate collaborative teams capable of
developing and exploiting advanced EM infrastructure towards critical materials
engineering needs, 4) provide guidance to funding agencies for supporting
excellence and leadership in electron microscopy infrastructure, and 5)
cultivate an EM community that promotes broader participation of females and
other underrepresented groups in the materials science and engineering research
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.