* 2038305
* Magnetic interactions for selective assembly and reconfiguration of colloids
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Bhuvnesh Bharti, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 12/31/2023
* USD 295,744.00

New materials with desired properties are often formed by binding together nano-
or micron-sized particles in a fast, precise fashion. This task has proven
challenging because available experimental methods do not provide the desired
control over the particle binding and assembly process. The goal of this project
is to use external magnetic fields to provide a new way to control the assembly
and organization of nano- and micron-sized particles in aqueous solution. The
project focuses on effects of particle shape, solvent properties, and the
strength of the applied magnetic field on assembly and structuring of the
particles. The primary goal of the project is to establish an experimental
strategy for rapid fabrication of precise structures of microparticles, which
otherwise requires complex synthetic procedures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use the assembled structures
as micron-sized vehicles for controlled motion and delivery of molecules at a
specified location within the solvent. The subsequent formation of a polymeric
structure along the path of the moving microparticle will be a new class of
polymer printing, where particle assemblies would be used to control the printed
geometry. The project will provide opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students to develop new skills in the emerging field of reconfigurable
materials. The research team will be involved with outreach activities for
visually impaired and middle-school students. In addition, the investigator will
work with Baton Rouge Community College to introduce their students to education
and research opportunities available at LSU. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to answer a fundamental question in particle assembly: Can non-specific
magnetic interactions be used for directing selective assembly and
reconfiguration of multi-component colloidal structures? The hypothesis behind
the project is that the magnetic potential energy landscape around a colloidal
particle can be designed by altering its shape/surface anisotropy and magnetic
susceptibility contrast with the dispersing medium, which may allow for
selective attachment of a guest particle to a specific binding site on a host
microparticle. The project will test the hypothesis and address the
abovementioned question by examining the assembly and reconfiguration of iron
patched colloidal particles in external magnetic field. The project aims to (1)
Direct the assembly process by designing magnetic energy landscapes around a
colloidal particle, (2) Identify the effect of particle shape on the assembly of
the mixture of patchy and non-patchy colloids, (3) Understand the role of
external magnetic field characteristics on the reconfiguration of the assembled
structures, and (4) Develop a particle-based patterning technique using the
assembled structures as active and self-propelling sub-units to drive a
polymerization process in a liquid phase. The project will provide new insights
into the magnetic field driven assembly and reconfiguration of colloids and
establish the principles of guiding local reactions within continuous media
using pre-assembled microstructures. The fundamental principles developed in the
project may provide a platform for rapid and robust assembly of colloidal
structures with low, but controlled symmetry, which is difficult to achieve by
conventional colloidal assembly techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.