* 2038085
* Supporting Student Development Activities at the International Joint Conference on Biometrics (IJCB2020)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2021
* Ioannis Kakadiaris, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 01/31/2021
* USD 17,498.00

Opportunities to present, discuss and receive feedback on scholarship within a
broader community are critical components of student professional development. A
doctoral consortium and undergraduate student mentoring program are ways to
foster meaningful interchanges between scholars at varying levels and nurture
career pathways. With a transition to virtual programming for the 2020
International Joint Conference on Biometrics (IJCB 2020) due to the COVID-19
pandemic, this award supports the incorporation of a doctoral consortium and
undergraduate student mentoring program as part of the conference. IJCB combines
two major biometrics research conferences, the Biometrics Theory, Applications,
and Systems (BTAS) conference and the International Conference on Biometrics
(ICB). The combined conference brings together leading computer vision experts
presenting on advances in fundamental biometrics techniques, new biometrics
algorithms and technologies, analyses of the social impact of biometrics
technology, and identity in behavior analysis. The goals of the doctoral
consortium are to highlight the work of advanced Ph.D. students and facilitate
feedback by senior members of the professional biometrics community. The goal of
the undergraduate student mentoring program is to match undergraduate students
majoring in STEM areas with faculty and industry professionals for advisement
and networking in biometrics. These activities will broaden participation for
undergraduate and doctoral students in the conference and the biometrics
professional community at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IJCB2020 will be held
virtually in fall 2020. The doctoral consortium consists of three main
components: virtual poster presentations by doctoral participants,
individualized feedback by senior members of the community, and breakout
sessions on career and professional development topics. The undergraduate
student mentoring program supports monthly mentoring sessions in September-
December 2020. Student participants and mentors will be recruited through
several means, including the conference website, the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Biometrics Council, and related organization
mailing lists and selected through an application process, with participation
encouraged by individuals from traditionally underrepresented groups. Mentor
matching will be facilitated through the completion of a survey of geographic
locations, mentoring preferences, biometrics areas of interest/experience, and
interpersonal preferences. Up to ten students will be supported to participate
in the doctoral consortium, and up to thirty undergraduate students will be
supported to participate in the undergraduate student mentoring program. The
project is complemented by a comprehensive evaluation plan to include surveys
from mentors and mentees on the strengths, weaknesses, and
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.