* 2038559
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Transforming Connected and Automated Transportation with Smart Networking, Cooperative Sensing, and Edge Computing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Feng Qian, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 259,763.00

This NSF Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) grant will advance the state-of-the-art of
Connected and Automated Vehicle (CAV) systems by innovating in the three key
areas of networking, sensing, and computation, as well as the synergy among
them. This work leverages several emerging technology trends that are expected
to transform the ground transportation system: much higher-speed wireless
connectivity, improved on-vehicle and infrastructure based sensing capabilities,
and advances in machine learning algorithms. So far, most related research and
development focused on individual technologies, leading to limited benefits.
This project will develop an integrated platform that jointly handles
networking, sensing, and computation, by addressing key challenges associated
with the operating conditions of the CAVs: e.g., safety-critical, high mobility,
scarce on-board computing resources, fluctuating network conditions, limited
sensor capabilities. The research team will study how to use the integrated
platform to enable real-world CAV applications, such as enhancement of public
service personnel's safety, alleviation of congestion at bottleneck areas, and
protection of vulnerable road users (VRUs). Given its interdisciplinary nature,
this project will yield a broad impact in multiple research communities
including transportation engineering, mobile/edge computing, and machine
learning. The outcome of this research will benefit multiple stakeholders in the
CAV ecosystem: drivers, pedestrians, CAV manufacturers, transportation
government agencies, mobile network carriers, etc., ultimately improving the
safety and mobility of the nation's transportation system. This project will
also provide a platform to conduct various education and outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual core of this research consists of several
foundational contributions to the ground transportation CPS domain. First, it
innovates vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communications through strategically
aggregating 4G/5G/WiFi/DSRC technologies to enhance network performance. Second,
it develops a cooperative sensing and perception framework where nearby vehicles
can share raw sensor data with an edge node to create a global view, which can
provide extended perceptual range and detection of occluded objects. The key
technical contribution is to ensure good scalability - allowing many moving
vehicles to efficiently share their data despite limited, fluctuating network
resources. Third, it enables partitioning computation across vehicles and the
infrastructure to meet the real-time requirements of CAV applications. Fourth,
integrating the above building blocks of networking, sensing, and computation,
the research team will develop an optimization framework that makes adaptive,
resource-aware decisions on what computation needs to be performed where at
which quality, to maximize the service quality of CAV
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.