* 2038067
* SBIR Phase I:  Open Machine Learning Competitions with Private Data
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Peter Bull, DRIVENDATA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to expand access to artificial intelligence (AI) talent and spur
innovation to solve hard problems while protecting privacy. Machine learning and
AI are bringing transformational change to governments, private companies, and
social sector organizations. Yet in the coming years, innovation will be
hamstrung by limited access to AI talent. Open innovation, such as machine
learning (ML) competitions, provides governments and firms the ability to tap
into a global talent pool to solve some of their most pressing and vexing
challenges. Yet there is currently an immense barrier to running these
competitions: the data must be made available to participants, which can
preclude running a competition if the associated data are too sensitive to
release due to concerns about privacy, security, or confidentiality. With data
talent in increasingly high demand, government agencies, companies, and others
have demonstrated a willingness to invest in this fashion. The proposed project
develops a method to maintain data privacy at scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an end-
to-end competition system that provides privacy guarantees for data used to
build crowdsourced algorithmic solutions. Open ML challenges typically work by
providing participants with training data to learn underlying patterns, then
evaluating resulting predictions on unlabeled test data. For many important
problems, making training data available in this way violates concerns about
privacy or enables abuse. The critical gap is preserving the privacy of training
data while enabling participants to build models that can learn from it. This
project will bring together recent advances in three of the most promising
approaches in privacy-preserving data analysis: homomorphic encryption,
federated learning, and differential privacy. Each technique will be developed
and tested in a dedicated challenge structure with two core properties: 1) to
preserve the privacy of sensitive data; and 2) to ensure competitors are able to
get feedback on submitted models during the competition to inform algorithm
improvements. Each competition system will result in a set of performance
measures, including benchmarked algorithm performance and data privacy
guarantees, to assess system feasibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.