* 2038483
* EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Artificial Intelligence and Cybersecurity Research and Education at Scale
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Hsinchun Chen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 297,719.00

The regularity of devastating cyber-attacks has made cybersecurity a significant
challenge for society. Artificial intelligence (AI) holds significant promise in
sifting through large volumes of cybersecurity data to proactively identify
emerging threats with unprecedented efficiency. However, AI and cybersecurity
are diverse, complex, and rapidly evolving areas. As a result, there is a lack
of a diverse workforce knowledgeable in explainable and trustworthy AI,
validation of AI systems, and AI safety (including AI for security and security
for AI). In order to proactively foster a vibrant AI for cybersecurity system,
the project will leverage interdisciplinary academic and industry leaders to
support the development of a novel “AI4Cyber” education and research program
that can be delivered at scale to meet the rapidly increasing demand for a
large, diverse, and well-trained AI cybersecurity workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team proposes to integrate traditionally
disparate AI tools, data, and resources from industry (e.g., FireEye,
Microsoft), nonprofit organizations, and National Science Foundation programs
(e.g., Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace, CyberCorps®, and Cybersecurity
Innovation for Cyberinfrastructure). AI4Cyber will serve as a resource for the
AI for cybersecurity community to facilitate innovative pedagogy and foster
interdisciplinary research for five data-rich and ever-evolving cybersecurity
applications. These applications include cyber threat intelligence, privacy
analytics, disinformation and computational propaganda, security operations
centers, and adversarial machine learning. The project will also help to
facilitate highly visible competitions and knowledge sharing at professional
societies and industry cybersecurity venues. In addition, AI4Cyber will be
integrated into the first free AI for Cybersecurity Massively Open Online Course
(MOOC) delivered on edX, which is the world’s largest nonprofit MOOC provider.
Selected course content will also be integrated into the master’s in
cybersecurity programs at the University of Arizona and Indiana University.
Because both the University of Arizona and Indiana University are designated as
National Security Agency and Department of Homeland Security Centers of Academic
Excellence in Cyber Defense, and the University of Arizona is a Hispanic Serving
Institution, not only will the proposed programs be of high quality, but they
also have the potential to reach a diverse set of students and increase
diversity in the AI-cybersecurity workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by a special initiative of the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace
(SaTC) program to foster new, previously unexplored, collaborations between the
fields of cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, and education. The SaTC
program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic
Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the
growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security
and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.