* 2038213
* Collaborative Research: An investigation of the evolution and taxonomy of the true blueberries (Vaccinium section Cyanococcus)
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Paul Manos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 11/30/2023
* USD 544,715.00

North American blueberries, a rare example of domesticated woody species with
origins in the US, have been intensively studied by agronomists because of their
economic importance as a food crop. However, the evolutionary history of the
group is still uncertain. In particular, a clear view of how many species exist
in nature remains elusive: current estimates range between nine and 24. One
reason for this is extensive morphological variation within species.
Additionally, the ability of blueberry species to hybridize (cross-breed)
further confounds species identification. These hybridization events also
occasionally result in the formation of completely new species via duplication
of the parent genomes, a phenomenon known as polyploidy. These polyploids,
however, are often difficult to distinguish from the parents, resulting in
unrecognized diversity. This study will attempt to remedy this by providing a
thorough assessment of blueberry species boundaries and diversity while
accounting for evolutionary history. The project will result in biodiversity
discovery, a revision of the naming convention in blueberries, and a detailed
understanding of polyploidy and its role in shaping the evolutionary history and
species composition of this ecologically and economically important group. The
project will also include many training opportunities, and an illustrated
storybook will educate children about basic botany and the natural history of
blueberries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensive field- and herbarium-based research
will be integrated with a variety of molecular techniques and analytical
approaches to provide a comprehensive systematic and evolutionary study of
Vaccinium sect. Cyanococcus. A phylogenomic dataset will be assembled from
target enrichment data to infer evolutionary relationships and biogeographic
history of the group. A custom pipeline will be designed that allows for the
identification of alleles from polyploids, filling an important gap in the study
of naturally occurring, non-model polyploid complexes. Alleles will be used to
test hypotheses regarding the origins and mode of polyploidization and
identification of diploid progenitors. The study will conclude with a thorough
taxonomic revision of Cyanococcus based on extensive morphological study of
herbarium and field-collected material and common garden studies. This will
comprise dichotomous and interactive keys, species descriptions, and geographic
distribution maps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.