* 2038173
* EAGER: Reaction Engineering for Flame Spray Pyrolysis of Perovskite Oxide Nanocrystals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Christopher Hogan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

Flame spray pyrolysis (FSP) is an advanced technology to synthesize metal oxide
powders with a wide range of chemical compositions and physical properties.
Because it is readily scalable, FSP has significant applications in powder
production for photocatalysts, gas sensors, batteries, solar cells, and fuel
cells. While the production of metal oxide nanocrystalline materials has been
demonstrated using FSP, it is currently unknown how to control the process to
make the chemically pure materials needed for the applications described.
Because purely experimental approaches to optimizing the FPS are costly and
time-intensive, a new modeling framework for FSP reactors will be developed in
this research program to predict how powder particles form and grow in flame
reactors. To describe this complex process, the model must integrate elements
corresponding to the decomposition chemistry of metal-containing feed
components, fuel pyrolysis and oxidation, and aerosol particle nucleation and
growth dynamics. The outcome of this combined modeling and experimental program
will be a computational tool that can predict the chemical composition, size
distribution, and crystal phase of the nanocrystals as the numerous FSP
processing parameters are changed. From a fundamental perspective, this project
will promote progress in aerosol science and advance the field of chemical
reaction engineering. From the application viewpoint, this project will enable
computer-based design of FSP reactors capable of high-precision control and
significantly reduced fuel costs for nanoparticle manufacturing operations. From
an educational perspective, the research team will incorporate the outcomes of
this project into their course content, help train the next generation STEM
workforce, and continue to include more undergraduates and diversified/under-
represented groups into frontier research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By leveraging
their past success in spray combustion and soot/aerosol modeling, the research
team proposes a new modeling framework, with supporting experimental
measurements, that will enable model-based design and optimization of FSP
reactors for perovskite oxide synthesis. The research project will focus on the
synthesis of Lanthanum doped Barium Titanate (La:BaTiO3) by FSP using
ethylhexanoate-derived metal precursors and ethylhexanoic acid as a fuel.
Experiments to measure the atomic percentages of La, Ba, Ti, and O in mobility-
size selected nanocrystals, and the percentages of BaTiO3, BaO, and TiO2 (along
with phase information) in the synthesis of La:BaTiO3, will be used to provide
validation data for the proposed model. Detailed chemical reaction mechanisms
for precursor decomposition, fuel oxidation and pyrolysis, nanoparticle
nucleation and surface reactions for multiple metal salt precursors will be
identified using a global reaction pathway selection analysis tool developed by
the project team. Likewise, a dynamic adaptive chemistry technique will be used
as a model reduction method enabling simulations of complex reaction systems
using practical levels of computational resources. Finally, a 7-dimensional
hybrid sectional-moment model will be developed to track the fractions of BaO,
TiO2, and BaTiO3, particle size, and crystallite size specifically to answer
whether the nanoparticle composition changes during growth. When complete, the
modeling strategy will be broadly applicable to flame pyrolysis systems for a
wide range of industrial-scale particle manufacturing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.