* 2038007
* EAGER: SciDatBench: Principles and Prototypes of Science Data Benchmarks
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Geoffrey Fox, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tevfik Kosar
* 12/31/2021
* USD 296,877.00

Analysis of large scientific data sets requires new research in both the data
analysis methods and the information technology hardware and software to use in
the analysis. This project is investigating and prototyping a new set of science
data benchmarks, dubbed SciDatBench. It establishes a new collection of
important and representative big scientific datasets together with typical
software implementations of the machine learning algorithms that are needed for
best practice analysis. The SciDatBench collection is accompanied by
documentation allowing it to be used in the training of researchers in the
rapidly evolving Big Data analysis techniques. The project has a potential to
impact a broad range of scientific disciplines including eventually material
sciences, environmental sciences, life sciences including epidemiology, fusion,
particle physics, astronomy, earthquake, and earth sciences, with more than one
representative problem from each of these
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SciDatBench generates particular instances of big
data analysis benchmarks and establishes a sustainable process for maintaining
and enhancing them. This collection includes both standalone examples and end-
to-end examples needing multiple components that are seen in the analysis of
many science experiments. SciDatBench is affiliated as an approved Science Data
working group with the very successful MLPerf activity with 80 organizational
members looking at Industry machine learning benchmarks. The state-of-the-art
examples in SciDatBench are contributing to progress in scientific discovery
that advances the national health, prosperity, and welfare, as stated by NSF's
mission. The project is proactively involving under-represented communities in
its activities. SciDatBench supports comparative studies and identifies
requirements for future cyberinfrastructure to support scientific data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.