* 2038556
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Statistical Approaches to Topological Data Analysis that Address Questions in Complex Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jessica Kehe, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 334,780.00

As both real and simulated data become increasingly complex due to improved
instrumentation and deeper understanding of the underlying data-generating
mechanisms, improved statistical methodology is required for proper analysis.
Fields such as astronomy and biology that have spatial intricate, web-like data
(e.g., the large-scale structure of the Universe, fibrin networks) can benefit
from methodology that exploits the web-like information. The field of
Topological Data Analysis (TDA) has great potential for the innovations needed
to address these important and challenging scientific questions. This project
will extend existing TDA algorithms, statistical theory and applications, and
make the advancement easily accessible by incorporating the work into the freely
available R package TDA. Moreover, the research will train undergraduate and
graduate students in an interdisciplinary and collaborative
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are (1) to extend
existing algorithms in TDA to allow statistically rigorous inferences and
improved visualization, (2) to develop the statistical theory necessary to apply
hypothesis testing to sets of topological descriptors, (3) to develop
justifiable algorithms for parameter selection, and (4) to apply these methods
to complex data, especially to critical areas in astrophysics. These
developments will make TDA more accessible to scientists and data analysts
across disciplines and will give TDA a rigorous statistical
foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.