* 2038187
* Self-Adaptive Electromechanical Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Oumar Barry, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 01/31/2024
* USD 334,027.00

This grant will support research on nonlinear vibrations and wave propagation to
enable the development of new multi-functional metamaterial devices, thus
promoting both the progress of science and advancing national prosperity.
Metamaterials are artificially engineered materials used to manipulate and
control sound, light, and many other physical phenomena. These materials have
proven to be useful in many applications such as ultrasonic, vibration
mitigation, energy harvesting, and sensing (e.g., complex filtering, light
channeling). However, most mechanical energy control devices currently available
operate in a narrow frequency range and cannot adapt to changing frequency. This
award will support fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the
design and fabrication of self-adaptive metamaterials that can achieve a wide
frequency self-tuning range. The new self-adaptive metamaterial can be easily
integrated into various engineering structures (e.g., automotive or aircraft
components) to enable low-cost and reliable vibration mitigation, energy
harvesting, and sensing techniques. Other systems and applications that will
also benefit from this research include absorbers for wind-induced vibration
control, as well as self-powered sensors for real-time monitoring of gas
turbines and civil infrastructure. The broader impacts of the project include
inclusion of students from underrepresented groups, mentoring and training of
undergraduate and graduate students, and integration of the research findings in
classroom materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The self-adaptive metamaterial will
be designed using the concept of passive self-tuning via a sliding mass, and
quasiperiodic arrangements of the local resonators. The primary objective of
this research is to gain fundamental understanding of the nonlinear dynamic
interactions within such an electromechanical metamaterial. The secondary
objective is to test the hypothesis that the interplay between quasiperiodic
arrangements and self-tunability in metamaterials can improve the performance of
vibration mitigation and energy harvesting or sensing. To address this problem,
the research team will conduct a combination of theoretical, computational, and
experimental analyses. Quasiperiodicity in the local resonators will be examined
for the purpose of realizing tunable-topological bandgaps. The team will
investigate how localized topologically protected modes can be harnessed to
improve energy harvesting and sensing while conserving vibration mitigation
performance. Prototypes of the self-adaptive metamaterial will be fabricated,
and rigorous experiments will be conducted to validate and refine the
theoretical development. It is anticipated that the self-adaptive metastructure
will provide unprecedented performance characteristics for a wide range of
engineering applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.