* 2038416
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Empowering prosumers in electricity markets through market design and learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Vijay Subramanian, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The availability of vast amounts of operational and end-user data in cyber-
physical systems implies that paradigm improvements in monitoring and control
can be attained via learning by many artificial intelligence agents despite them
possessing vastly different abilities. Engaging this heterogeneous agent base in
the context of the smart grid requires the use of hierarchical markets, wherein
end-users participate in downstream markets collectively through aggregators,
who in turn are coordinated by an upstream market. The goal of this project is
to conduct a systematic study of such market-mediated learning and control. This
project aims at much deeper levels of participation from end-users contributing
electricity generation such as rooftop solar, shedding load via demand response,
and providing storage capabilities such as electric vehicle batteries, to
transform into reliable distributed energy resources (DER) at the level of
wholesale markets. A methodological theme is multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) by agents that control physical systems via actions at different levels
of the hierarchy. Underlying the whole project are well-founded physical models
of the transmission and distribution grids, which provide structure to the
problem domain and concrete use cases. This project facilitates a deeper level
of decarbonization in the electricity sector, and contributes to climate change
solutions by engineering a flat, interactive grid architecture that allows
significant DERs to provide electricity services to both local and regional
grids. Engagement with a grid-level market operator enables the project to
address a problem space of immediate relevance to the current electricity grid.
The project also includes the development of educational materials on data-
analytics and energy systems. Intrinsic to the program are efforts at outreach
to involve high-school students via demonstrations and lectures based on the
technology developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is a systematic and principled study of methods for hierarchical market-mediated
learning and control, with the electric grid being the primary application
domain. Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) runs as a common
methodological theme through the project, with strategic agents with varying
information structures and concepts of rationality that control physical systems
via actions at different levels of the hierarchy. The approach is different from
studies on generic MARL algorithms in that attention is focused on well-founded
physical models of the transmission and distribution grids, as well as the
workings of the power system. The project is organized into three interdependent
thrusts, namely, (i) Learning to bid as aggregators in wholesale markets, which
studies dynamics of aggregators that provide supply offers and demand bids at
the upstream market (wholesale level), while procuring these services from
downstream DERs (retail level), (ii) Learning to incentivize retail users to
contribute their resources, under which bounded rational agents learn to respond
to a population-level distribution of other agents and incentives provided, and
(iii) Evaluation and experimentation over a full-scale system emulator by
integrating it with reinforcement learning tools. This project provides an
architecture for DERs to provide electricity services to both local and regional
grids, and hence contributes to developing solutions to climate change.
Engagement with an independent system operator enables a focus on grid-specific
issues, ensuring the applicability of the solutions to real-world problems. The
impact is enhanced by specific minority inclusion activities, courses on
computing tailored to broaden participation in the context of data-analytics and
energy systems, and outreach to high-school students using demonstrations and
lectures based on the project results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.