* 2038042
* RAPID: Navigating Social Distancing with DeafBlind Children: Protactile Language Acquisition in an Online Learning Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Diane Brentari, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2022
* USD 196,564.00

Blanket directives to practice social distancing, while crucial to slowing the
spread of COVID-19, do not take into account vulnerable populations such as
DeafBlind children, who are at risk for social isolation and lack of critical
language exposure. COVID-19 creates an immediate need for innovative and
effective models of inclusive distance learning. This project will find ways to
support language acquisition and cognitive development for the coming school
year without increasing epidemiological risk. Conducting this research now
stands to broaden our understanding of language, while also establishing models
for education in populations that are disproportionately impacted by social
distancing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Over the past decade, groups of DeafBlind
adults in the United States began communicating directly with one another via
reciprocal, tactile channels—a practice known as "protactile". These practices
are leading to an emergent grammatical system that has yet to be acquired by any
DeafBlind children. This project introduces a cohort of DeafBlind children to
skilled protactile signers by combining video technology, a wearable haptic
device designed for this project, and communication facilitators in the
childrens’ homes. This hybrid approach will be evaluated as a remote learning
environment to allow DeafBlind children to continue their learning at a distance
consistent with slowing the spread of COVID-19. This approach will enable an
analysis of the effects of the acquisition process as protactile language is
transmitted from DeafBlind adult signers, who knew American Sign Language before
protactile language, to DeafBlind children, who are acquiring protactile
language as a first language. It is predicted that DeafBlind children will
follow the general course of first language acquisition and will develop core
lexical items earlier than verbs with componential morphology, thereby diverging
from the path that adult signers have taken, creating forms with componential
morphology before creating core lexical items. It is also predicted that the
lexical forms created by children will adhere to protactile phonological
principles more broadly than the forms created by adult protactile signers,
whose application of protactile phonological principles is more restricted. If
confirmed, the findings will show how DeafBlind children can acquire and expand
language under conditions of social distancing, thereby modeling one way that
education within vulnerable populations can be facilitated, while continuing to
slow the spread of COVID-19&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.