* 2038853
* CPS: Medium: Batteryless Sensors Enabling Smart Green Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Josiah Hester, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,242,000.00

Cities across the nation have invested significantly in making infrastructure
smarter, more sustainable, and more resilient to extreme weather events. Green
infrastructure (GI), a general term for planned installations of trees, plants,
soils, wetlands, and other natural resource, is increasingly being installed in
cities nationwide to provide resilience to flooding, sewer overflows, urban
heat, air pollution, habitat loss, and coastal erosion, that are overwhelming
traditional infrastructure and negatively impact urban life. Embedding smart
devices in GI provides numerous benefits to a city, providing insight into the
health and effectiveness of the system, and the operations and fitness of the
city. However, deploying smart devices in GI is challenging because of the scale
and need for long-term deployment, meaning battery powered or expensive plugged-
in devices are not feasible. This project builds Smart Green Infrastructure;
augmenting GI with battery-free smart devices, powered by energy harvested
directly from soil, which gather data, infer, actuate, and collaborate with each
other. By harvesting from freely available soil and removing batteries, these
devices can last for decades. Through partnerships with organizations in
Chicago, Illinois–The Nature Conservancy, the Chicago Botanic Garden, and the
Lincoln Park Zoo–the project demonstrates applicability by tackling stormwater
management, urban wildlife surveillance, green roofs and other real-world
applications. . Beyond cities, the work in this project will enable new
applications in agriculture and smart farming, water resources management, and
any applications where long term, zero maintenance embedded intelligence is
required. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building Smart GI presents cyber-physical
systems challenges in enabling robust inference, communication, and coordination
on ultra-constrained computing platforms, and despite frequent power failures
and dynamic energy availability. These devices harvest energy from soil or plant
organic matter using terrestrial Microbial Fuel Cells (MFCs), constructed from
inert materials providing decades long lifetime. These devices use machine
learning to understand their environment, enabling robust, long-term monitoring
that requires no maintenance or replacement. Finally, these devices actuate to
"heal" the surrounding environment, switching the MFC from energy generation, to
producing a disinfectant instead with the microbial community. A high-powered
edge device orchestrates the actions of the swarm of MFC powered nodes, making
decisions based on network data and external factors like user tasks. Project
tasks include; co-design of the Terrestrial MFC and corresponding energy model
for efficient and dynamic energy harvesting and; development of a tiny,
resilient computing platform that harvests soil energy and supports sensing, and
actuation; creation of a framework for conducting on-device machine learning to
recognize subtle environmental changes from lossy data; exploration of
orchestration of a network of intermittently powered devices; and conducting a
series of end-to-end deployments with Chicago
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.