* 2038439
* CAREER: Biochar Systems for Sustainable Applications in the Food-Energy-Water Nexus
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Yuan Yao, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2024
* USD 519,401.00

Biochar is a carbon-rich solid byproduct of thermochemical biomass conversions.
It has potential applications in food, energy, and water systems. This project
aims to advance potential biochar applications by (1) using artificial
intelligence (machine learning) approaches to predict process data and life
cycle assessment (LCA) of various combinations of biomass feedstocks, conversion
pathways, and applications of biochar; (2) building an integrated framework for
modeling and analysis of biochar systems in the food-energy-water (FEW) nexus;
and (3) demonstrating the framework through real-world case studies in different
geographic, temporal, and socioeconomic contexts. The educational and outreach
objectives include (1) attracting underrepresented students to STEM fields by
developing a multimedia package for FEW and biochar sustainability; (2)
developing both in-class and online courses and providing training and
professional development opportunities to integrate research and education
activities for undergraduate and graduate students; (3) developing an
international network of scholars for FEW, biochar sustainability, and
interdisciplinary research communities with a long-term goal of forming an
international research and education program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
targets bridging knowledge gaps for biochar production and effective
applications in enhancing FEW sustainability by integrating LCA, technico-
economic analysis (TEA), Geographic Information System (GIS), machine learning,
and dynamic modeling. Understanding the impacts of using various biomass
substrates for different biochar applications on the environment, economics, and
communities will lay a foundation for the further design and implementation of
large-scale biochar systems under different socioeconomic, climate change, and
resource limiting conditions. Integration of advanced modeling tools including
LCA, GIS, and machine learning that are commonly used in different disciplines
is an important feature of the approach. Through integration of advanced
modeling methods from engineering, environmental science, natural science, and
data science, this project seeks to demonstrate how transdisciplinary research
can create improved societal outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.