* 2038855
* CPS: Medium: GOALI: Enabling Scalable Real-Time Certification for AI-Oriented Safety-Critical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Sriprakash Sarathy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,199,992.00

In avionics, an evolution is underway to endow aircraft with “thinking”
capabilities through the use of artificial-intelligence (AI) techniques. This
evolution is being fueled by the availability of high-performance embedded
hardware platforms, typically in the form of multicore machines augmented with
accelerators that can speed up certain computations. Unfortunately, avionics
software certification processes have not kept pace with this evolution. These
processes are rooted in the twin concepts of time and space partitioning:
different system components are prevented from interfering with each other as
they execute (time) and as they access memory (space). On a single-processor
machine, these concepts can be simply applied to decompose a system into smaller
components that can be specified, implemented, and understood separately. On a
multicore+accelerator platform, however, component isolation is much more
difficult to achieve efficiently. This fact points to a looming dilemma: unless
reasonable notions of component isolation can be provided in this context,
certifying AI-based avionics systems will likely be impractical. This project
will address this dilemma through multi-faceted research in the CPS Core
Research Areas of Real-Time Systems, Safety, Autonomy, and CPS System
Architecture. It will contribute to Real-Time Systems and Safety by producing
new infrastructure and analysis tools for component-based avionics applications
that must pass real-time certification. It will contribute to Safety and
Autonomy by targeting the design of autonomous aircraft that must exhibit
certifiably safe and dependable behavior. It will contribute to CPS System
Architecture by designing new methods for decomposing complex AI-oriented
avionics workloads into components that are isolated in space and
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in
producing a framework for supporting components on multicore+accelerator
platforms in AI-based avionics use cases. This framework will balance the need
to isolate components in time and space with the need for efficient execution.
Component provisioning hinges on execution time bounds for individual programs.
New timing-analysis methods will be produced for obtaining these bounds at
different safety levels. Research will also be conducted on
performance/timeliness/accuracy tradeoffs that arise when refactoring time-
limited AI computations for perception, planning, and control into components.
Experimental evaluations of the proposed framework will be conducted using an
autonomous aircraft simulator, commercial drones, and facilities at Northrop
Grumman Corp. More broadly, this project will contribute to the continuous push
toward more semi-autonomous and autonomous functions in avionics. This push
began 40 years ago with auto-pilot functions and is being fueled today by
advances in AI software. This project will focus on a key aspect of certifying
this software: validating real-time correctness. The results that are produced
will be made available to the world at large through open-source software. This
software will include operating-system extensions for supporting components in
an isolated way and mechanisms for forming components and assessing their timing
correctness. Additionally, a special emphasis will be placed on outreach efforts
that target underrepresented groups, and on increasing female participation in
computing at the undergraduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.