* 2038625
* CPS: Medium: Real-Time Learning and Control of Stochastic Nanostructure Growth Processes Through in situ Dynamic Imaging
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Panganamala Kumar, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,215,737.00

This Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) grant will support research that will
contribute new knowledge related to emerging monitoring and control techniques
of the growth of nanomaterials, which are crucial for applications such as new
types of batteries and photovoltaic devices, because precise structuring of
matter is essential to realize the desired charge, mass, and energy flow
patterns that underpin energy conversion and storage. With the fast arrival of
tremendous amount of data produced by dynamic nanoscale imaging, the National
Nanotechnology Initiative has identified the lack of in-process monitoring and
control as a grand challenge impeding the design and discovery of new materials,
because "existing methods are time-consuming, expensive, and require high-tech
infrastructure and high skill levels to perform." This grant supports a
multidisciplinary team, comprising experts from data science, control, circuit
design, and material sciences, aiming to tackle this challenge by designing a
cyber-physical system that can reliably convert dynamic imaging data to machine
intelligible information for process monitoring and control. The results from
this research will benefit nanomaterial discovery and pave a path to scalable
production. The multidisciplinary approach will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact science and
engineering education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual core of this
research is to address the foundational problem of real-time learning and
control of a multivariate, nonparametric model of probability density functions
that reflect the collective stochastic behavior of evolving nano objects.
Several scientific and engineering barriers are to be overcome, including
efficient methods for nonparametric learning, adaptive stochastic control of
evolving empirical distributions of nano objects, and hardware/software co-
designs for boosting computational efficiency and meeting real-time
requirements. The research team will test randomized shallow architectures,
which are a novel approach for addressing real-time nonparametric learning
issues, explore structured-shallow-networks-enabled process control, which will
be one of the early applications of neural networks in real-time dynamic
settings, and design hardware accelerators for select algorithms that enables
on-the-fly solution for high-precision scalable
nanomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.