* 2038076
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Leveraging Physical Side-Channel Information to Build Detection-Based Rowhammer Defenses
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2021,10/31/2021
* Zhenkai Zhang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 10/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Preventing a process from modifying a memory it does not own is a cornerstone of
security. However, this essential protection has recently come under threat due
to the discovery of a vulnerability, known as the Rowhammer for dynamic random-
access memory (DRAM). It has been found that this vulnerability commonly exists
in DRAM chips and can be exploited to form a wide range of powerful attacks.
Defending against Rowhammer attack remains a challenging problem. This project
aims to solve this problem by developing novel detection-based defense
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has 3 major thrusts. Thrust 1 will
analyze certain inevitable physical side effects of computation (e.g.,
electromagnetic radiation, acoustic emanation, and power consumption) to
discover malicious hammering. Thrust 2 will design and implement deployable
defense techniques based on the discovered physical side-channel information
which can robustly detect and promptly thwart any potential Rowhammer attacks,
including elusive ones hidden inside trusted execution environments. Thrust 3
concerns experiments and evaluation to quantify and demonstrate the significance
of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques developed in this project
may impact industry and help practitioners design more secure and dependable
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Code, data, publications, presentations, will be
released publicly. A project repository will be maintained on CPS-VO
(https://cps-vo.org/) for at least 5 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.