* 2038682
* IDIEA-DC: An Infrastructure for Distributed Intelligence Experimentation and Architectures in the Digital Continuum: from IoTs to the Cloud
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Tarek El-Ghazawi, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,905.00

This project sets the stage for leveraging the concurrent and synergistic
advances in digital domains such as machine learning, high-performance
computing, big data, clouds, and smart and connected devices to create new
breads of applications that were hardly possible to conceive and deploy before.
This can be productively accomplished by presenting this plethora of different
domains to application developers as one integrated system, which is referred to
here as the digital continuum. This project creates a testbed infrastructure for
such digital continuum with capabilities for application deployments, task
distributions, performance monitoring and optimizations, and data sets for
experimentation with emphasis on distributed intelligence. The concepts and
access to such testbed are shared with the community in order to open new doors
for innovative system and application research in the digital continuum as a
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convergence research is identified as one of the
big ideas for future progress and investments. The digital continuum is an
example of such converged systems. This project creates an experimental
infrastructure, IDIEA-DC that can mimic the digital continuum from the edge
devices to the data center. IDEA-DC also provides productive interfaces for
exploring and testing research ideas in support of launching distributed machine
learning applications on the digital continuum as a system, such as federated
learning. It supports monitoring and control for intelligent and dynamic cross-
layer optimizations with respect to many different parameters including
performance and bandwidth availability, energy and quality of service. Two
instances of such infrastructure will be created. One will be a heavily
instrumented cluster devoted to emulate such digital continuum while providing
the opportunity for more accurate measurements and closer control. The second
will be a cloud-based deployment. The infrastructure will be augmented with
relevant data sets, as well as libraries for measurements and
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.