* 2038203
* Collaborative Research: Cultivating Indigenous Research Communities for Leadership in Education and STEM - CIRCLES Alliance
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Gilbert Ustad, Black Hills State University
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 87,850.00

The CIRCLES, Cultivating Indigenous Research Communities for Leadership in
Education and STEM, Alliance is a partnership between six states in the western
half of the U.S. (Idaho, Montana, New Mexico, North Dakota , South Dakota, and
Wyoming) to address the under representation of American Indian and Alaska
Native (AI/AN) students in the science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
disciplines and workforce. The AI/AN population within the states associated
with the CIRCLES Alliance represents 10.5% percent of the nation’s AI/AN
population. With access to this population, the collective of STEM related
activities, programs, and collaborations developed and implemented within these
states through existing partnerships with tribal communities and with colleges
that serve the tribes provides a path for increasing the success of AI/AN
students through the combined Alliance. This network of people, institutions,
and communities along with the results of this project could serve as a national
model for other states to follow. The project will start by furthering
conversations within tribal communities through interviews centered on STEM
education in their communities and brainstorming ideas on how to combine efforts
towards the success of students. It is then expected that these conversations
will lead to tribal communities taking the lead in identifying projects,
activities, and programs that are of greatest need to their students for STEM
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CIRCLES, Cultivating Indigenous Research
Communities for Leadership in Education and STEM, Alliance is a partnership
between six states in the western half of the U.S. (Idaho, Montana, New Mexico,
North Dakota , South Dakota, and Wyoming) to address the under representation of
American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) students in the STEM disciplines and
workforce. The preparation, cultural, and access reasons for this this low
representation require organically grown and trusted partnerships, which are in
place within the participating states. The AI/AN population within the states
associated with the CIRCLES Alliance represents 10.5% percent of the nation’s
AI/AN population. Subsequently, the development and implementation of integrated
formal and informal STEM activities within these states through already existing
partnerships with tribal communities and tribal colleges provides a pathway for
increasing the engagement, involvement, and success of AI/AN students within
this network and could provide a national model for scaling to other states. The
CIRCLES Alliance looks to increase the knowledge gained by the combined effort
of states that will collectively engage and impact AI/AN communities through
conversation, interviews, and relationship building between tribal entities and
EPSCoR jurisdictions. As part of these growing relationships, tribal communities
will take the lead roles in identifying STEM projects and programs that have
been successful and in developing programs that are determined to be of greatest
need in the STEM education of their students to produce a STEM-ready workforce
that fits into the economic development plans of their respective
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.