* 2038000
* EAGER: Quantum-coherent transport in bacterial protein nanowires
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Victor Batista, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

The project seeks to evaluate the role of quantum coherence in bacterial growth,
respiration and communication. The PIs of this project have discovered that
common soil bacteria have evolved metalloprotein nanowires to get rid of
electrons derived from metabolism. The nanowires allow bacteria to survive in
harsh environments that lack membrane-permeable electron acceptors such as
oxygen. This discovery suggests a unique quantum material, exhibiting metal-like
properties, with theoretically-predicted electronic coherence, and quantum-
coherent electron transfer, that can be further accelerated with light.
Surprisingly, the coherence is preserved under extreme aqueous and acidic
environments. Understanding what makes this coherence robust to survive in the
face of disorder and noise will help in designing bacterial communities that
can: preserve coherence to accelerate charge transport, autonomously optimize
their performance in changing environments as well as sense and signal damage to
initiate self-repair. The PIs will integrate this research into a range of
educational and outreach activities for students at all levels by using this
multidisciplinary research as a vehicle to enhance recruitment, retention,
education, and training of students, with attention to those from
underrepresented groups by leveraging our existing infrastructure to enhance
diversity and inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will develop new systems
of synthesis, characterization, and modeling for quantum properties of protein
nanowires. By characterizing transport of electrons, ions, excitons, and
chirality-induced, highly-polarized spins in nanowires, at surprising ultrafast
rates and centimeter distances, the PIs will quantify the spin relaxation,
diffusion length as well as coherence length and time to elucidate design
principles and mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences in Biological Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.