* 2038043
* Workshop: RISE Workshop on RECR Resources
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Dena Plemmons, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 46,943.00

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On
ce a website is created, often additional guidance, policies, and resources need
to be added. This workshop will gather experts in the field of the responsible
and ethical conduct of research (RECR) to suggest a roadmap for keeping RECR
websites up to date. The STEM community will benefit by having suggestions
developed by scholars and educators with knowledge and experience in effective
and meaningful promotion of responsible and ethical research to maintain RECR
pages. This project funds the members of the Association of Practical and
Professional Ethics Research Integrity Scholars and Educators Consortium (APPE
RISE) to identify and develop resources that researchers and administrators can
use to promote responsible and ethical research. Project outcomes will thus
positively impact institutional compliance, disciplinary and institutional
cultures, research practices, and education for conducting research in an
ethical and responsible manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main project activity
is a 1.5-day workshop with select participants from the APPE RISE and other
leaders from the research ethics community. Prior to the workshop, the research
team will identify key stakeholders and conduct telephone interviews to assess
the diversity and needs of the potential audience for the websites. The team
will use this information to identify relevant informational content and
categories of resources. At the workshop, participants will identify, share,
discuss, evaluate, and organize resources for promoting responsible and ethical
research. The resulting collection of resources will highlight and supplement
(rather than replicate) the many research ethics resource repositories that
already exist and include an introduction, a definition of responsible and
ethical conduct of research, and a summary of the points of agreement across
major studies of best practices in ethics education. After the workshop, the
research team will draft a report recommending changes and additions to bench
marked web pages that will allow institutions to promote responsible and ethical
research. The project will produce materials that will be useful for interested
organizations and will provide new engagement opportunities for research
integrity scholars, educators, and administrators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.