* 2038111
* Interdisciplinary Science Session: Can Machine Learning and Data-driven Science Lead to Breakthroughs in Earth System Modeling and Analysis?; Aspen, Colorado; June 7-11, 2021
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2022
* James Arnott, Aspen Global Change Institute
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2022
* USD 18,000.00

Recent years have seen an explosion in the use of machine learning (ML) and
other data science techniques in applications from self-driving cars to targeted
advertising to medical diagnosis. Meanwhile climate and earth system science
have become increasingly data intensive, as the volume of data from observing
systems and computer models has increased almost exponentially. There is thus
considerable interest in finding ways to apply the tools of data science to the
problems of climate and earth system science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
brings together a group of researchers from the fields of climate, earth system
science, statistics, data science, and related disciplines to seek novel and
productive ways to apply data science tools to climate and earth system science.
One application to be considered is the use of ML as a means of representing
small-scale processes in climate and earth system models. Another is the use of
ML and similar techniques for the analysis of large volumes of data. Particular
challenges to be considered include the incorporation of physical constraints
into ML algorithms and the extent to which results of ML-based analysis can be
interpreted in physically meaningful ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop has
broader impacts through its attempt to introduce new and powerful tools into
climate and earth system science. Data science tools have the potential to
enhance the societal value of research results, for example by allowing
scientists to provide better guidance to planners and stakeholders facing
threats posed by extreme weather, climate change, and other earth system
phenomena. Public outreach will be performed through a keynote lecture and web-
accessible videos of workshop presentations, and a perspective paper will be
published as a result of the meeting. The workshop is planned for the week of 7
June 2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.