* 2038458
* Build and Broaden: The Long-Term Impact of COVID-19 in Hispanic Communities in the Tri-State Area
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Stephen Ruszczyk, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 12/31/2022
* USD 82,329.00

This project is a conference that serves as a forum to discuss and advance
scientific understanding of the long-term impact of COVID-19 pandemic on Latino
communities in New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut. In addition to the
disproportionate health impacts of COVID-19 on Latino communities, the pandemic
has triggered an economic recession and educational privation across the United
States that have also excessively affected Latino communities in the Tri-State
area. In the conference, social and behavioral scientists from a wide range of
disciplines, featuring scholars from regional Hispanic Serving Institutions,
share their emerging research on the interconnected dynamics of the
transformation in community contexts, access to healthcare, and educational
outcomes in Hispanic communities due to the pandemic. The knowledge developed
from this conference will help decision makers and community leaders develop an
in-depth understanding of the impact of the pandemic on Latino communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference broadens participation by Latina and
Latino scholars and scholars that teach and do research with Latino communities
in the advancement of knowledge and understanding on health, economic, and
educational impacts of the pandemic. The conference is organized to
institutionalize social networks across regional Hispanic Serving Institutions.
The thematic areas of the conference include (1) health disparities, (2)
community structures, and (3) educational processes. Each of the first three
panels highlights one of these central themes, while the second-day panel
focuses on building foundational connections across the thematic areas. The
conference features three levels of dissemination: a special journal issue to be
shared with the academic community, the participation of community-based
organizations and policymakers in the conference; and a broadcast and digital
repository of researcher snapshots and conference proceedings for the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.