* 2038697
* Collaborative Conference: A Workshop to Explore Data Science in Oceanography
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Emilio Mayorga, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2023
* USD 42,487.00

Computational and data science skills have become essential in making scientific
discoveries, especially in fields where the integration of diverse sources of
observational and modeled data is required to understand the mechanisms and
functions of complex systems, such as the Earth’s ocean. However, conventional
ocean sciences education focuses predominantly on domain-specific knowledge and
often falls short in explicitly incorporating these operational skills into the
curriculum. The PIs will plan and host several workshops, a virtual workshop in
2020 and two in-person workshops in 2021, that aim to address this urgent need
by combining immersive tutorials on state-of-the-art data science methodologies,
peer-learning, and on-site collaborative hack project work in a 5-day intensive
workshop. This is a domain-specific adaptation of the “hackweek” model, which
has emerged in the computational data science community as a powerful model for
educating new users, sharing technical expertise, and building an inclusive and
cohesive community. The focus of the workshops is the use of ocean data, and
specifically the use of data from the NSF-funded Ocean Observatories Initiative.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshops, called "OceanHackWeek2020-2021", provide an
avenue for expediting the adoption of data science methodologies and
computational tools for data-intensive research in the ocean sciences community.
These skills are indispensable for modern-day oceanographers to tackle complex
scientific questions by harnessing the data revolution. OceanHackWeek differs
from traditional academic conferences and one-off hackathons by its immersive
curriculum, collaborative learning environment, and a set of carefully crafted
participant selection criteria that helps promote diversity and inclusivity.
These designs help spur collaborative interdisciplinary ideas and help promote
best data science practices in ocean sciences. OceanHackWeek focuses not only on
promoting data science literacy but also on building an inclusive and cohesive
community of oceanographers for learning and sharing. The organizers encourage
and empower participants to bring the skills gained and the sense of community
formed during the hackweek back to their own labs and institutions. Beyond the
intensive in-person workshop, OceanHackWeek tutorials will be maintained as
persistent open online resources to allow anyone to partake and self-learn. By
facilitating and catalyzing the growth and change of individuals through
grassroot efforts that promote and embrace a diverse community, OceanHackWeek
drives cultural change in the field of oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.