* 2039984
* D-ISN: TRACK 1: Collaborative Research: Disrupting Exploitation and Trafficking in Labor Supply Networks: Convergence of Behavioral and Decision Science to Design Interventions
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2025
* Kevin Swartout, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 471,838.00

This Disrupting Operations of Illicit Supply Networks (D-ISN) project will
contribute to the national security, prosperity, and welfare by improving
understanding of the states of laborer exploitation and trafficking that often
occurs in the chaotic rebuild and recovery environment following natural
disasters such as hurricanes and pandemics. Construction supply chains are
extremely vulnerable to labor exploitation and trafficking, especially among
workers with fewer skills and day laborers. The model-based decision framework
will help policy makers and individuals prevent and respond to situations of
labor exploitation and trafficking from a societal perspective by designing more
efficacious interventions. The project will provide a path forward toward the
design and deployment of a large-scale trial of interventional targets and
programs. The exacerbating influences that ongoing natural disasters like
COVID-19 have on labor supply chains allow the decision framework to be
developed with built-in resilience. The project will involve early-career
scholars, graduate students, women, minorities, and multiple institutions, and
will more broadly facilitate future involvement of the behavioral science and
decision science communities in the disruption of illicit supply networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will address several novel and
unique features encountered in the complex labor supply ecosystem, including
stochastic systems with partial information to capture the case where a
laborerâ€™s state and interactions with others cannot be directly observed. In
addition, the employment status of construction laborers generally changes
relatively frequently. The proposed framework will provide managerial insights
to policy makers, regulators, and companies on how to monitor, combat, and
disrupt labor exploitation and trafficking with limited resources. This research
has several novel and unique aspects as it strives to capture the following
critical features encountered in the relevant complex ecosystem: empirical
research, stochastic multi-actor network models, agent-based simulation models,
and batch reinforcement learning. The project combines action research and
community operations research to create, test, and refine a framework for
designing and evaluating interventions whose focus is to remediate illicit human
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.