* 2039759
* Examining the relationship between an increasingly carnivorous Homo erectus and Pleistocene mammal extinctions.
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* William Barr, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 05/31/2024
* USD 90,099.00

Modern humans have an unparalleled capacity to modify their ecosystems. When and
how humans obtained this ability is uncertain. This project seeks to clarify the
timing and nature of human ecosystem modification over the course of human
evolutionary history. Specifically, this project examines the potential impacts
of a new emphasis on meat-eating by Pleistocene Homo erectus on mammal
communities using a quantitative, food-web approach, informed by studies of the
anatomy and isotopic composition of fossil predators with which human ancestors
competed for access to meat. The project broadens participation in
paleoanthropology by creating new opportunities for student research, enhances
international, multidisciplinary research collaborations, and disseminates
results broadly, including public-facing outreach events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ancient Hominin Impacts Hypothesis (AHIH) states that
meat-eating by Homo erectus caused profound impacts on Pleistocene mammal
communities, driving both large herbivore prey species, and competing predators
to extinction. However, at the time Homo erectus first appeared, the region in
which they appeared was experiencing climate-driven grassland expansions, which
may also have contributed to extinctions in predators and prey. It is currently
unknown whether environmental change, human impacts, or a combination of both
best explains the observed Pleistocene mammal extinctions. This project tests
the AHIH using a paleo food webs approach at the site where Homo erectus first
appears in the fossil record. Anatomical and isotopic studies of local
carnivores reveal which herbivore species extinct carnivore consumed, informing
a quantitative paleo food-web model of the local community. The outputs of
numerical food-web modeling experiments will be compared to the predictions the
AHIH to reveal what impact, if any, human ancestors had on Pleistocene mammal
communities. The project expands an understanding of the evolutionary
significance of meat eating to ecosystem modification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.