* 2039877
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Understanding linkages between nutrient quality and phytoplankton assemblage responses to COVID-19 stay-at-home orders in an urban, estuarine system
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Maria Tzortziou, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2023
* USD 146,476.00

In addition to health and safety concerns, the global coronavirus (COVID-19)
pandemic has had significant impacts on human behavior worldwide, from business
and school closures to stay-at-home orders. As a consequence there have been
unprecedented and precipitous drops in global travel for work, education,
recreation, and other daily activities. The associated declines in fossil fuel
consumption and pollution emissions have resulted in improved air quality.
Reductions in atmospheric contaminants (particularly nitrogen, N) and deposition
of pollutants must also be influencing nutrient cycling and impacting
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystem processes. The situation has created a
completely novel and large-scale "human experiment" in how sudden changes in
socio-economic behavior and mobility patterns may influence the environment. To
better understand environmental changes associated with the pandemic, this NSF
RAPID project will focus on studies of coastal and estuary aquatic habitats,
which are known to be particularly biologically productive and diverse.
Researchers will measure key biogeochemical (nutrient) and ecological
(phytoplankton, bacteria) metrics using water sampling and satellite
observations of an urban estuary on the east coast of the US over the COVID-19
shutdown and reopening periods. This project will also train postdoctoral
scholars and graduate students, including those from underrepresented groups in
science, while enhancing the understanding of connections between societal
activity and coastal ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Steep declines in the
concentration, thus deposition, of atmospheric pollution (particularly N),
combined with shifts in wastewater effluent distribution associated with the
COVID-19 shut-down are expected to influence the biogeochemistry and ecology of
adjacent coastal waters. Since the dominant N-form, and stoichiometric ratios
relative to other nutrients, shape phytoplankton and bacterial community
structure, sudden changes in nutrient amounts, quality, and source distribution
in an urban estuary could translate to regime shifts in microbial assemblages
and biogeochemical processes. The overarching hypothesis of this study is that
the sudden decline in human activity due to the COVID-19 pandemic will exert
considerable and measurable effects on coastal biogeochemical and physical water
quality parameters as well as phytoplankton and bacterial assemblages. While
this hypothesis is broadly applicable to developed coastlines worldwide, this
study will focus on Long Island Sound (LIS) because it (i) borders the greater
New York City (NYC) metropolitan area, specifically the commuting corridor
between NY and Connecticut (CT), (ii) is heavily urbanized, (iii) was especially
hard-hit by COVID-19, and (iv) NY and CT were among the first states to mandate
stay-at-home restrictions, leading to surrounding communities drastically
downscaling transportation activity. The research addresses three questions: 1.
Have recent changes in human activity (improved air quality and concurrent
changes in wastewater inputs) been associated with shifts in key biogeochemical
metrics (C, N, P, Si) and stoichiometric ratios? 2. What are the corresponding
responses of phytoplankton and bacterial assemblages? 3. How do these changes
relate to shifts in bio-optical properties? To answer these timely ecosystem-
scale questions, the team will measure key water quality and biogeochemical
parameters, as well as evaluate the abundances and composition of phytoplankton
and bacterial assemblages. Work will leverage regional water and air quality
monitoring and past and ongoing water sampling in LIS. Satellite ocean color
imagery will be used to scale-up observations from point measurements to the
larger ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.