* 2039848
* Developing a 15-Year Agenda for Computing Education Research
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Mark Weiss, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2023
* USD 79,378.00

Computing has an essential role in nearly all aspects of the modern world.
Beginning as specialized equipment used by few people, computers are now
integral to virtually every field and are used by billions of people across
every continent. As a result, computing education is no longer a specialized
field that only future computing professionals need to master. Instead,
computing education must evolve to ensure that all students master the computing
skills needed to thrive in a world that will increasingly depend on computing.
The goal of this project is to facilitate a virtual workshop attended by a range
of computing professionals, including academics and practitioners. These
professionals will explore the problems and challenges affecting the growth and
vitality of computing education. They will also identify strategies and
solutions to help address these challenges and to ensure that computing
education meets future societal needs. The results of this workshop will provide
a research agenda of the critical topics and questions that must be addressed by
computing education research so that the nation can prepare a computing literate
public as well as the computing workforce of the future.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will facilitate a discussion among the affinity groups
who collectively participate in computing education research, specifically
targeting issues related to preparing students who are computationally fluent,
and building and enhancing the computing professional workforce, which includes
research software engineers, research data science professionals, advanced
cyberinfrastructure systems professionals, and others. The goals will be to
identify challenge areas, discuss and identify potential research directions,
and develop a set of recommendations for consideration by the national research
community and funding agencies. The workshop will explore how to advance the
computing education research areas that will produce the knowledge needed to
advance computing education’s outcomes, efficiency, and effectiveness for all
learners. The project will produce a report with recommendations for a computing
education research agenda that will lay the foundation for educating a
computing-savvy public and preparing learners for computing career paths.
Completing this agenda is expected to support the growth of a diverse computing
workforce that can collaborate across traditional boundaries and that supports
the computing research and education enterprise. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools. It is also supported by the IUSE:CUE program, which seeks
to re-envision the role of computing in undergraduate education while continuing
to emphasize the need for more diverse student populations for careers in both
computing and non-computing fields, and the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace
(SaTC) program, which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy,
and in this case specifically cybersecurity education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.