* 2039998
* Build and Broaden: Collaborative Research: African American Family Relationship Research through Partnerships with HBCUs
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Chalandra Bryant, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 11/30/2021
* USD 20,090.00

This award supports a conference that fosters connections and builds research
collaborations between Historically Black Colleges/Universities (HBCUs),
Minority-Serving institutions (MSIs), and research-intensive institutions (R1s).
The proposal responds to NSF’s Dear Colleague Letter, Build and Broaden:
Enabling New Social, Behavioral and Economic Science Collaborations with
Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs). The goal of the Build and Broaden program,
and this workshop, is to foster connections that enable the submission of
competitive collaborative research proposals. The resulting projects would
support research activity and funding at both an HBCU/MSI and an R1 institution,
providing valuable research experiences and lasting research infrastructure
investment at both institutions. The conference includes invited faculty mentors
who are developmental science scholars committed to working with families from
underrepresented groups, using diverse methodologies, and using within-group
research designs to study the roots of intimate/marital relationships. These
senior, tenured scholars have strong records of securing external funding to
support their research programs and have demonstrated the ability to effectively
mentor and collaborate with other researchers. Faculty mentors will present
their research and provide the scaffolding needed for individuals who are less
knowledgeable about relevant programs at NSF and the research funding process in
general. Faculty mentors will meet with scholars appointed at HBCUs/MSIs and
exchange ideas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An evaluation survey will be conducted
with all participants to assess the quality of the meeting, its impact on
attendees, and the initial success at producing new collaborative partnerships.
Follow up surveys will be used to assess how successful the meeting was at
producing collaborative grant proposals that would not otherwise have been
submitted. Understanding the developmental implications of interpersonal family
function is important to many researchers, educators, practitioners, and policy
makers. The proposed meeting seeks to enhance the breadth of talent and
perspectives engaged in the research process, and in so doing to make new
discoveries in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.