* 2039209
* Strategic Outcome Progressions Conference: Exploring a Framework for Measuring Informal Education Outcomes and Institutional Impact
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Colleen Popson, Franklin County Historical Society
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 74,999.00

Various measures exist to assess learning outcomes from informal science,
technology, engineering, or math (STEM) education programming, especially for
youth audiences. Although there has been growing interest in the field among
practitioners, researchers and evaluators for the development and implementation
of shared, common STEM measures and frameworks, informal STEM learning (ISL)
institutions (e.g., museums, zoos, aquaria, botanic gardens, and the like) face
a unique challenge when they design and evaluate educational programs. By nature
of the broad-ranging topic areas these institutions emphasize, programming seeks
to reach audiences that vary in age, ability, cultural background, interest, and
more. Participation also varies--for example, participants choose which in a
series of exhibits they attend and how much time they spend at each. Given this
planned-for variance, how do educators target appropriate learning outcomes? To
what extent do outcomes map to activity complexity? How does programming success
link to institutional goals? One solution may be a framework of outcome
progressions. “Progressions” are within outcome categories (e.g., interest,
attitude, knowledge, skills, behavior, science capital, etc.), the ordinal
series of effects that can be mapped to programming that ranges from short
duration with simple content (e.g. a hallway cart demonstration can trigger
situational interest) to extended duration with complex content (e.g. a youth
internship can generate well-developed personal interest). STEM educators,
evaluators and researchers working in or with ISL institutions will come
together to consider the utility and feasibility of an outcome progressions
framework. With this framework STEM learning institution educators may be better
equipped to understand the impact of their programming and how to design for it.
This work will be undertaken by the COSI Center for Research and Evaluation in
conjunction with the Office of Education, Outreach, and Visitor Services of the
National Museum of Natural History and the PEAR
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary aim of this multi-day virtual
convening is to inform future development of the framework for outcome
progressions. These progressions will reflect and accommodate outcomes targeted
by existing and shared evaluation measures. The framework will provide informal
educators and evaluators with (1) a way of aligning outcome expectations with
programming depth and dosage; (2) outcome choices achievable with various depths
of programming; (3) a strategic tool for planning institution-wide targeted
outcomes across a full portfolio of institution educational programming; and (4)
a tool for documenting an education department’s varied outcomes across the full
range of possible outcomes. To create rich and informed critical discussion, the
conference will involve research consultant experts representing each outcome
category; practitioners representing diverse programming; and evaluation
theorists familiar with the broad needs of informal learning institutions. A
conference subcommittee with expertise in culturally responsive and equitable
program development and evaluation will ensure the agenda contains flexibility
to generate emergent equitable and inclusive conversations. Conference
participants will review and contribute to the soundness and utility of these
categorizations as well as the progressions within them. These insights and
inputs will inform future development of the framework as a valid and reliable
tool. Deliverables include a paper summarizing the findings from the convenings
and a related webinar that describes the framework and recommendations for its
use. These will be shared broadly via the informalscience.org website and other
professional venues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.