* 2039741
* EAGER:Using Network Analysis And Representational Geometry To Learn Structure-Function Relationship In Neural Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Constantinos Dovrolis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,999.00

Over the past few years, neural networks have revolutionized the fields of
computer vision and natural language processing and are now becoming commonplace
in many scientific domains. Despite their successes, understanding how to design
or build a neural network solution remains challenging and often results in a
game of guess and check. This process is incredibly inefficient, and in the end,
does not provide any insights into why a model is either good or bad. Thus, new
approaches are needed to characterize the relationship between structure (how
the network is constructed) and function (how the network performs on a task) in
neural networks, and use this information to design learning systems that are
more efficient and stable. The overarching goal of this project is to develop
tools to model the relationship between the structure and function of deep
neural networks. This project will generate a rich toolkit for extracting low-
dimensional features from neural networks and will produce new insights that can
be used to drive progress in the future design of systems capable of modifying
their own architecture to adapt to new data streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given
the dimensionality of the problem, the discovery of compact (low-dimensional)
representations and metrics that can adequately capture signatures of
``learning'' will be critical. When learning is unsuccessful, these metrics will
be used to diagnose problems inherent to the network structure, such as its
depth, width, and density of connections. The first part of the project will use
tools in network science to discover how concepts such as network sparsity or
path diversity between inputs and outputs affect the network's learning
performance and efficiency (e.g., the number of examples required to learn a
modular task, or whether the network can learn continually without catastrophic
forgetting). The second part of the project will develop tools to study how the
geometry of representations formed within networks can be used to predict
learning outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.