* 2039624
* EAGER: Towards molecular scale resolution in studies of the anomalous motion of nanoparticles using liquid phase electron microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2022
* A Alivisatos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 02/28/2022
* USD 156,166.00

Understanding how small particles move in a fluid near a surface is important
for many scientific areas, such as biophysics and colloidal self-assembly. This
phenomenon is also relevant to many major emerging technologies, from
biomolecular separations to three-dimensional additive manufacturing. For
nanometer-sized particles, the ability to capture images of these motions has
been extremely limited. Liquid cell transmission electron microscopy is a new
technique that has great potential to overcome this limitation, provided it can
first be validated with simple model systems. This research project aims to
study the motion of nanoparticles near a liquid-solid interface, to classify the
type of motion of these particles, and to develop physics-based theoretical
models that explain the motion of these particles close to a surface. This
knowledge gained from this research project will advance our understanding of
how nanoparticles move close to a surface, which presents challenges in many
fields including biology, geology, and chemical processing. Through this project
a diverse group of undergraduate students will work collaboratively under the
guidance of the more senior project participants. These students will learn how
to use new data science tools to analyze collected microscopy images and
videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the motions of nanoparticles in a
fluid and close to a surface is of fundamental importance in physics and
chemistry. A common method to characterize these motions has been through
optical microscopy, which naturally imposes spatial resolution limitations on
dynamics. The advent of liquid cell transmission electron microscopy has made it
possible to study the nanoscale motion of particles near various surfaces, in
the liquid environment, and with high spatial resolution. This research project
will investigate the anomalous diffusive motion of a simple and tunable model
system of gold nanoparticles in aqueous environments near the silicon nitride
membrane of a transmission electron microscopeâ€™s liquid cell. Specific aims
include i) studying the effect of electron beam dose rate on the anomalous
diffusion of gold nanoparticles in in-situ liquid cell transmission electron
microscopy. This aim will be accomplished by measuring the trajectories of large
numbers of nanoparticles at different electron beam dose rates; ii) exploiting
the large scale in-situ microscopy data collected from particle trajectories in
time and classifying the type of diffusive motion using deep neural networks;
and iii) developing Langevin-based theoretical models to capture the distinctive
diffusive characteristics that happen across multiple timescales and to relate
the local rheological material properties to the type of motion in the liquid
cell environment. If successful, this research would facilitate a new way to
study the motion of a nanoparticle close to a surface and thereby advance
fundamental understanding of the behavior of matter on the nanometer scale. Such
knowledge would also enable the mechanism-guided design of experiments and
systems in a wide range of scientific fields including crystallization,
biomedical drug delivery, rheology, chemical separations, and additive
manufacturing research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.