* 2039795
* Collaborative Research: Tapping an unused biomarker for insights of past evaporation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Aaron Diefendorf, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 367,265.00

Changes to the hydrological cycle, including precipitation and evaporation, have
impacts on society and ecosystems at local to global scales. Therefore, it is
critical to understand how the hydrological cycle responds to changes in climate
as warming forces documented and projected changes in precipitation and extreme
events. However, the effects of warming on evaporation are more challenging to
anticipate, and without the evaporation term, the complete water budget cannot
be constrained. By utilizing various existing proxies preserved in lake
sediments, it is possible to track past precipitation and temperature, however
there are few proxies that record evaporation. This project will help fill in
this gap by developing the use of a group of biologically produced organic
compounds called highly branched isoprenoids (HBIs). These HBIs are produced by
diatoms and should contain a chemical signal of the lake water the diatoms live
in. This project will focus on this connection between the HBIs and the signal
of evaporation through a series of field-based modern calibrations and apply
these calibrations to recent lake sediment archives to test their ability to
reproduce evaporation. The goal of this work is to advance evaporation
reconstruction both temporally and spatially, ultimately improving
paleohydrologic reconstructions and future predictions of hydrologic change. The
national health, prosperity and welfare can be safeguarded with a more complete
understating of the evolution of the hydrological cycle. This collaborative
project with The College of Wooster will provide research opportunities to
undergraduate students while developing mentoring skills and experience for the
UC graduate students. The Browns Lake field site in Ohio will be used in to help
students gain field and lab experiences during summer programs at Wooster
designed to recruit STEM students into the geosciences from underrepresented
groups. This project will provide training in project design, data synthesis,
interpretation and dissemination for graduate students. This research will also
increase broader public knowledge and awareness of climate change by creating
hands-on activities at the Northside Farmer’s Market in Cincinnati.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the use of hydrogen isotopes to
reconstruct lake evaporation and hence contribute to the understanding of past
hydrologic balance. Specifically, this work will consider diatom-derived highly
branched isoprenoids (HBIs) as a paleohydrology proxy. If the hydrogen isotopes
of HBIs record lake water hydrogen isotopes, then, when combined with other
proxies, past records of lake water evaporation can be generated to constrain
the complete hydrologic cycle. To accomplish this, this project will first
investigate how diatom growth habitat, water chemistry, and timing of HBI
synthesis influences the hydrogen isotopic composition of HBIs. Diatom HBIs will
be collected from pelagic and benthic habitats across a suite of lakes that vary
in water chemistry (i.e., pH, salinity), as this influences diatom species
composition. The timing of seasonality of HBI production will be determined by
collection of bimonthly sediment trap samples from Brown’s Lake in northeastern
Ohio over two years. Once these controls on HBI hydrogen isotopes are addressed,
this project will then determine the sensitivity of HBI hydrogen isotopes in
sediment archives to known changes in local hydroclimate. This will be completed
by examining HBIs in lake sediments where established records of evaporation and
precipitation already exist. The development of HBIs proposed here will provide
site selection criteria and necessary calibration information to use hydrogen
isotopes of HBIs as a proxy for lake water evaporation, ultimately improving
paleohydrological reconstructions from lake sediments. The project broader
impacts will benefit society by 1) establishing a partnership with the College
of Wooster, a primarily undergraduate institution, by creating research
experiences for undergraduate students that will further the research proposed
here; 2) creating a unique opportunity for undergraduate students to gain
advanced and critical research skills, beyond the classroom, and preparing them
for careers in the geosciences or STEM fields; 3) providing training in project
design, data synthesis, interpretation and dissemination for graduate and
undergraduate students in addition to mentoring students to enhance educational
and career development; 4) encouraging the inclusion of and increasing the
number of women in STEM by providing support for, and the training of the Ph.D.
student, along with support for the training of undergraduate students; and 5)
public outreach in the form of geoscience hands-on activities at the Northside
Farmer’s Market in Cincinnati, a unique venue to help increase broader public
knowledge and awareness of climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.