* 2039463
* Twisted Bilayer Sonic Crystal: A New Playground for Twistronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Yun Jing, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 12/31/2023
* USD 380,909.00

Sonic crystals are artificially engineered materials that can control sound in
unconventional ways, such as to camouflage sound or confine sound at desired
locations. While single layers of sonic crystals have been primarily studied in
the past, this research seeks to study a fundamentally new type of sonic
crystals, where two sonic crystals are stacked with a small angle misalignment.
Such a bilayer configuration forms an artistic moiré pattern, commonly found in
textiles. This project will broadly advance the field of acoustic functional
materials by endowing sonic crystals with a new set of capabilities to
manipulate sound. The resulting bilayer sonic crystals are expected to
facilitate applications such as energy harvesting and enhanced acoustic emission
and sensing. The research activities will involve undergraduate students, as
well as students from under-represented groups. Innovative outreach activities
will also be enabled, such as a partnership with the Palmer Museum of Art at
Penn State University for a special exhibition on bilayer sonic graphene, with
the theme to forge an unexpected bond between art (moiré pattern) and science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Twistronics is the field that studies electronic behavior
that can be dramatically altered by controlling the twist between layers of two-
dimensional materials, such as graphene. A recent major discovery in twistronics
is the so-called magic angles, which are extraordinary twist angles between two
sheets of graphene that give rise to utra-flat bands, creating the Mott
insulating state and unconventional superconductivity. This research draws
inspiration from the recent development in twistronics and seeks to exploit
twist and interlayer coupling as two new degrees of freedom to devise a new
family of sonic crystals, i.e., twisted bilayer sonic crystals. Analytical and
computational models will be developed to shed light on the band structure of
twisted bilayer sonic crystals with a wide range of twist angles and interlayer
coupling strength. A framework will be established to identify the acoustic
version of magic angles in twisted bilayer sonic crystals. Important properties
of acoustic magic angles, such as their corresponding eigenmodes, physical
bounds, and robustness to defects, will be revealed. At last, important insights
will be gained on the topological features of twisted bilayer sonic crystals, as
well as on how loss interacts with their bands, either favorably or
adversely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.