* 2039341
* Conference Proposal:  GA-5: Data Science in Indian Country
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Nievita Bueno Watts, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 99,737.00

The 5th Geoscience Alliance (GA-5) conference, “Data Science in Indian Country,”
funded under this award, will bring together geoscientists, Native leaders,
educators, and students for the purpose of elevating Native American voices in
the geosciences, promoting participation, advancing research, and fostering
collaboration. This conference focuses on addressing the shift in science
towards big data and how Native American perspectives can be incorporated in the
collection and analysis of the Earth system. Because the geosciences have some
of the lowest rates of ethnic and racial diversity, crucial voices are often
lost in the discussion of data-rich complex problems that impact human societies
(for example, resource management and environmental stewardship). Data that is
stripped of cultural identity produces results that are incomplete. The GA-5
conference is designed to be transformative by facilitating critical discussions
regarding data science centered on Indigenous perspectives. Results from
discussions and the dissemination of findings will initiate a critical dialog
about open data practices and the rights of Native Americans to have control
over how data collected on their land is handled and interpreted. Such
discussions will result in changes reflective of the values of, and sensitivity
to, Native American perspectives. The conference will be held at North Carolina
State University in Raleigh, North Carolina, home to one of the largest Native
American populations in the eastern United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Geoscience Alliance (GA) is a national alliance of individuals committed to
broadening participation of Native Americans, Alaska Natives, and people of
Native Hawai’ian ancestry in the geosciences. The goals of the Geoscience
Alliance are to: 1) create new collaborations that support geoscience education
for Native American students, 2) establish a new research agenda that closes
knowledge gaps about barriers and best practices related to Native American
participation in the geosciences, 3) increase participation by Native Americans
in setting the national geosciences research agenda, particularly on issues that
impact Native lands, 4) communicate educational opportunities for Native
American students in the geosciences, and 5) respect indigenous traditional
knowledge. The GA-5 conference will promote knowledge-sharing on best practices
for preparing all students to use data in the geosciences; support the academic
and professional development of underrepresented minorities in geoscience
disciplines; and provide participants with information about NSF-funded
programs, internships, and undergraduate and graduate programs. Participants at
the conference will be drawn from the geosciences, environmental and
sustainability sciences, biology, engineering, mathematics and other related
disciplines. Greater than 80% of participants will be from groups
underrepresented in the geosciences with a focus on Native Americans, Alaska
Natives and Native Hawai’ians and all participants will be encouraged to share
current research in a poster session. A focus on networking at the conference
will support all participants in developing a strong network of peers and
collaborators in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.