* 2039525
* Collaborative Research: Biomass burning smoke as a driver of multi-scale microbial teleconnections
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Leda Kobziar, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 03/31/2024
* USD 443,170.00

Microbes are found in all environments and play essential roles in nutrient
cycling, gas exchange, and through associations with plants and animals.
However, the ways that microbes are transported from one environment to another
are not well understood. Each year, wildland fires emit millions of tons of
smoke particles into the atmosphere and these particles likely carry microbes
with them. Traditionally, wildfires have been studied in terms of direct impacts
to terrestrial biota and the chemistry and physics of the atmosphere, but the
role of smoke as an agent of biological dispersal has yet to be explored.
Grasslands are one of the most widespread and frequently burned ecosystems, so
this research will examine the impacts of smoke-driven microbial dispersal in
tallgrass prairies of the central United States. Smoke sampling will be
conducted using a combination of unmanned aerial vehicles flying into smoke
plumes and combustion experiments and soil incubations that mimic conditions in
nature. This project uses an integrated approach to better understand the
consequences of smoke to human, plant, and animal health across all environments
where wildland fire occurs. The increasing size and severity of global
wildfires, leading to increased interaction between biomass burning smoke and
human populations, make this research relevant to a wide range of stakeholders
including those interested in the potential transport of pathogenic microbes. In
addition to mentoring three post-doctoral scholars, a graduate student, and
undergraduate summer interns, the results will be disseminated to local
communities through existing K-12 and informal learning programs at the Konza
Prairie LTER and NEON sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial emissions in smoke
from biomass burning are both quantitatively and qualitatively different from
the bioaerosols observed from wind-driven emissions, implying that wildland fire
may be a globally relevant and yet-unquantified mechanism for microbial
teleconnections among ecosystems. To test how smoke drives microbial
metacommunity ecology, this project will use an integrated approach that
compares the composition and viability of smoke source and sink microbial
assemblages in field- and laboratory-based experiments. Smoke and particulate
deposition during repeated prescribed fires in grasslands will be sampled over
two years to characterize the relationships among fire behavior, meteorological
conditions, and survival of microbes transported in smoke. Sterilized and
untreated soils from similar, unburned sites will be exposed to contrasting
dosages of smoke with known microbial content to compare the relative influence
of selection, dispersal, and drift on soil microbial community assembly. These
data will be used to build new capacity for simulating smoke microbial dispersal
across scales by parameterizing microbial emission fluxes and microbial
dispersion in atmospheric, chemical transport, and coupled fire-atmosphere
models. Results will lend insight into the relative importance of stochastic vs.
deterministic processes in driving microbial community ecology in systems where
fire disturbances are frequent, while modeling will enable predictions of the
scale and impact of smoke-related microbial dispersal. This research will inform
questions about microbial gene flow, microbial pathogen epidemiology,
phytopathogens, and meteorological processes, and will expand fundamental
understanding of fire’s ecological significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.