* 2039142
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Expanding Volunteer Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 06/17/2020,04/30/2021
* Ritu Ritu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 04/30/2021
* USD 203,817.00

Volunteer computing (VC) uses donated computing time consumer devices such as
home computers and smartphones to do scientific computing. It has been shown
that VC can provide greater computing power, at lower cost, than conventional
approaches such as organizational computing centers and commercial clouds. BOINC
is the most common software framework for VC. Essentially, donors of computing
time simply have to load BOINC on their computer or smartphone, and then
register to donate at the BOINC web site. VC provides "high throughput
computing": handling lots of independent jobs, with performance goals based on
the rate of job completion rather than completion time for individual jobs. This
type of computing (all known as high-throughput computing) is in great demand in
most areas of science. Until now, the adoption of VC has been limited by its
structure. For example, VC projects (such as Einstein@home and Rosetta@home) are
operated by individual research groups, and volunteers must browse and choose
from among many such projects. As a result, there are relatively few VC
projects, and volunteers are mostly tech-savvy computer enthusiasts. This
project aims to solve these problems using two complementary development
efforts: First, it will add BOINC-based VC conduits to two major high-
performance computing providers: (a) the Texas Advanced Computing Center, a
supercomputer center, and (b) nanoHUB, a web portal for nano science that
provides computing capabilities.Also, a unified control interface to VC will be
developed, tentatively called Science United, where donors can register. The
project will benefit thousands of scientists who use these facilities, and it
will create technology that makes it easy for other HPC providers to add their
own VC back ends. Also, Science United will provide a simpler interface to BOINC
volunteers where they will register to support scientific areas, rather than
specific projects. Science United will also serve as an allocator of computing
power among projects. Thus, new projects will no longer have to do their own
marketing and publicity to recruit volunteers. Finally, the creation of a single
VC "brand" (i.e Science United) will allow coherent marketing of VC to the
public. By creating a huge pool of low-cost computing power that will benefit
thousands of scientists, and increasing public awareness of and interest in
science, the project plans to establish VC as a central and long-term part of
the U.S. scientific cyber infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adding VC to an
existing HPC facility involves several technical issues, which will be addressed
as follows: (1) Packaging science applications (which typically run on Linux
cluster nodes) to run on home computers (mostly Windows, some Mac and Linux):
the team is developing an approach using VirtualBox and Docker, in which the
application and its environment (Linux distribution, libraries, executables) are
represented as a set of layers comprising a Docker image, which is then run as a
container within a Linux virtual machine on the volunteer device. This has
numerous advantages: it reduces the work of packaging applications to near zero;
it minimizes network traffic because a given Docker layer is downloaded to a
host only once; and it provides a strong security sandbox so that volunteer
computers are protected from buggy or malicious applications, (2) File
management: Input and output files must be moved between existing private
servers and public-facing servers that are accessible to the outside Internet. A
file management system will be developed, based on Web RPCs, for this purpose.
This system will use content-based naming so that a given file is transferred
and stored only once. It also maintains job/file associations so that files can
be automatically deleted from the public server when they are no longer needed.
(3) Submitting and monitoring jobs: BOINC provides a web interface for
efficiently submitting and monitoring large batches of jobs. These were
originally developed as part of a system to migrate HTCondor jobs to BOINC. This
project is extending it to support the additional requirements of TACC and
nanoHUB. Note that these new capabilities are not specific to TACC or nanoHUB:
they provide the glue needed to easily add BOINC-based VC to any existing HTC
facility. The team is also developing RPC bindings in several languages (Python,
C++, PHP). The other component of the project, Science United, is a database-
driven web site and an associated web service for the BOINC clients. Science
United will control volunteer hosts (i.e. tell them which projects to work for)
using BOINC's "Account Manager" mechanism, in which the BOINC client on each
host periodically contacts Science United and is told what projects to run.
Project servers, not Science United, will distribute jobs and files. Science
United will define a set of "keywords" for science areas (physics, biomedicine,
environment, etc.) and for location (country, institution). Projects will be
labelled with appropriate keywords. Volunteers will have a yes/no/maybe
interface for specifying the types of jobs they want to run. Science United will
thus provide a mechanism in which a fraction of total computing capacity can be
allocated to a project for a given period. Because total capacity changes slowly
over time, this allows near-certain guaranteed allocations. Science United will
embody a scheduling system that attempts to enforce allocations, honor volunteer
preferences, and maximize throughput. Finally, Science United will do detailed
accounting of computing. Volunteer hosts will tell Science United how much work
(measured by CPU time and FLOPs, GPU time and FLOPs, and number of jobs) they
have done for each project. Science United will maintain historical records of
this data for volunteers and projects, and current totals with finer granularity
(e.g. for each host/project combination). Finally, Science United will provide
web interfaces letting volunteers see their contribution status and history, and
letting administrators add projects, control allocations, and view accounting
data.