* 2039287
* EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Exploring Visualized and Explainable Artificial Intelligence to Improve Students’ Learning Experience in Digital Forensics Education
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Jie Yan, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 03/31/2024
* USD 64,990.00

With the exponential increase in cybercrimes in recent years, the need for
Computer Forensics and Digital Evidence (CFDE) expertise is rapidly growing. A
qualified CFDE professional needs to have deep knowledge of digital forensic
evidence identification, acquisition, and examination, as well as the ability to
present and explain digital forensic evidence in courtrooms. However, there are
major barriers to instilling the core knowledge of CFDE and practice of cyber
investigation techniques in a diverse body of interested students. For example,
a systematic approach for collecting, organizing, and analyzing digital forensic
evidence is lacking. This project will engage novel interdisciplinary
perspectives, including artificial intelligence (AI), cybersecurity, criminal
justice, and computer science to re-examine the emerging CFDE field with a
formal approach. This project will then explore visualized and explainable AI to
improve students’ learning experience in digital forensics education at
Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs) including Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together faculty
from the University of Baltimore, an MSI, Bowie State University, one of the
oldest HBCUs in Maryland, and the University of Missouri Kansas City, who have
synergistic expertise in digital forensics, cybersecurity, AI, law, and computer
science. The project will leverage graph-based AI models to provide students
with visualized depictions of forensic evidence, the patterns of evidence, and
the connections among the evidence. It will also explore explainable AI to
support the development of forensic evidence that is accountable and presentable
to courts, and develop AI-aided CFDE instructional materials. The project will
address research questions at the intersection of AI, CFDE, and education
including the following: (a) How do graph-based models store, retrieve, and
present digital forensic evidence? (b) How do graph-based AI models discover new
evidence and to what extent should we trust AI-discovered evidence/patterns? (c)
How can knowledge and techniques of AI-assisted investigation be infused into
CFDE instructional materials, and to what extent do the materials improve
students’ learning experiences? Learning materials will be made available to
both the CFDE and data science communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by a special initiative of the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace
(SaTC) program to foster new, previously unexplored, collaborations between the
fields of cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, and education. The SaTC
program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic
Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the
growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security
and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.