* 2039320
* RAPID: Responsible conduct of accelerated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine research through challenge trials
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Nir Eyal, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 07/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This project examines the ethics of accelerating research into a COVID-19
vaccine through human challenge trials. In a human challenge trial, healthy
volunteers are deliberately exposed to the virus after being given the vaccine
(or placebo). The project examines the ethics of these trials and how to make
them more ethical through philosophical research and through a survey of
challenge trial volunteers. While even the most ethically conducted challenge
trial will involve risks to volunteers, these trials can also accelerate the
development of a vaccine for COVID-19 by several months. Given the current rates
of infection and mortality, this time gain could translate into many thousands
of lives being saved. Findings will also benefit humanity in future public
health crises where quick testing of vaccine efficacy is needed. Dissemination
of the findings will promote public scientific literacy, and deepened engagement
with science, ethics, and technology across STEM disciplines. Clarifying these
ethical principles will facilitate more efficient partnerships between
government, academia, industry, and others, and promote national security via
increased resilience to pandemics, biological warfare, and other threats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses multiple methods to investigate the
ethics of human challenge trials for COVID-19. It has three main research
components: 1) a philosophical examination of whether responsible conduct of
challenge trials for SARS-CoV-2 is possible, under what criteria (e.g., what
inclusion and exclusion criteria and trial procedures would reduce net harm to
participants), and subject to what institutional oversight mechanisms (e.g., a
special added IRB/expert taskforce); 2) a survey of 3,000 proactive volunteers
for SARS-Cov-2 human challenge trials and a randomly selected control group
about their motivations and beliefs about COVID-19 and the current pandemic,
risk perceptions, and willingness to take risks; and 3) creation of an education
package for trialists based on the findings. This package will educate trialists
about potential pitfalls of challenge trials, such as potential misunderstanding
of trial details and risk, which the informed consent process must emphasize,
and avoiding unfair participant selection, which might be a pitfall given the
lower socio-economic status of many high-transmission/surge areas. This project
advances knowledge in several areas of STEM research ethics, including the
ethics of challenge studies, the assessment of risks and benefits to
participants, and the degree to which participantsâ€™ autonomous authorization of
research may make even somewhat adverse risk/benefit ratios ethically
tolerable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.