* 2039745
* Q2Work: Supporting learners and educators to develop a competitive workforce in quantum information science and technology
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Emily Edwards, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In the time of rapidly expanding interest and
investment in Quantum Information Science and Engineering (QISE), relevant
education and workforce development efforts are becoming critical. This three-
year project is designed to accelerate progress across the quantum education
community by amplifying its efforts through dissemination, cohesion, and
collaboration. The project will also allow expansion of the Key Concepts for
K-12 education, so that the community can work towards integrating QISE into
early education. Activities include a website that serves as a hub for the wider
QISE education ecosystem, and a plan for a cohesive set of workshops to further
the development of age-appropriate K-12 QISE education resources.
Transdisciplinary and convergent connections across the QISE education ecosystem
spanning K-12, academia, government, industry, professional societies, and
informal education organizations are a central element of this effort. QISE
draws from the fields with some of the lowest percentages of underrepresented
minority and female students, and this program involves mechanisms to increase
participation of underrepresented groups in QISE.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;QISE education and the associated
research is distinct from quantum mechanics, mathematics, or computer science,
but it is not its own field. This activity bootstraps a community of educators,
education researchers, and QIS professionals to further develop QISE education,
seed new efforts and magnify research in this critical area. Core research and
technological progress in QISE depends on supporting this community. Moreover,
planned activities enable the education community to take concrete collaborative
steps towards making changes to curricula and implementing tools that increase
awareness, intuition, and literacy in quantum information science at the K-12
level and ultimately across all ages and learning environments. Planned
activities and outputs are designed to be inclusive, and to build connections
with underrepresented groups in the fields of science, technology, engineering
and mathematics. Broadening access to QISE for students of different
backgrounds, and increased female and minority representation at the college
level are also the goals of this work. An evaluator will assess the project
activities and deliverables using methods such as surveys, focus groups, and
data analytics collected from web logs. Given the emphasis on facilitating
connections across QIS education ecosystem, evaluation protocols will be
developed based on a framework for assessing the attributes of collaborative
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is partially supported by NSF's
Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program, in the Directorate for Education
&amp; Human Resources and Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(MPS) through the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA), Division of
Materials Research (DMR) and Division of Physics. DRK-12 seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.