* 2039851
* RAPID: Understanding the Disparate Impact of COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Pablo Beramendi, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 199,910.00

There is anecdotal evidence that the COVID-19 pandemic has disproportionately
affected communities of color and poor communities than relatively affluent
communities. This research will use two projects to systematically study the
causes and consequences of disparate effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on
different socioeconomic groups. The first project uses new cross state survey
data to investigate whether access to public health insurance for the poor
reduces the chances that individuals contract the COVID-19 disease. The unique
way the researchers collect the data and the methodology they use allows them to
establish a causal relationship between public health insurance access and
COVID-19 spread. The second project will use a different cross-state survey data
to investigate the effects of COVID-19 on political and ideological preferences.
The results of this research project will provide important inputs into policies
to reduce the disparate effects of the pandemic on different groups and
indirectly reduce the rate of spread and its negative impact in the
aggregate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project investigates the disparate
effects of COVID-19 on different communities. The project will collect data from
adjoining counties across states that expanded Medicaid under the Affordable
Care Act (ACA) and those that did not and use regression discontinuity (RD)
design to estimate the causal effects of access to public health insurance on
the probability of getting COVID-19. The second project will use panel survey
data to investigate the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on political ideology,
beliefs, and participation. This project is based on panel data collected from
1000 individuals in 8 states. The sampling frame, and details of the data
collected allows the PIs to establish a causal relationship while controlling
for a wide variety of socioeconomic and policy variables. By studying the causes
and consequences of the disparate effects of COVID-19, this research provides a
broader and more nuanced effects of COVID-19 than had hitherto been provided.
The results of this research project will provide important inputs into policies
to reduce the disparate effects of the pandemic on different groups and
indirectly reduce the rate of spread and its negative impact in the
aggregate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.