* 2039044
* COVID-19 Postdoctoral Fellowship Program
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Silvia Ronco, Research Corporation for Science Advancement
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Peebles
* 08/31/2021
* USD 343,629.00

This support to the Research Corporation for Science Advancement (RCSA) helps to
stabilize a portion of the scientific workforce by providing approximately four
fellowships for highly trained postdoctoral associates in chemistry, materials
research, physics, and astronomical sciences. This project is supported by the
Divisions of Chemistry, Materials Research, Physics, and Astronomical Sciences
in the Mathematical and Physical Science Directorate. COVID-19 has caused
unprecedented disruption in many sectors of society. University budgets have
been reduced, hiring freezes put in place, and work stoppages enacted. Newer
science, technology, engineering, and mathematical (STEM) professionals hoping
to enter the professoriate at this time face significant challenges that could
force many of them to leave the professions. This activity extends existing RSCA
programs to help these highly trained members of the STEM workforce bridge the
gap between training and the start of their independent careers, by helping to
retain them in STEM while also augmenting the breadth of their experience.
Applicants apply through RSCA mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This activity
provides approximately four fellowships for individuals caught in the wake of
the COVID-19 crisis that has impacted their prospects on the scientific job
market. Rather than have these individuals leave the STEM fields, these
fellowships provide them with at least one year of support. In addition to
furthering their scientific expertise in areas which they are already familiar,
this support provides these postdocs with opportunities to gain pedagogical
training in active learning and its implementation in hybrid and online
classrooms. This will make these fellows more competitive for academic positions
when they return to the academic scientific job market. The mentors of these
fellows also benefit since they are able to maintain some stability in their
research endeavors. Research funding is stressed due to COVID-19 impacts and
during these disruptions, when individuals leave a lab, it is not always
possible to hire replacements. These fellowships help mentors retain highly
trained and productive researchers at time when training new project members is
difficult, if not impossible. Colleges and Universities benefit from these
fellowships in that the fellows will become resource people for courses, both
now during the fellowships, but also after, when the fellows continue to benefit
from the pedagogical insights they gain as they move into their faculty
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.