* 2039218
* SBIR Phase II:  A Process to Extend the Shelf Life of Fruits, Vegetables, and Dairy at Ambient Temperature
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Max Richman, Farther Farms, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2023
* USD 991,377.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase II project is to
improve fruit and vegetable storage and dairy powder production in situations
that currently require additives and carrier agents during the high-temperature
processing techniques. The creation of novel, high-quality, shelf-stable food
products is an important step toward increasing food system sustainability and
accessibility. The team seeks to increase shelf-stability, reducing reliance on
the expensive and limited cold chain. This technology has potential applications
for pharmaceutical drug preservation. Additionally, global water shortages have
increased reliance on desalination technologies that are expensive and
environmentally taxing. With the potential cost, scalability, and portability
benefits of the proposed separation technology, there is further potential for
use in water treatment.

This SBIR Phase II project seeks to further develop a hybrid separation
technology combining supercritical fluids and sonication to instantly separate a
solute and solvent at operational temperatures of 15-55 °C, with inputs as low
as 1% solids. The technology results in products with particles sizes of <10um
to >250um and varying crystallization without hardware changes. By creating a
continuous separation effect using velocity (supersonic flow as the kinetic
driving force for phase separation instead of heat), the technology overcomes
the end-product quality limitations of traditional thermal drying techniques,
and has the potential to scale with attractive unit economics,. This method is
significantly more energy efficient than existing methodologies. Specifically,
the technology can produce pure fruit, vegetable, and dairy powders without
preprocessing concentration steps, additives, carrier agents, or thermal
treatment. The method may also be used to develop drug formulations for aerosol
delivery and/or enhanced bioavailability, streamline sugar manufacturing to
create co-energy generation, and potentially offer cost effective compact
desalination systems to make drinkable water. The Phase II research seeks to
design, construct, and optimize a scalable pilot system through computational
fluid dynamics modeling, custom fabrication, and analytical testing to validate
the unit economics and end-product attributes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.