* 2039517
* EAGER: Quantum Imaging for Precise Mapping of Protein Organization during Signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Diane Lidke, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,997.00

Cells have proteins called receptors that bind to signaling molecules and
initiate a physiological response. Receptors are generally transmembrane
proteins, which bind to signaling molecules outside the cell and subsequently
transmit the signal through a sequence of molecular switches to internal
signaling pathways. Currently, there are no reliable methods to determine both
stoichiometry and precise distances between proteins in a signaling cluster,
which is critical for understanding the fundamental mechanisms that control
signaling. Quantum-enhanced measurements proposed in this project will allow to
approach the physical limits in precision to study protein-protein interactions
and determine protein organization during cellular signaling. Undergraduate and
graduate students involved in the project will acquire experience in diverse
areas including fluorescence microscopy, quantum optics and precision
measurements, single-photon detection technologies, cell signaling, and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will demonstrate quantum-enhanced
measurements to realize ultra-precise characterization of protein-protein
interactions in intact cells. An image inversion interferometer system for two-
point source imaging with high precision will be constructed, and a fast
feedback system for center of mass positioning required for the Quantum Imaging
technique will be developed. Analyses and estimators that integrate distance
measurements and traditional single molecule super resolution microscopy (SMSR)
information will be applied to study EGFR and EGFR/Ron clusters on the membrane
of intact cells. The proposed work will develop a novel technology that merges
quantum-enhanced imaging techniques with state-of-the art SMSR, to provide a
10-fold resolution enhancement for precise imaging of proteins in signaling
clusters with approximately 1 nm resolution. This project is supported by the
Biological Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.