* 2039242
* CSBR: Increased capacity for research and student engagement at the  Frost Entomological Museum
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Andrew Deans, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 391,298.00

Natural history collections record the world’s diversity through time and
support the scientific community’s understanding of changing ecosystem dynamics.
In the face of declining insect biodiversity worldwide, it is more important now
than ever for entomology collections to preserve, digitize, and disseminate
specimen data to the broader community. The Frost Entomological Museum at Penn
State cares for more than 1.3 million specimens that span the diversity of
insects. This collection stands to grow further, through the incorporation of
satellite collections of pollinators, especially bees (more than 125,000
specimens), and through the activities of the Insect Biodiversity Center (IBC),
a recently established research initiative at Penn State. The infrastructure
provided through this grant increases the storage capacity of the Frost by 50%,
allowing for the curation of these collections and to serve as a repository for
scaled up efforts to understand insect diversity through time. The award also
provides the resources to digitize the substantial aphid collection
(approximately 224,000 specimens on 49,000 slides), which holds important data
regarding these insects’ plant hosts, and aquatic insects (approximately 100,000
specimens in 15,000 vials), which are indicators of habitat health. These
improvements will facilitate research that addresses native pollinator decline,
epidemiology, global climate change and its impact on species distributions and
invasive species, niche restrictions, indicator species, and the evolutionary
history of insects. The project will also generate data that contribute to
ongoing research on imperiled insects and will fill critical taxonomic,
geographical, and temporal gaps in existing datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
high-density compactor storage system will be installed in the Frost Museum in
order to accommodate new rows of cabinets for pinned insects. These cabinets
will accommodate approximately 1,600 drawers of expanded space. A portion of
this storage will be utilized by incorporating the pollinator collection
previously housed at Penn State’s Fruit Research and Extension Center and
specimens generated by Penn State’s Center for Pollinator Research. The aphid
collection, which consists of slide-mounted specimens, will be imaged on a
flatbed scanner and then moved to new custom-built slide cabinets. The slide
scans will be transcribed in the Frost Museum database, georeferenced, and the
data shared with iDigBio and the Global Biodiversity Information Facility
(GBIF). The aquatic insect collection likewise will be imaged and rehoused in
new, expanded ethanol storage. The lot images will be transcribed,
georeferenced, and the data shared with the above repositories, making them
accessible to the public. A graduate student and at least two undergraduates
will receive training in collections care, management, and
digitization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.