* 2039417
* SBIR Phase II:  An automated digital pathology lab for rapid on-site processing and imaging of tissue biopsies
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Mei Wang, Instapath Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project supports digital pathology. For the past
century, pathology has been performed on microscopically thin sections of
tissues that are stained and mounted onto glass microscope slides for analysis
by a pathologist. This process is labor-intensive, costly, and the turnaround
time is typically one week. For the vast majority of biopsy procedures, the
diagnostic result is not obtained for days or even weeks after the procedure.
Current bedside pathology techniques for rapid diagnosis and quality assurance
of biopsy samples are slow, inaccurate, destructive to the tissue, and require
the presence of multiple trained personnel, which prevent them from being widely
used. Recent technological advances allow digitizing of the physical microscope
slides and enable a fully digital pathology workflow. However, to date no system
can take a fresh tissue sample through the entire long, laborious processing
lifecycle prior to imaging. This project will develop a tissue processing and
imaging platform to enable fast, automated processing from the fresh sample to
the digital image within minutes of tissue removal. This will provide better
care and patient outcomes and enables new opportunities to provide care in
clinical settings with more limited pathology resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
continues development of an integrated technology platform that automates the
entire process of tissue processing and digital imaging, obviating the need for
trained personnel to be on-site. This project will support the development of
new strategies to automate the acquisition of high-quality microscopic images
from samples with widely varying surface topographies, while simultaneously
improving both speed and image quality to meet clinical needs. The new
technologies will support parallel, hands-free automated sample processing to
increase throughput for analysis of multiple samples in a single session. The
project will culminate in verification and clinical validation of the integrated
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.