* 2039781
* Collaborative Research:  Hidden Dimensions of Diversity in Woodland Salamanders: Investigating Ecophysiological Evolution in a Classic Non-Adaptive Radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Eric Riddell, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 02/29/2024
* USD 284,800.00

One of the most persistent patterns in biology is that species richness is
unequally distributed across the tree of life: whereas some lineages are
exceptionally prolific in generating new species, others are species-poor, even
over long evolutionary timespans. It is generally thought that, in order to be
species-rich, a lineage must also be ecologically diverse. Yet, this is not
always the case. This proposal focuses on woodland salamanders (genus
Plethodon), a highly diverse amphibian lineage in the Appalachian region of
eastern North America. This lineage is renowned for high species richness
despite little ecological diversity. Nonetheless, the story of the Plethodon
radiation has largely been studied from a single niche axis – that of structural
habitat use and corresponding morphology. Just as important, but largely
ignored, is thermal and hydric habitat use, and how interactions with climatic
factors may generate biodiversity. As lungless salamanders, these organisms
perform a delicate dance with their thermal and hydric environments to ensure
cutaneous respiration. This award centers around discovering how physiological
diversity is structured across the lineage, and how physiological evolution
contributes to the high species diversity of Plethodon. This award is important
because it will advance our understanding of how biodiversity originates.
Specifically, the researchers will unpack how diversification (or lack thereof)
along several ecological axes sculpts broad-scale patterns of species richness.
The award is also important because it will provide detailed and updated
information about salamander vulnerability to ongoing environmental change. This
project will provide training opportunities for undergraduates and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theory suggests that disparity in biodiversity
reflects ecological differences among lineages. At one extreme, adaptive
radiation is characterized by rapid and prolific diversification into numerous
ecological niches and, at the other end, lineages with low ecological diversity
also tend to have few species. So-called ‘non-adaptive’ radiations occupy an
enigmatic middle ground characterized by high species richness despite low
ecological diversity. Perhaps most famous among these radiations are the
plethodontid (lungless) salamanders. This lineage is renowned for long-term
morphological stasis, suggesting that diversification has been driven by neutral
processes. Using a series of phylogenetic causal models, the researchers will
explore evolutionary patterns of physiological diversity, and determine their
causal mechanism(s). Then, using evolutionary rate matrices, the researchers
will compare rates and patterns of morphological and physiological evolution.
Then, the researchers will explore the physiological correlates of species’
distributions to explore why the Appalachian region is so species rich in
lungless amphibians. Lastly, using a series of new mechanistic models, the
researchers will explore how salamander distributions will be altered over the
next century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.