* 2039026
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Wildland Fire Observation, Management, and Evacuation using Intelligent Collaborative Flying and Ground Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Peter Fule, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 12/31/2021
* USD 649,890.00

Increasing wildfire costs---a reflection of climate variability and development
within wildlands---drive calls for new national capabilities to manage
wildfires. The great potential of unmanned aerial systems (UAS) has not yet been
fully utilized in this domain due to the lack of holistic, resilient, flexible,
and cost-effective monitoring protocols. This project will develop UAS-based
fire management strategies to use autonomous unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in
an optimal, efficient, and safe way to assist the first responders during the
fire detection, management, and evacuation stages. The project is a
collaborative effort between Northern Arizona University (NAU), Georgia
Institute of Technology (GaTech), Desert Research Institute (DRI), and the
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR). The team has established
ongoing collaborations with the U.S. Forest Service (USFS) in Pacific Northwest
Research Station, Kaibab National Forest (NF), and Arizona Department of
Forestry and Fire Management to perform multiple field tests during the
prescribed and managed fires. This proposal's objective is to develop an
integrated framework satisfying unmet wildland fire management needs, with key
advances in scientific and engineering methods by using a network of low-cost
and small autonomous UAVs along with ground vehicles during different stages of
fire management operations including: (i) early detection in remote and forest
areas using autonomous UAVs; (ii) fast active geo-mapping of the fire heat map
on flying drones; (iii) real-time video streaming of the fire spread; and (iv)
finding optimal evacuation paths using autonomous UAVs to guide the ground
vehicles and firefighters for fast and safe evacuation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the frontier of disaster
management by developing: (i) an innovative drone-based forest fire detection
and monitoring technology for rapid intervention in hard-to-access areas with
minimal human intervention to protect firefighter lives; (ii) multi-level fire
modeling to offer strategic, event-scale, and new on-board, low-computation
tactics using fast fire mapping from UAVs; and (iii) a bounded reasoning-based
planning mechanism where the UAVs identify the fastest and safest evacuation
roads for firefighters and fire-trucks in highly dynamic and uncertain dangerous
zones. The developed technologies will be translational to a broad range of
applications such as disaster (flooding, fire, mud slides, terrorism)
management, where quick search, surveillance, and responses are required with
limited human interventions. This project will also contribute to future
engineering curricula and pursue a substantial integration of research and
education while also engaging female and underrepresented minority students,
developing hands-on research experiments for K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the NSF Cyber-
Physical Systems 20-563 solicitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.