* 2039575
* Data CI Pilot: CI-Based Collaborative Development of Data-Driven Interatomic Potentials for Predictive Molecular Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Ellad Tadmor, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,127,993.00

The project addresses a pressing need of the molecular simulation community by
providing materials researchers with a powerful new ability to efficiently
synthesize all available data and knowledge related to their particular problem
of study. It convenes a consortium of materials researchers around the common
goal of increasing interoperability of existing and emerging materials
cyberinfrastructures supported by NSF and others. The PIs will develop a new
computational framework that enables researchers to rapidly develop and deploy
data-driven interatomic potentials for complex material systems, by connecting
existing cyberinfrastructure resources of first-principles calculations and
experimental data. This will provide qualitative insights into material
behavior, as well as predictive capability necessary to design new materials and
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to accelerate the
adoption of data-driven interatomic potential (DDIP) technology by removing
existing barriers faced by materials researchers. Few groups in academia,
government and industry have the capacity to develop DDIPs as this requires
simultaneous expertise in the physics of the material being modeled, in “first
principles” (FP) calculations, and in machine learning techniques, as well as
access to extensive computational resources needed to construct the extremely
large and diverse training sets required to fit high-quality DDIPs. To address
this, a computational infrastructure called “ColabFit” is being developed that
will enable researchers to collaborate on DDIP development by pooling their
knowledge and data. Researchers will be able to train state-of-the-art DDIPs
using a supported fitting code of choice, seamlessly access training data from
existing cyberinfrastructure (CI) resources of FP data, and exchange DDIPs in a
standard format through the Open Knowledgebase of Interatomic Models (OpenKIM)
project so that they can build on each other’s work. This effort fills a
pressing need in the materials simulation community, as evidenced by the large
consortium of leading DDIP developers, CI projects, and materials standards
organization that has been assembled to support it. To keep development of the
ColabFit framework focused on real-world materials research needs, it will be
organized around a target application of DDIP development for phase
transformations in 2D transition metal
dichalcogenides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Computer and Information Sciences
Directorate, and the Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.