* 2039605
* EAGER: SaTC-EDU: AI-based Humor-Integrated Social Engineering Training
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Julia Rayz, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,566.00

Advances in artificial intelligence (AI) have introduced new opportunities and
challenges in cybersecurity. Social engineering, while contributing to the
majority of cyberattacks, poses a uniquely difficult problem in cybersecurity
because of a combination of factors. First, social engineering is low cost and
involves multiple increasingly complex and subtle attack models. Second, the
majority of computer users are not cybersecurity-literate, with less than 30%
judged competent on basic knowledge. Third, social engineering takes advantage
of human vulnerabilities such as habit formation and susceptibility to
persuasive techniques. This all results in a significant gap in security because
individuals are unprepared to counteract social engineering. To address the need
to educate casual computer users against social engineering attacks, this
project proposes a novel approach that will take advantage of human psychology,
just like the attacks themselves do. The project team proposes to create an
accessible and engaging learning experience that will promote changes in
attitude and behavior in computer users by teaching them about social
engineering techniques and how to detect them. This project fills an important
gap by focusing on users normally marginalized by current cybersecurity
education efforts, including casual computer users or those with computer
anxiety, such as the elderly and low-income families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address the dual problems of a lack of cybersecurity literacy and increasing
social engineering attacks, the multidisciplinary project team proposes to
integrate AI techniques to create a customized social engineering education
experience that utilizes the principles of entertainment education. This effort
will target non-security professionals and will use pretext design maps to train
AI systems to generate social engineering scenarios. Transformer-based natural
language processing models and humor theory knowledge will be used to generate
explainable humorous training schemas based on these social engineering
scenarios. The scenarios will then be applied in a classroom setting, where
learning patterns and specific psychological markers will be used to refine the
AI-generated scenarios. The combination of these approaches will result in an
effective cybersecurity pedagogical tool, powered by AI, for casual computer
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by a special initiative of
the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to foster new, previously
unexplored, collaborations between the fields of cybersecurity, artificial
intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.