* 2039087
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Spatio-Temporal Logics for Analyzing and Querying Perception Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Jyotirmoy Deshmukh, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The goals of Automated Driving Systems (ADS) and Advanced Driver Assistance
Systems (ADAS) include reduction in accidental deaths, enhanced mobility for
differently abled people, and an overall improvement in the quality of life for
the general public. Such systems typically operate in open and highly uncertain
environments for which robust perception systems are essential. However, despite
the tremendous theoretical and experimental progress in computer vision, machine
learning, and sensor fusion, the form and conditions under which guarantees
should be provided for perception components is still unclear. The state-of-the-
art is to perform scenario-based evaluation of data against ground truth values,
but this has only limited impact. The lack of formal metrics to analyze the
quality of perception systems has already led to several catastrophic incidents
and a plateau in ADS/ADAS development. This project develops formal languages
for specifying and evaluating the quality and robustness of perception sub-
systems within ADS and ADAS applications. To enable broader dissemination of
this technology, the project develops graduate and undergraduate curricula to
train engineers in the use of such methods, and new educational modules to
explain the challenges in developing safe and robust ADS for outreach and public
engagement activities. To broaden participation in computing, the investigators
target the inclusion of undergraduate women in research and development phases
through summer internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formal language developed
in this project is based on a new spatio-temporal logic pioneered by the
investigators. This logic allows one to simultaneously perform temporal
reasoning about streaming perception data, and spatially reason about objects
both within a single frame of the data and across frames. The project also
develops quantitative semantics for this logic, which provides the user with
quantifiable quality metrics for perception sub-systems. These semantics enable
comparisons between different perception systems and architectures. Crucially,
the formal language facilitates the process of abstracting away implementation
details, which in turn allows system designers and regulators to specify
assumptions and guarantees for system performance at a higher-level of
abstraction. An interesting benefit of this formal language is that it enables
querying of databases with perception data for specific driving scenarios
without the need for the highly manual process of creating ground truth
annotations. Such a formal language currently does not exist, and this is a huge
impediment to building a thriving marketplace for perception components used in
safety-critical systems. This framework sets the foundation for a requirements
language between suppliers of perception components and automotive companies.
The open source and publicly available software tools developed in this project
will assist with testing of perception systems by engineers and governmental
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.