* 2039129
* Collaborative Research: Holocene and Late Pleistocene Stream Deposition in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica as a Proxy for Glacial Meltwater and Paleoclimate
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Regina DeWitt, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 367,390.00

The McMurdo Dry Valleys are the largest ice-free region in Antarctica and home
to a seasonally active hydrologic system, with streams and saline lakes. Streams
are fed by summer meltwater from local glaciers and snowbanks. Therefore,
streamflow is tied to summer climate conditions such as air temperatures, ground
temperatures, winds, and incoming solar radiation. Based on 50 years of
monitoring, summer stream activity has been observed to change, and it likely
varied during the geologic past in response to regional climate change and
fluctuating glaciers. Thus, deposits from these streams can address questions
about past climate, meltwater, and lake level changes in this region. How did
meltwater streamflow respond to past climate change? How did streamflow vary
during periods of glacial advance and retreat? At what times did large lakes
fill many of the valleys and what was their extent? The researchers plan to
acquire a record of stream activity for the Dry Valleys that will span the three
largest valleys and a time period of about 100,000 years. This record will come
from a series of active and ancient alluvial fans that were deposited by streams
as they flowed from valley sidewalls onto valley floors. The study will provide
a long-term context with which to assess recent observed changes to stream
activity and lake levels. The research will be led by two female mid-career
investigators and contribute significantly to student research opportunities and
education. The research will contribute to graduate and undergraduate education
by including students in both field and laboratory research, as well as
incorporating data and results into the classroom. The research will be
disseminated to K-12 and non-scientific communities through outreach that
includes professional development training for K-12 teachers in eastern
Massachusetts, development of hands-on activities, visits to K-12 classrooms,
and STEM education and literacy activities in North
Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to constrain rates of fluvial
deposition and periods of increased fluvial activity in the McMurdo Dry Valleys
during the Holocene and late Pleistocene. During 50 years of hydrologic
monitoring in the Dry Valleys, scientists have observed that streams exhibit
significant response to summer conditions. Previous studies of glacial and
lacustrine deposits indicate regional glacier advance in the Dry Valleys during
recent interglacial periods and high lake levels during and after the Last
Glacial Maximum (LGM), with potentially significant low and high stands during
the Holocene. However, the geologic record of meltwater activity is poorly
constrained. The PIs seek to develop the first spatially-extensive record of
stream deposition in the Dry Valleys by analyzing and dating alluvial fans.
Given that alluvial fans are deposited by summer meltwater streams in a
relatively stable tectonic setting, this record will serve as a proxy of
regional summer climate conditions. Meltwater streams are an important component
of the regional hydrologic system, connecting glaciers to lakes and affecting
ecosystems and soils. A record of fluvial deposition is key to understanding the
relationship between past climate change and regional hydrology. The proposed
research will include remote- and field-based mapping of alluvial fans, stream
channels, and meltwater sources as well as modeling potential incoming solar
radiation to the fans and moisture sources during the austral summer. In the
field, the PIs will document stratigraphy, collect near-surface sediments from
25 fans across four valleys (Taylor, Pearse, Wright, and Victoria), and collect
2- to 3-m vertical cores of ice-cemented sediments from three alluvial fan
complexes. The PIs will then conduct depositional dating of fluvial sands via
optically stimulated luminescence and analyze mineralogy and bulk major element
chemistry with X-ray powder diffraction and X-ray fluorescence. From these
analyses, the PIs propose to (1) determine the timing of local- to regional-
scale periods of high fluvial deposition, (2) calculate depositional rates, and
(3) constrain depositional environments and sediment provenance. Given that many
of the alluvial fans occur below the hypothesized maximum extents of glacially-
dammed lakes in Wright and Victoria valleys, detailed stratigraphy, sediment
provenance, and OSL dating of these fans could shed light on ongoing debates
regarding the timing and extent of LGM and post-LGM lakes. The work will support
a postdoctoral researcher, a PhD student, and many undergraduate and masterâ€™s
students in cross-disciplinary research that spans stratigraphy, geochemistry,
paleoclimatology and physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.