* 2039674
* CAREER: Partitioning of Rare Earth Elements (REE) Between Minerals and Aqueous Fluids in Ore Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Alexander Gysi, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2024
* USD 513,454.00

The rare earth elements (REE) have similar but slightly different ionic radii
and atomic masses, which permits studying the fundamental behavior of chemical
elements and their incorporation in mineral structures in natural systems. Their
magnetic properties make them important components in permanent magnets used in
wind turbines, batteries of hybrid cars, and phosphors in energy efficient
light. The REE composition of minerals is also used in geosciences to trace
geological processes in the Earth's crust. Ore deposits commonly form at depth
through the mobilization of metals in aqueous fluids and the mineralization in
hydrothermal veins. The properties of both, the fluid and the minerals, will
affect how the different REE are fractionated. Currently, we have much to
discover about how to quantify systematically the trace element signatures of
minerals with regards to fluid-rock interaction and ore-forming processes. This
CAREER proposal explores how REE fractionate between aqueous fluids and minerals
in ore deposits using laboratory experiments, numerical modeling and fluid
inclusions trapped in natural minerals. The THERMO fluids project will be
initiated with the preparation of a Fluids &amp; Minerals summer school for
undergraduate students, an open access booklet, and a dedicated hands-on
thermodynamics tutorial webpage. A major aim of this project will be to provide
an education platform and demonstrate the broader significance of thermodynamics
in geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Calcite, fluorite and apatite are common
gangue minerals associated to REE and other mineral deposits. These minerals
record geochemical signatures that may be used to determine temperature, fluid
chemistry and potentially fluid pathways associated to ore-forming processes.
This research involves a comprehensive series of hydrothermal experiments at 100
to 350 degrees C for determining the partitioning of REE between aqueous fluid-
calcite, -apatite and -fluorite as a function of temperature and fluid
composition (i.e., salinity, pH and ligand activity). The experimental data will
be used to develop a new thermodynamic model for predicting and quantifying REE
signatures in these hydrothermal minerals. To test the model, a set of mineral
trace element compositions and fluid inclusions will be studied in peralkaline,
carbonatite, and iron oxide-apatite hosted ore deposits in North America. The
objective of the proposed research is to provide a framework for simulating the
partitioning of trace metals associated to fluid-rock reactions in ore deposits
and advance our capabilities of modeling and interpreting ore-forming
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.