* 2039716
* EAGER:Collaborative Research: Blockchain Graphs as Testbeds of Power Grid Resiliece and Functionality Metrics
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2023
* Harold Vincent Poor, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 10/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Rapid adoption of renewable energy, growth of distributed generation
technologies and microgrid deployment, widespread implementations of IoT devices
and associated cybersecurity concerns have led to an ever expanding risk
landscape and have, in turn, shifted the focus from energy system protection to
resilience. Furthermore, the past two decades have seen a consistently
increasing interest in the application of tools developed in the
interdisciplinary field of complex network analysis to enhance our understanding
of functionality, security, and reliability of power systems and critical
infrastructures in which power grid networks serve as an integral constituent.
Such systems are intrinsically interconnected and interdependent, and as a
result, failure of one component due to manmade and natural cause, e.g., adverse
weather, aging, and intentional attacks such as terrorism, can lead to a
catastrophic cascade of failures. However, one of the key obstacles for
developing systematic and reliable assessment of power grid and critical
infrastructure resiliency under various threats is unavailability of ground
truth data on system response to adversaries due to data security, privacy and
confidentiality. Motivated by these problems rooted in the analysis of modern
power grids but inherent to many other complex network systems and given public
availability of all blockchain transaction transactions, we propose to use
blockchain graphs as a test-bed for validation of functionality and resilience
metrics on complex power grid
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exploring power grid sensitivity to
targeted attacks and failures in scenarios allowing for validation of any
proposed methodology against ground truth is the key toward developing reliable
risk mitigation strategies for power systems. The novel research approaches to
be developed in this project aim to lay foundations for deeper knowledge
integration and transfer across power systems, finance, social sciences and
other disciplines by utilizing graph-theoretic analysis and adopting a common
mathematical language of computational topology. By promoting new synergistic
research initiatives, the project will further advance knowledge creation not
only on power grids and blockchain but on modern complex networks, from brain
connectome to social media platforms to telecommunication-- thereby facilitating
resilience and sustainability of our society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.