* 2039189
* Collaborative Research: Control of Information Processing and Learning in Neuronal Networks through Light-mediated Programming of Genomic Networks
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Matteo Rinaldi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 01/31/2024
* USD 233,204.00

Communication and networking play a key role in the development and functioning
of living organisms. The physical DNA interactions within the genome, or network
of genes, determine gene activities and thereby the development and function of
cells, similarly as the software determines the operation of the hardware in a
computer. Therefore, being able to program genomic interactions and thereby the
development of communicating neuronal networks is at the basis of transformative
applications. In this direction, optogenomics, or the control of the genome
function through light, is proposed. Optogenomics offers an unprecedented means
to control organ and specifically brain development and functions, or even new
corrective treatments of cancer and other diseases. Such control will be enabled
through development of novel directional light emitting nano-devices. The goal
of this inter-disciplinary project is to study information processing and
learning (and, thus, ultimately memory) in neuronal networks orchestrated by the
light manipulation of the genome. For this, new photonic and electronic tools
will be developed to program the genome in neurons and to study both the
resulting changes in the structure and activity in networks of living neurons.
This project will provide inter-disciplinary training opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate students, who will become versed in both nanophotonics and
nanoelectronics as well as neuronal cell studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond
optogenetic platforms, which are aimed at the use of light to control cell-cell
interactions, optogenomic systems allow the control of DNA interactions in the
genome and, thus, the programming of the cell development and function. In this
project, new optogenomic tools will be developed to control the development and
information processing and learning in neuronal networks. In the proposed
system, neural stem cells will be transfected with optimized optogenomic
constructs that combine light-activated algae proteins and mammalian genome
regulators. As the input to the system, the constructs will be activated
globally across the cell culture through LED-based homogeneous illumination. The
light-induced changes in the genome 3D structure and function will be analyzed
using Chromatin Conformation Capture HiC/HiChIP, Atomic Force Microscopy, and
RNAseq with the NextGene global genome sequencing. The output of the system will
be the opto-electrophysiological analysis of signal processing in
optogenomically constructed neuronal networks, with innovative transparent
flexile beamforming nanophotonic devices combined with flexible high-density
microelectrode arrays, using metrics like Spike-Timing-Dependent Plasticity,
Hebbian learning and network science. An integrated Genome-Neuronal Function
Model will be developed for the first time by correlating genomic topological
networks to the functional gene networks and ultimately to the properties of the
resultant neuronal network as they form in 3D model of the human brain â€“
cerebral organoids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.