* 2039277
* EAGER: Actuation of Synthetic Cells Via Proto-Flagellar Motors
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Richard Murray, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,997.00

This is a project that focuses on the development of functioning molecular
motors for micron-scale synthetic cells, demonstrating mechanisms for motility
in (synthetic) cellular systems. Recent advances in the fields of synthetic
biology and molecular sciences have substantially advanced the ability to
produce genetically-programmed synthetic cells and multicellular machines from
molecular components. These efforts provide techniques for the bottom-up
construction of cell-like systems that can provide scientists with new insights
into how natural cells work, harness the power of biology to create nanoscale,
biomolecular machines, and provide an exciting pathway for exploration of the
Rules of Life. This project considers the ‘actuation’ subsystem of a synthetic
cell, with the goal of allowing expression of membrane-integrated actuation
complexes that can serve as a starting point to modulate the motility of the
cell. The project engages undergraduate students from the Summer Undergraduate
Research Fellowship program at California Institute of Technology and
establishes collaborations between the US Build-A-Cell consortium and Imperial
College, London, that includes personnel exchanges to build stronger
international ties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To demonstrate the ability to express
actuation complexes capable of modulating motility, this project (i) creates and
optimizes vesicles with reconstituted transmembrane complexes (proto-flagella)
that can eventually drive motility and (ii) engineers new vesicle systems that
rely on TX-TL for the synthesis of the soluble and membrane proteins needed for
motility. The project team redefines the state of the art by driving a step
change in the type and complexity of behavioral modules that can be introduced
into synthetic cells. Reconstituting membrane proteins provides new insights
into the biological processes that underlie mechanisms for motility in
microorganisms. In conjunction, the project develops generic methodologies for
achieving in vesicle genetic control of membrane proteins, using proto-flagella
as a test case.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.