* 2039727
* Collaborative Research: Identifying shallow slow slip using hematite textures and (U-Th)/He thermochronometry of exhumed and experimental faults
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Alexis Ault, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 05/31/2024
* USD 449,006.00

Slow slip, the movement along a fault without an earthquake, is a fundamental
part of the seismic cycle. In the near-surface environment, slow slip may impact
a range of tectonic processes and seismic hazards, including reducing earthquake
energy, controlling how earthquakes stop, and the intensity of ground shaking. A
critical unknown is how the material properties of fault rocks control this
phenomenon. This project focuses on a segment of the San Andreas fault that is
overdue for a large earthquake and has experienced recent slow slip events.
Investigators will make use of the unique textural and geochemical qualities of
hematite, a common mineral in faults, to determine the prevalence, timing, and
impact of slow slip along the southern San Andreas fault in Mecca Hills,
California. Comparison of observations from natural hematite-coated faults with
laboratory deformation experiments will document how hematite deforms to
understand what governs where and why slow slip occurs. Data will be integrated
into a new educational program, the Providence (Utah) to Providence (Rhode
Island) Partnership, that will connect rural and urban students in different
parts of the country and impact more than 450 elementary and middle school
students. Research and broader impact activities will provide mentoring and role
modeling opportunities for middle school through faculty levels, critical for
expanding and diversifying the sciences through each stage of education and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hematite is a common mineral on fault surfaces
and its textures and thermochronometry data patterns can characterize a range of
fault behavior. This project tests the hypothesis that hematite on fault
surfaces promotes shallow slow slip by comparing data from hematite-coated slip
surfaces in upper crustal, bedrock fault damage zones from Mecca Hills, with
results from deformation experiments at sub-seismic slip rates on both hematite
gouge and natural fault surfaces. Multi-scale microscopy and spectroscopy of
hematite (and comparisons to clay textures), hematite (U-Th)/He analyses, and
4He/3He thermochronometry will be used to investigate rate-dependent friction
behavior of hematite, related fault slip temperatures, deformation mechanisms,
and spatiotemporal patterns of past shallow fault slip. This research will
generate bedrock material property data that are critical for realistic physics-
based models integrating shallow slow slip into the seismic cycle. The
Providence to Providence Partnership will connect eighth graders at the Center
for Creativity, Innovation, and Discovery in rural Utah, situated in the
Intermountain Seismic Belt, with fourth graders in urban Rhode Island, via Zoom
teleconferences. Researchers and students will engage in annual virtual and
field education modules on faults and earthquakes. Eighth graders in Utah will
teach these concepts to rising Utah eighth graders and fourth graders in RI.
This project also provides training and support for graduate and undergraduate
researchers, as well as a postdoctoral fellow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.