* 2039380
* MIP: Platform for the Accelerated Realization, Analysis, and Discovery of Interface Materials (PARADIM)
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Darrell Schlom, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cosima Boswell-Koller
* 05/31/2026
* USD 13,999,466.00

Non-Technical Description: Cornell University leads a Materials Innovation
Platform, an NSF mid-scale infrastructure program in the Division of Materials
Research. Cornell University, in partnership with Johns Hopkins University,
forms the Platform for the Accelerated Realization, Analysis, and Discovery of
Interface Materials (PARADIM). PARADIM is a national user facility enabling a
more effective way of doing materials research: one that accelerates materials
discovery by establishing an ecosystem - a national community of practitioners -
that is equipped with experimental and theoretical methods to enable users to
realize inorganic materials with superior electronic characteristics. The scope
of PARADIM is the realization of inorganic materials with superior electronic
characteristics in the form of single crystals and epitaxial thin films with an
emphasis on new interface quantum materials. The inorganic materials realized by
PARADIM users have either never been made before or are to be made with a
perfection, purity, or interfacing with other materials for which there are
compelling reasons to believe that superior electronic characteristics will
result. The open structure of the Platform democratizes materials discovery for
all U.S. scientists and makes it possible for users to collectively apply the
"closed loop" approach of the Materials Genome Initiative. PARADIM also provides
numerous community-building and training components to prepare the future
workforce including two annual week-long summer schools on materials-by-design
approaches leveraging and informing users about PARADIM's facilities and
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: PARADIM provides an
advanced set of openly available equipment and expertise for the realization of
inorganic materials with superior electronic characteristics. PARADIM's state-
of-the-art facilities include (1) major crystal growth methods, especially
optical floating-zone techniques; (2) a fully automated molecular-beam epitaxy
system where users can select among 62 elements of the periodic table and see
the electronic structure of the materials they produce by angle-resolved
photoemission spectroscopy; (3) advanced electron microscopes for probing the
structure, chemistry, and functional properties of materials down to the atomic
scale; (4) artificial intelligence/machine learning approaches to leverage
existing and new materials data to extract actionable information and aid users'
materials realization in real-time; (5) theoretical capabilities to help design
and understand materials as well as to analyze experimental data, and (6) a
talented team who trains users how to make the most of these capabilities and
improves these tools. The scope of the in-house research of PARADIM is to weave
new "quantum fabrics" with tailored functionalities which arise by intertwining
different quantum materials. Many new quantum technologies demand materials with
properties that typically do not exist in bulk compounds, for instance,
topological superconductors or quasiparticles with non-Abelian statistics. This
is often because such properties may arise from multiple states that might
normally be in competition with one another in a single compound. By weaving
together "threads" with different properties, such as superconductivity or
magnetism, PARADIM's in-house team aims to realize quantum fabrics with novel
electronic, magnetic, topological, or a mixture of such textures and with
functionalities that do not exist in bulk and could play an important role in
future quantum technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.