* 2039801
* An Archaeology Of Industry And Inter-Ethnic Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Albert Gonzalez, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 226,427.00

Scientists will conduct archaeological and ethnohistorical research to explore
the relationship between industry and rebellion in the nineteenth-century
American Southwest. The project investigates the cultural factors behind the
destruction of a massive industrial operation at the hands of insurgents opposed
to the recent annexation of the region by the United States. Previous
archaeological studies of industrial-era labor in the region tend to anatomize
moments of violent class conflict, while industrial studies across the United
States typically work to refine typologies of resistance for the period more
generally. This project breaks new ground by addressing the question of
insurgent motivation, approaching the architecture of the industrial operation
as an actor in the process, shaping patterns of raw materials consumption, human
resource use, and industrial waste disposal. Associated field and laboratory
research will create opportunities for descendant and local community
engagement, encouraging the co-production of anthropological knowledge and
enriching the education of student participants. The project will serve as a
model for the employment of High Impact Practices among underserved student
populations by including undergraduate students from a Hispanic Serving
Institution in collaborative research with various local elders and high school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laborers at the industrial operation site milled
much of the region’s wheat and manufactured enormous volumes of whiskey during
the seventeen years the site was in operation. That work produced cultural,
natural, and economic ripple effects in the region that may have played some
role in the site’s selection for destruction by rebels. Researchers will work to
improve anthropological and historical understandings of the outfit’s efforts by
surveying the site and its surrounds, analyzing industrial, architectural, and
other materials recovered in associated excavation, and by carrying out relevant
experiments in architectural energetics. They will address questions regarding
the degree to which human and natural resources were used in construction and
day-to-day operations at the site, comparing the relative volumes of labor,
water, and wood consumed in relation to those of nearby farming, ranching, and
industrial outfits as indicated by documentary evidence. The project brings
together the methodological and analytical techniques of historical archaeology,
experimental archaeology, and ethnohistory to describe aspects of the operation
likeliest to produce resource strain and exacerbate local inequalities. In the
process, the project will develop a new method by which archaeologists and other
researchers may come to understand the relationship between industry and
rebellion in the American Southwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.