* 2039991
* Strengthening Capacity in Dynamic Language Infrastructure for Tribal Nations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Colleen Fitzgerald, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/28/2022
* USD 145,280.00

One important dimension of carrying out scientific investigation is having the
resources (such as personnel, buildings, or equipment) needed to carry out these
activities, that is, infrastructure. Diversity of scientific investigators is
another important investigation. As scientists have included women or people of
color, different research questions, assumptions or epistemological frameworks
increased fundamental knowledge about a host of fields, ranging from biology to
medicine to engineering. This award will enable a conference, and associated
meetings, to provide training opportunities and establish partnerships between
members of Native American groups and linguists with grant experience in order
to help increase submissions and successful awards in the language sciences for
projects led by Native American principal investigators, especially those based
at Native American institutions. In doing so, it will strengthen capacity in
language infrastructure for tribal nations, as well as diversify the pool of
investigators (and the research questions and epistemologies) to advance
fundamental knowledge in the language sciences. Project activities will broaden
participation of Native Americans in linguistics, as well as build economic and
scientific opportunities for Native Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Native
American languages have led to significant intellectual contributions in our
understanding of what language is, its systematicity, and the diversity of human
language in all areas of linguistic theory. Beyond that, they have provided
crucial information to other sciences, such as archaeology, where language data
is placed alongside other kinds of data in order to reconstruct human
prehistory, and cultural anthropology. The nature of the project is such that it
will lead to the creation of proposals focused on questions largely shaped by
Native Americans. The insights of such PIs about their languages and cultures
are likely to lead them to focus on important research on topics that have been
neglected by outside scholars and, thereby, expand the range of scientific
advances that can be supported by research on Native American languages. This
will allow Native American theories of language to inform linguistic theory in
much the same way that data from Native American languages has, which has
transformative potential for the study of language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.