* 2039823
* CAREER: Combining Materials Science and System-Level Analysis to Sustainably Supply Safe Drinking Water
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* Leanne Gilbertson, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2026
* USD 399,764.00

Aging water supply infrastructure is a major challenge for providing safe
drinking water, particularly in areas not serviced by centralized water
treatment facilities. Existing approaches for drinking water treatment have
tradeoffs. For example, treatment with chlorine can create harmful substances,
and ultraviolet light and ozone require high energy and can be expensive. The
goal of this CAREER proposal is to develop new materials that can harness
visible light inexpensively to generate reactive oxygen species as disinfectants
to kill pathogens in water. The newly designed materials will be tested for the
ability to kill a range of pathogens, including the microorganism that causes
Legionellosis, a deadly disease responsible for &gt;$400 million/year in
healthcare costs in the US. The scientific discoveries from this research will
be used to improve public awareness of safe drinking water through a podcast in
which the public will submit questions. Podcast listening has significantly
increased during the COVID-19 pandemic, suggesting this will be an effective
mode of engaging the general public. The investigator will also develop a
Science Through Storytelling program to enhance K-6 student knowledge using the
relatable context of drinking water to develop positive attitudes and sense of
identification around STEM topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal
combines fundamental science and principles of environmental engineering to
develop graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) water treatment technologies
leveraging energy-efficient LEDs. g-C3N4 is a non-metal, visible-light
photocatalyst that is synthesized using low cost, abundant precursors, making it
a promising alternative photocatalyst for drinking water treatment. While
modifications of g-C3N4 chemistry have been pursued to improve photocatalytic
performance, the link between molecular structure, physicochemical properties,
and microorganism inactivation is not fully resolved. The overall goal of this
work is to establish a rational design framework for visible-light enabled,
sustainable water disinfection by connecting g-C3N4 properties to both material
chemistry and antimicrobial efficacy. Doing so will enable intentional material
design adaptable to a range of water matrices and target bacteria. An important
advance of this research includes expanded inactivation testing of drinking
water pathogens like Legionella pneumophila, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and
nontuberculous mycobacteria. This will provide more relevant results for water
treatment, given that &gt;90% of current studies have focused only on
Escherichia coli inactivation. Finally, this research will integrate life cycle
and economic feasibility assessment to ensure sustainable advancement of
photocatalytic water disinfection. The PI will work with (i) K-6 students in a
newly developed Science Through Storytelling program, (ii) 6-12 students through
the Carnegie Science Center’s annual SciTech Days, and (iii) the general public
in a podcast focused on drinking water questions and concerns sourced from our
community. Through these activities, the PI aims to demonstrate how the public
can become active participants in developing innovative science and engineering
solutions to the grand challenge of sustainably providing safe drinking
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.