* 2039161
* I-Corps: Virtual Training, Evaluation, and Tracking of Program Impact
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Philip Weilerstein, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 8,802,139.00

The I-Corps rogram aims to increase the economic and societal impact of NSF
research funding by enabling the commercialization of research and by equipping
scientists and engineers with skills and experience in developing economically-
scalable models for technology commercialization. Program participants focus on
learning and using a structured process that enables them to gather input from
users and potential customers to evaluate and define a translational path from
fundamental research into applications that have commercial potential and
societal benefit. Many I-Corps teams go on to form companies operating in a
broad range of sectors including health, energy, materials, agriculture, and
information technology. This structured, repeatable program engages a national
community of institutions and faculty to deliver training that results in
economic outcomes. Through the proposed work, VentureWell will support the
training of more than 1500 additional individual I-Corps participants. The
proposed effort will also generate additional I-Corps faculty to increase the
diversity of the faculty pool, enhance the program pedagogy, and advance the
systematic data collection and tracking of teams immediately before and long
after formal participation in the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF established
the I-Corps training program in 2011 to train NSF-funded researchers how to
evaluate the commercial potential of their scientific research. VentureWell's
evaluation of program outcomes and tracking of program impact in a systematic,
timely way has been critical to the operation of a consistent, effective, high-
fidelity program at scale, and to the measurement of long-term program results.
The core intellectual merit of this work is the insight provided into the
program's impact — both economic outcomes and participants' career and research
outcomes — over time. To gain this insight, VentureWell evaluates the delivery
of each cohort, administers a longitudinal outcomes survey, and tracks venture
outcomes independently to verify program impact data. The processes and data
systems that efficiently track outcomes and provide insights into the
development of technology-based ventures are a product of this work as well.
VentureWell will support the transformation of all training to have virtual
offering options while curating and disseminating pedagogical learnings to
enable further development of the national I-Corps faculty. VentureWell will
continue to work within the National Innovation Network (NIN) to disseminate
effective course practices, outcomes, and impact enabling the NIN to effectively
adopt and institutionalize these approaches. This support will further NSF's
goal of advancing this high-impact program providing leadership in the national
innovation ecosystem through NSF I-Corps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.