* 2039482
* Collaborative Research: A Scalable Sustainability-Based Approach to a Novel Demand Response Paradigm in the Emerging Smart Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/22/2020,07/31/2022
* Timothy Hansen, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2022
* USD 29,685.00

The research project addresses energy efficiency and sustainability issues of
electricity production and consumption in the United States. When the demand on
the electric power system peaks, such as on hot summer days, the increased
electricity is supplied by inefficient and polluting generators called peaking
units. If the demand can be shifted or removed from this peak time, then
electricity can be generated and consumed in a sustainable, energy-efficient
manner. In this project, we introduce new methods for a coordinated multi-
voltage-level energy management system to reduce peak electricity demand, which
contributes to a sustainable energy future for the U.S. The project's scope is
expected to significantly and positively impact several areas of vital
importance to the future electric power system, including the integration,
coordination, and deployment of distributed resources in the end-user realm;
end-to-end interaction across the electric power system; full deregulation of
electricity markets and control centers; and development of the engineering
workforce. Additionally, the research will encourage, facilitate, and accelerate
the deployment of new technologies in the electric grid and help achieve energy
independence, low carbon footprint, reduced peak loads, and full-scale electric
deregulation. The proposed intelligent energy management systems and new
sustainability metrics may impact other critical energy delivery
infrastructures, such as gas and oil delivery systems, transportation,
hydroelectric dams (and associated irrigation contracts), deregulated markets,
and telecommunications. The research will be disseminated to specific as well as
broad audiences and through targeted K-12 STEM education. The success of the
project outreach efforts will be evaluated by an independent
educator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the technical goals of the research
project, a unique infrastructural framework is proposed for a coordinated multi-
voltage-level multi-aggregation-scale energy management system, extending from
the individual end-user asset to the bulk transmission grid, with the goal of
optimizing environmental and economic sustainability. This transformational new
method utilizes aggregator entities to perform demand response via the
aggregation and control of end-user assets (e.g., electric vehicles). Customer
incentive pricing, a unique time-varying pricing method for demand response that
coexists with bulk power pricing and retail electricity pricing, is introduced
and its effectiveness is evaluated under different market and system conditions.
To realize the new holistic aggregator-based demand response energy management
system, new coordinated stochastic control algorithms will be designed and their
applicability for the existing bulk and retail power markets will be evaluated.
These algorithms will be assessed using high-fidelity modeling and co-
simulation, with respect to newly developed sustainability metrics, market and
power system efficiency, and algorithm scalability to a realistic-size power
system on a unique test bed.