* 2039497
* Collaborative Research: Genes to ecology in tropical trees: how sharing resistance gene alleles affects pathogen transmission and growth
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* James Marden, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2024
* USD 623,390.00

This project examines how sharing variants of genes associated with resistance
to pathogens among neighboring trees affects their susceptibility or resistance
to infection by pathogenic soil microbes, and how this affects their growth in
lab and forest settings. This research will also determine if variation in
resistance genes impacts the beneficial as well as pathogenic microbial
communities associated with tree roots. This will have important consequences
for predicting the success of an individual tree depending on its proximity to
individuals with the same and different variants of pathogen resistance genes.
This knowledge has important implications for forest ecology and will provide
new insights about the best planting arrangements for all types of plant species
that have well characterized pathogen resistance genotypes. The results will
also inform models that examine how species differences in the diversity of host
resistance genes affect an entire forest community. The project will inform
agricultural methods and contribute to sustainability of long-term ecological
research in forest plots by providing new concepts, tools, hypotheses, results,
training, and professional development opportunities for young scientists. The
project will train post-doctoral scholars and reach out to young scientists
working at Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute to mentor them on ways to
include physiology and functional genomics in
ecological&lt;br/&gt;Studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seedlings of Virola
surinamensis carrying one particular resistance (R) gene allele have 20% greater
growth rate when exposed to soil from mature trees lacking that allele, but no
advantage when exposed to soil from mature trees carrying the same allele, with
associated differences in their ability to upregulate genes involved in host
defense. This project will examine how root transcriptomes, root microbiomes,
cultures of pathogenic microbes, and transmission of a pathogen through
different spatial networks of seedlings growing together in trays are affected
by the R gene allele sharing context. Complimentary field experiments will
examine performance of paired seedlings planted in different allele-sharing
contexts in the forest. Complimentary monitoring studies will examine genotypes
and long-term growth rates of tagged Virola surinamensis saplings and mature
trees on long-term plots on Barro Colorado Island (BCI) and nearby mainland
sites in Panama. The results will provide important new insights about the way
genetic variation affects plant defense, plant-microbe interactions, and
heretofore mechanistically vague concepts such as plant-soil feedbacks and
negative density dependence that are increasingly the focus of theoretical
models of forest dynamics and the maintenance of tree species diversity. An
overarching feature is integration of functional genomics with data from a long-
term ecological study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.