* 2039276
* Collaborative Research:  Geologic Methane Emissions to the Atmosphere--Improving the Bottom-Up Estimates of Microseepage
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Katey Walter Anthony, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2024
* USD 46,647.00

Methane (CH4) is a powerful greenhouse gas that contributes to warming of the
atmosphere and climate change and has significant societal implications.
Nevertheless, relative magnitudes of its numerous sources remain ill-
constrained. In the present study, field observations are collected of CH4 that
is emitted from natural geological features and represent one of the most
uncertain sources of CH4 to the atmosphere. Machine learning techniques are then
used to increase predictive power of these emissions across the United States.
Undergraduate and graduate students are an integral part of the field sampling
and data analysis components of the work, and educational outreach activities
are intended through established programs with the local school district and
Rochester Museum &amp; Science Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microseepage is a
low-intensity flux of natural geological CH4 to the atmosphere that is
postulated to be the single largest, yet poorly constrained component of
geological emissions. The research seeks to improve bottom-up estimates of
microseepage from large areas of hydrocarbon-rich sedimentary basins, with the
overarching hypothesis that microseepage emissions in existing inventories are
overestimated. CH4 fluxes are determined during summer and winter in eight
different US basins to cover a wide area of varying characteristics in gas
reservoir depth, structure/tectonics, and climate/ecosystem. A field deployable
closed dynamic flux chamber technique is used for these measurements. The
relationship between microseepage flux magnitude and a set of hypothesized flux-
enhancing parameters is then investigated and used to develop a machine-learning
approach for upscaling microseepage fluxes. Resulting new estimates of
microseepage CH4 emissions from the contiguous US will improve our understanding
of natural emissions of this important greenhouse gas that is also a key player
in atmospheric chemistry and global climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.