* 2039615
* SaTC: TTP: Small: TRACE: Tracking Run-time Anomalies in Code Execution
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Farshad Khorrami, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,748.00

Connectivity of embedded computing devices in cyber-physical systems (CPS) makes
robust cybersecurity crucial. While computer/network security approaches apply
to CPS, leveraging the unique temporal behavior and code structure
characteristics of CPS devices enables robust and complementary cybersecurity
solutions. This project builds one such near-zero-cost solution, developed in
part during the DARPA Rapid Attack Detection, Isolation and Characterization
Systems (RADICS) project, that uses digital side channels to detect and
characterize malware on embedded devices in CPS. This Transition To Practice
project transitions this solution to a commercialization stage per the programâ€™s
aim to "support the development, implementation, and deployment of later-stage
and applied security or privacy research into an operational environment in
order to bridge the gap between research and production." "Tracking Run-time
Anomalies in Code Execution" (TRACE) system is of interest to power utilities,
power grid equipment vendors, embedded system designers, and US government
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For on-demand and continuous run-time integrity
verification of fielded devices and detection of firmware/software anomalies,
TRACE deploys lightweight measurer components to target devices to collect
multi-modal on-device, time-series measurements (e.g., Hardware Performance
Counters, stack traces, memory maps and memory-based measurements, kernel
measurements). TRACE processes these measurements using an off-device machine
learning based analysis component for threat detection (baseline-relative and
baseline-independent). The multi-modal anomaly detection in TRACE uses low-
dimensional feature extraction, deep learning, dynamic event sequence analysis,
and probabilistic modeling and estimation algorithms. TRACE can detect malicious
modifications to software/firmware as well as operating system rootkits.
Efficacy of TRACE anomaly detection is being demonstrated on a variety of
computation load profiles and devices with a focus on power grid devices in a
typical substation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.