* 2039534
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced‌ ‌Computer‌ Vision‌ ‌Methods‌ ‌for‌ ‌Mosquito‌ ‌Surveillance
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,10/31/2022
* Adam Goodwin, VECTECH, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 10/31/2022
* USD 255,781.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will result from the development of new tools to prevent future mosquito
disease outbreaks. Most US mosquito control organizations lack the capability or
capacity to conduct routine mosquito surveillance, a necessary task for
effective mosquito control. Globally, 80% of the world population is at risk for
mosquito-borne disease, and mosquito surveillance, monitoring, and evaluation
are widely recognized as critical public health activities o be scaled globally.
The technology developed through this proposal will develop and demonstrate the
feasibility of new identification methods to reduce operational mosquito
surveillance costs, while improving accuracy and standardization of data. The
result will be improved decisions that will reduce the incidence of mosquito-
borne diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will build on advances in computer vision for high
accuracy identification of mosquito species in operational contexts. While high
accuracy classification of mosquito species has been demonstrated using deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), evidence has been limited to controlled
laboratory environments, with small datasets of few species, or with lab reared
specimens. Operational environments face a significantly more complex problem,
with hundreds of potential species that may be encountered, and variation in
morphology and quality of wild-caught mosquitoes. This proposal seeks to
overcome and mitigate the core technical challenges unaddressed by the current
state of research, including: fine-grain classification techniques required to
distinguish medically relevant species from over three thousand mosquito species
found in nature with significant overlapping morphology, novel species detection
methods to identify when a presented specimen is from species unknown to the
species classification algorithms, and characterizing the feeding state and the
physical quality of specimens, such as damage to wings, legs, scales, and
body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.