* 2039743
* FSML: SERC Visiting Scientist Cottages
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Anson Hines, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 405,804.00

The Smithsonian Environmental Research Center (SERC) provides field, lab and
convening facilities at its 1,000 ha property on the shores of Chesapeake Bay in
support of research on the interactions among ecosystems of the coastal
landscape in response to climate and human impacts. With this award, SERC will
build on-site short-term housing for visiting scientists relieving presently
inadequate and deteriorating housing facilities that lack ADA accommodations.
This investment is part of a much broader master plan for growing accommodation
at SERC; it will ensure continued access for critical on-going research and will
enable expanded opportunities for outreach. SERC is unique in its combined
estuarine and terrestrial research that provides important long-term and large-
scale data and unique experiments on land-sea interactions and responses to
environmental change. It hosts numerous major research projects including
participation in the National Ecological Observatory Network; long-term research
on the effects of elevated CO2, stream discharge and water quality, estuarine
fish &amp; invertebrate community dynamics, tree demography; and experimental
research on tree species diversity and ecosystem function. Access to these
resources provide rich and diverse opportunities for visiting scientists to
conduct both new research within the context of extensive background data and
synthesis of multifactorial interactions. Access to SERC resources also provide
unique opportunities for undergraduate intern training and graduate
dissertations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 60 active extramural research
projects leverage an array of long-term datasets, and the datasets are highly
valued by our academic and governmental sponsors and collaborators. SERC
Facilities support a 50-year history of both providing access to visiting
scientists and informing environmental policy makers on emerging environmental
issues. Short-term housing enables visiting researchers and educators to use
SERC’s unique resources and site most efficiently and cost-effectively. SERC’s
site is also hosts numerous tours for Congressional staff members and
politicians from nearby Washington, DC, and the Maryland capital Annapolis. U.S.
State Department often features SERC in tours of international visitors working
on environmental resource management. SERC Facilities are also an important
resource for SERC’s diverse array of collaborative research and training
programs for academic partners. The Facility is a central feature of SERC’s
professional training that annually supports 55 interns, 10 grad students, 25
postdocs and 570 visiting scientists for short and long periods. Approximately
130 of these visiting scientists actively conduct research on the site for
multiple days at a time, and over 400 attend meetings, workshops and training
annually. For more information on SERC, see
https://serc.si.edu/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.