* 2039958
* D-ISN: TRACK 2: Using Enterprise Network Models to Disrupt the Operations of Illicit Counterfeit Part Supply Chains for Critical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Peter Sandborn, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2022
* USD 249,927.00

Counterfeit parts have become widespread over the last 20 years, and their
infiltration into critical systems poses a significant economic risk as well as
a risk to human life and national security. Critical systems include those
associated with human safety (e.g., transportation, medical), the delivery of
critical services (e.g., infrastructure, energy generation), humanitarian and
military missions, and global economic stability. These systems are expensive to
procure, must be supported for long periods, and the consequences, if
compromised by counterfeit parts, can be catastrophic. This project will develop
methods of disrupting the counterfeit hardware networks for critical systems
guided by socio-technical network development and modeling, and through
consideration of the counterfeiting network’s connections to other illicit
trafficking networks. Counterfeit hardware addressed in this project includes
electronic and non-electronic hardware and hardware that is created via additive
manufacturing. The work performed in this project will inform decisions and
policies about the economy, security, and resilience of the Nation and the world
concerning illicit supply networks for counterfeit parts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of the treatment of the counterfeit part
problem to date is focused on the detection of counterfeits, which is necessary,
but represents treating the symptom, not the cause. In this project, we will
conduct a series of workshops that include stakeholders from industry, policy,
legal, supply chain, government acquisition, industrial security, and anti-
trafficking organizations. The workshops will be used to guide socio-technical
network development and modeling, and include consideration of the
counterfeiting network’s connections to other illicit trafficking networks. The
technical attributes of the problem include: part flows within sustainment
networks for critical systems, procurement and acquisition practices,
counterfeit detection technologies, and inventory management. The socio-
attributes include trust, communication (including significant counterfeit
reporting stigmas), and incentive reactions. The network models developed will
consider both commercial transactions and military acquisition systems to enable
identification of possible points of disruption in those networks. The model for
the counterfeit part network developed in this project will form an important
and necessary enabler for possible future blockchain-based solutions and is an
essential component of a digital twin for the supply chain for critical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.