* 2039146
* EAGER: Internet Measurement Capability for FABRIC
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Paul Barford, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 270,000.00

This project initiates Internet Measurement Research as a science driver for the
FABRIC testbed. The technical component of the project focuses on investigating
three different Internet measurement systems that will be deployed in FABRIC.
The systems are complementary to the current Measurement Framework and will
utilize FABRIC's unique capabilities including programmability and artificial
intelligence/machine learning. The systems can be customized, configured and
launched by researchers to gather data for their studies. The organizational
component of the project focuses on coordinating with the FABRIC team and
outreach to the Internet measurement community to raise awareness and catalyze
the use of FABRIC in research studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
investigate, develop and deploy prototype systems for active probe-based
measurement, distributed network honeypot measurement and passive measurement of
physical layer metrics. A system for measuring traffic from distributed
applications within FABRIC will also be investigated. These systems will be
developed as virtual machine images that can be integrated into and managed
flexibly by the FABRIC Control Framework. The technical challenges that will be
addressed in this work include investigating and building the core images,
integrating with specialized systems in FABRIC (including GPS, high-speed packet
capture, routers, etc.), building data repositories and coordinating with
testbed operations personnel to assure security policy
compliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will expand FABRICâ€™s capability to
support Internet measurement research, which seeks to broaden understanding of
Internet structure and behavior and inform the design and development of next
generation Internet systems and protocols. The outreach component of this
project will build awareness and facilitate community participation in FABRIC
and development of Internet measurement systems. The project will also influence
the development of new educational materials in networking and data science at
the undergraduate and graduate level. The students who work on the projects will
receive guidance and training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All software and data
artifacts that emerge from this project will be available to the community.
These will include documentation for all of the prototype Internet measurement
systems that will be deployed in FABRIC. Software, data, documentation and
publications will be available indefinitely from
http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~pb/software_data.html, and on the FABRIC testbed web
pages at https://fabric-testbed.net/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.