* 2039979
* SG: A revised taxonomy of the palm genus Iguanura
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Andrew Henderson, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 13,456.00

This project aims to document the biodiversity of a group of Asian palms and
update its classification. This project will improve understanding of the
geographic distribution and abundance of these species of palms, enabling
informed decisions about conservation priorities. Additionally, the results of
the project will be combined with results from many other, similar studies on
palms and serve to further the understanding of the biology of the economically
important palm family. All the resulting data from the project will be freely
available to any interested party, and the final publication will be in open
access format. This project will also serve as a model for other studies of
species delimitation by employing a rigorous scientific methodology to the
systematic study of palms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iguanura is the name given to a
group of small, stilt-rooted, understory palms with undivided or pinnate leaves,
leaflets with jagged margins, and unusually variable fruits. The genus occurs in
tropical rainforests in Myanmar, Peninsular Thailand, Peninsular Malaysia,
Singapore, Sumatra, and Borneo. Approximately 34 species have been recognized,
including a recently described species that was discovered over 1,800 km north
of the nearest known locality in Peninsular Thailand, emphasizing how the genus
has been poorly understood. The most recent systematic study of the whole genus
was carried out over 45 years ago and relied entirely on the relatively few
herbarium specimens existing at that time. A second important study, published
over 15 years ago, dealt only with species from Peninsular Malaysia and relied
on extensive field work and collecting. Neither of these studies employed an
explicit species delimitation methodology. The present study of Iguanura will
employ an explicit, repeatable methodology based on a clearly stated species
concept. It will test previously published species as hypotheses based on the
quantitative analysis of data, using all relevant specimens in the larger
herbaria in the US, Europe, and Asia. This analysis, along with extensive study
of herbarium specimens, will form the basis for a modern taxonomic revision of
the genus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.