* 2039985
* NSF-BSF: Understanding Evolution of Atmospheric Brown Carbon
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Alexander Laskin, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2024
* USD 583,166.00

Brown carbon (BrC) particles are emitted from the incomplete combustion of fuels
affecting global climate and human health, yet their optical properties and
chemical composition remain ill-defined. The laboratory-based project seeks to
investigate key properties of BrC aerosols produced specifically from biomass
burning (BB). Access to a unique array of advanced instruments and complementary
expertise is secured through the international collaboration between U.S. and
Israeli institutions of higher education. Funding is provided via the NSF-BSF
Lead Agency Agreement in which the U.S. component is funded by NSF and the
Israeli component by the U.S.-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF). Novel
results will be used in climate models and help better understand reactivity of
BrC particles toward ecological and human health. Students and an early career
scientist are slated to play essential roles in every aspect of the work thus
contributing to the development of a well-prepared globally aware workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific emphasis is on the least-studied subgroup of
moderately (M) and strongly (S) absorbing BrC (M/S-BrC). The laboratory
component to be carried out at the Israeli institution Weizmann Institute of
Science (WIS) consists of (i) generation of M-BrC and S-BrC proxies in
laboratory-controlled biomass/pyrolysis burning tests, (ii) particle ageing
while mimicking day- and night-time processes, and (iii) real-time analysis of
wavelength-dependent optical measurements of airborne size-fractionated
ensembles of particles. Generated particles are collected and sent to the U.S.
counterpart, Purdue University (PU), for off-line analyses of molecular
characterization and light-absorbing properties of individual BrC chromophores
from extracts of filter samples. In addition, chemical imaging is carried out to
characterize particle composition, size, mixing state and morphology (PU). Tasks
between the two institutions are intended to complement each other and provide
fundamental information on the composition, aging chemistry and light-absorption
properties of M/S-BrC with the ultimate goal of improving predictive
understanding of BrC impacts on atmospheric environment and
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.