* 2039310
* Multiphase Modelling and Experimental Characterization of Respiratory Microdroplet Suspension and Resuspension Dynamics Near Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Anand Jagota, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 407,452.00

The main transmission routes for COVID-19 are respiratory droplets and close
contact. Understanding environmental spreading pathways of COVID-19 is critical
for improving safety practices. Although the flow physics of respiratory
droplets at large length scales has been the focus of many studies, the
microscale dynamics of the suspension behavior of individual respiratory
droplets on common personal protective equipment (PPE) surfaces and the
secondary exposure risk due to resuspension of those droplets have not been
systematically evaluated. Initial studies show that environmental conditions
such as humidity and temperature as well as surface properties, e.g. surface
chemistry, roughness and wettability have significant effects on the evolution
mechanism of aerosols and droplets. In particular, there is no comprehensive
study on how temperature and humidity influence the aerodynamics and surface
interaction of aerosols. The goal of this project is to provide fundamental
understanding of the interaction between individual respiratory microdroplets
and PPE surfaces under external disturbance such as body motion, through
combined computational modeling and experiments. This research will help explore
potential approaches that can be practiced by medical staff and general public
to control motion, humidity, temperature, and surface modification that reduces
aerosol-based virus spreading. The project will also incorporate research into
education of undergraduate and graduate students in class, making a droplet-
surface simulation tool to be made available to the research community, and
outreach to K-12 and minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to provide both a fundamental understanding of thermal-humidity-
temporal microdroplet dynamics and a prediction tool for microdroplet surface
interaction. The specific aims of the proposal work are to: (i) Develop a 3D
multi-phase computational model for evaporation, transport, suspension,
adhesion, and resuspension dynamics of respiratory droplet on various surfaces;
(ii) Generate individual mimetic-virus laden respiratory microdroplets, with
chemical composition and sizes similar to respiratory droplets, and investigate
systematically the dynamics of the suspension and resuspension behavior of these
droplets near various surfaces in a controlled environment; and (iii) Explore
the effects of temperature, humidity, surface properties, and external
disturbance on the suspension and resuspension behavior of droplets and suggest
potential approaches for minimizing the aerosol spreading of virus. The
integrated computational and experimental approach will create comprehensive
understanding of the droplet-based virus transport and evolution as a function
of humidity, temperature and surface characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.