* 2039272
* Developing Science Communication Skills in Early Career Scientists
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Hayley Schiebel, Suffolk University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2022
* USD 45,355.00

Early career scientists (defined as undergraduate students, graduate students
and those within a few years of graduation from a graduate degree program) need
effective science communication skills to be highly successful in a science
career. This award provides funding to support a workshop prior to the June 2021
conference of the Association for the Sciences of Limnologist and Oceanography
(ASLO) that will provide training in verbal and visual communication to early
career scientists. The one-day workshop will help about fifty early career
scientists develop communication skills and will provide foundational knowledge
for communicating effectively to any audience. The workshop will include two
verbal science communication sessions designed to help researchers develop clear
and engaging stories about their work. Participants will have repeated
opportunities to practice short research pitches to a live audience and receive
interactive feedback. Two visual communication sessions will be delivered during
the workshop and will focus on 1) creating and delivering a scientific talk and
2) creating an engaging poster with graphics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early career
scientists are particularly in need of effective science communication skills as
they are either beginning their science career at the undergraduate level or
developing their scientific specialty at the graduate level. Based on feedback
from two prior pilot workshops, the organizers expect a significant improvement
in the participants' appreciation of the need for effective science
communication and in their mastery of verbal and visual communication skills.
The workshop will be widely advertised and free to attendees of the ASLO
conference. Prior workshop attendees have been a diverse group, with
undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral scholars comprising more half
of the attendees, and faculty members and industry researchers attending as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.