* 2039917
* D-ISN: TRACK 1: A Holistic Approach to Discovery, Modeling, and Interdiction of Drug and Human Trafficking Networks in the U.S. Southwest
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Dominique Roe-Sepowitz, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Disrupting Operations of Illicit Supply Networks (D-ISN) project will
enhance national public safety, health, and welfare by improving the
understanding of drug and sex trafficking networks, detecting their operational
patterns, and developing mechanisms to disrupt their activities. The trafficking
of humans and illicit drugs are pervasive problems in the United States, with
immeasurable negative impacts on healthcare, social services, and criminal
justice infrastructures. Combating these problems entails multiple challenges
due to the nature of trafficking operations, which include scattered data,
multiple agents, adaptability of both the market and traffickers, and hidden
operations. To tackle these challenges, this project integrates expertise from
academia, domain experts, and law enforcement agencies. This is achieved through
rigorous field work with detectives and survivors, and methods of analysis from
social sciences, operations research, computer science, and information science.
The research plan focuses on the U.S. Southwest, whose main urban areas have
street prostitution tracks, robust online sex advertisement markets, and active
gang and drug distribution networks. The structured data repository resulting
from this project will be publicly available to the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs a multi-scale approach that
analyzes and develops interventions at macro- and micro-levels, leveraging both
qualitative and quantitative methods. The research plan includes an illicit
network discovery component to construct illicit supply networks out of
contextual data from interviews with survivors and detectives, police case
records, and nonconventional databases. This will allow for the systematic
documentation of victim movement, drug movement, financial activity, use of
transportation hubs, and how these are interconnected. The macro-level analysis
provides a methodology to characterize the interdependency between actors,
locations, and financial instruments involved in the illicit network operation.
The analysis distills complex interdependencies into analytically tractable
logical relationships for the design of organizational, financial, and
geographical strategies that can thwart illicit activities. The micro-level
component supports the design of interventions from law enforcement and social
service perspectives at a finer and tactical geographical scale. The project
develops new mathematical programming models for the inference of trafficking
hot routes, which are predicted, high-density trafficking routes. It also
includes a game theoretical framework for the disruption of hot
routes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.