* 2039692
* Collaborative Research: An interdisciplinary approach to understand selfish parental care of egg and larvae in mixed-species communal nest breeding freshwater fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2024
* Kyle Strom, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 12/31/2024
* USD 911,107.00

Faced with danger such as a predator, animals commonly exhibit selfish behavior
to gain survival advantages over others when in a herd, school, flock, or swarm.
What is not widely documented, but probably common, is whether animals selfishly
protect their young at the expense of others when they have control over an
assemblage consisting of their own young mixed with others unrelated to them.
This study will investigate such possible selfish protection of eggs and larvae
orchestrated by fish parents when their eggs are mixed with those of other
species in their nest. By characterizing water flow and oxygen levels and risk
of predation of eggs in various locations in the nest and genetically
identifying the species of eggs found in these locations, the researchers will
be able to determine the relative quality and safety of the locations where the
nest host places its eggs for incubation and whether that indicates selfish
parental care behavior. They also will observe fish behaviors during nest
building and spawning, directly and with videography, to interpret placement and
defense of eggs in the context of selfishness, nest parasitism, and the selfish
herd theory. As species unique to North America, mound-nest building minnows
represent a natural and cultural heritage that scientists have largely
overlooked in their studies of animal behavior. Communicating improved
understanding of these fishes to the general public through a documentary
grounded in science and artistic performances, will ensure effective
publicization of scientific knowledge to garner support for preservation of
native freshwater fishes with unique behaviors and ecosystem
roles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Selfishness underpins most animal
behaviors as individuals act to maximize their own fitness, often at others’
expense. Using a putatively mutualistic communal nest breeding freshwater fish
system, this study will expand Hamilton’s selfish-herd theory in two key ways
by: 1) including an abiotic stimulus as a defining threat for individual selfish
behavior, and 2) recognizing that embryonic ‘herds’ may be created by parents to
confer selfish-herd benefits on their brood in an incubation environment.
Specifically, this study will: i) Investigate how ambient dissolved oxygen
modifies the relationship between fitness and spatial position in a mixed-
species egg and larval aggregation formed to reduce predation risk, ii)
Determine if and how selfish-herd effect is conferred on incubating host brood
through egg and larval distribution in a mixed-species freshwater fish nest-
association, and iii) Bridge the public-knowledge gap about breeding behaviors
(nest building, spawning, agonistic combat, and cooperative-competitive
interactions) and ecosystem roles of native freshwater fishes. Built on an
interdisciplinary collaboration between biologists, geoscientists and
computational engineers, this study will be the first to characterize selfish-
herd behavior in a three-dimensional incubation environment, using a combination
of field observations, experimentation, and high-precision, physics-based
simulation of water and silt movement and dissolved oxygen dynamics in mound
nests. The investigator’s will use a novel application of computational fluid
dynamics to characterize aquatic nest abiotic environment and its consequence
for survival of eggs and larvae. Success of this study will provoke fundamental
rethinking of some “nest-parasitism” phenomena, common among birds and fishes,
as potentially context-dependent mutualisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.