* 2039472
* Characterization and Simulation of Dispersive Elastodynamic Media in Time Domain
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2025
* Reza Abedi, University of Tennessee Space Institute
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 12/31/2025
* USD 383,621.00

Many materials are dispersive, i.e., their properties are frequency-dependent.
The interaction of waves with material microstructure can result in a complex
dispersive response. This effect is exploited in the design of metamaterials to
effectuate novel properties that are otherwise not observed in conventional
materials. This award supports fundamental research on the characterization and
analysis of elastodynamic dispersive materials as a function of their mechanical
layout and level of disorder at the microscale. Understanding the response of
dispersive materials is important for a broad range of applications towards
national prosperity and welfare and the national defense. For example,
elastodynamic metamaterials find applications in seismic wave mitigation,
vibration control, and blast wave mitigation. Moreover, disorder is inherent in
the microstructure of many natural and man-made dispersive materials. For
metamaterials, disorder is unavoidable due to manufacturing imperfections, but
this inevitability can be used to improve wave mitigation properties and
facilitate novel designs for non-destructive evaluation and energy harvesting
applications. This award will also support student internship and faculty
research opportunities through collaboration with a predominantly undergraduate
institution, graduate research and course development, and publicly shared
software modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of this project is
the formulation of advanced homogenization methods that derive dynamic
properties of dispersive materials followed by numerical methods that
incorporate such properties for transient analysis. Homogenized properties are
generally valid only from quasi-static to long wavelength regimes. Higher order
scattering coefficients and spatial dispersion terms will be used to extend this
and derive effective dynamic properties that are meaningful up to medium to
short wavelength regimes. The resulting effective properties can be quite
complex, for example, by having a tensorial mass density and resulting in Willis
constitutive equations. Modeling dispersive relations in time domain poses
additional challenges. An automated method will be formulated to derive complex
auxiliary differential equations for analysis in the time domain. The second
objective is understanding the effect of disorder on various response measures
of dispersive materials. Specifically, disorder can enhance wave mitigation
properties of a metamaterial design by expanding the frequency range of the
stopband(s), making the absorption more omnidirectional, and red-shifting the
stopband which is often a welcomed effect. Statistical analysis will be used to
analyze the sensitivity and stability of stopband and other dynamic properties
versus disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.