* 2039395
* Building Pathways to Innovation in Skilled Technical Workforce Education Through Strategic Employer Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Ann Beheler, CORD
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,748,060.00

This project will serve the national interest in a strong American workforce by
ensuring that more college technical education programs align with the current
and emerging needs of business and industry. In May 2020, the American Workforce
Policy Advisory Board published a call-to-action challenging key stakeholders in
the U.S. economy to “engage in a shared, coordinated, and sustained effort to
build a resilient and agile workforce of the future powered by skilled American
workers.” Investing in American Workers to Expedite Economic Recovery issued
three goals: 1) Expedite American workers’ return to employment and upward
mobility by investing in career pathways and implementing skills-based hiring
practices; 2) Remove obstacles to the modernization of American education and
training to accelerate reskilling and facilitate innovation in workforce
development; and 3) Build the technological infrastructure necessary for the
future of work. These goals closely align with current efforts of the National
Science Board, the National Science Foundation, and the NSF’s Advanced
Technological Education (ATE) program to grow the STEM-capable U.S. workforce
through skilled technical workforce programs tailored to the needs of local
communities. To support workforce development, this project will address the
essential need to strengthen and expand partnerships between business/industry
and community colleges that prepare the skilled technical workforce through
career pathways programs. By fostering public-private partnerships in technical
education, the project will promote making high-wage, high-skilled job
opportunities available to many people who have not previously had access to
these positions. Local and regional business and industry will benefit because
their pipeline of qualified candidates for open positions will be expanded.
Finally, participating colleges, their faculty, and future students in existing
and emerging technical disciplines will benefit from initiating work on a
culture of innovation co-led by business and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop strong business engagement between technical education
programs and the employers who want to hire graduates of these programs, while
also strategically increasing the number of competitive grant proposals
submitted annually to the ATE program. Building on the ATE-supported Business
Industry Leadership Team (BILT) model, a proven method for strategic employer
engagement, colleges engaged in the project will develop employer relationships
that yield workforce intelligence at a depth and with a frequency to facilitate
continuous program improvement and innovation. The project will launch three
complementary initiatives: 1) A BILT Academy that will support teams from
community college to effectively keep pace with shifting workforce demands and
evolving technologies to prepare the nation’s skilled technical workforce; 2) A
Mentoring Academy that will increase awareness of ATE’s focus on innovation and
mentor college teams to use BILT’s essential elements as a foundation upon which
to build competitive proposals for implementing innovative programs responsive
to employer needs; and 3) The project team will coordinate efforts with ATE
National Centers to assist new grantees in effective grant management and
implementation of strategic employer engagement through on-demand resources and
an Ask-an-ATE Expert helpline. To carry out these activities, the project will
develop a body of materials that can be used virtually and face-to-face, as well
as a curated resource collection that will support ongoing college innovation in
creating and enhancing technical education programs through strategic employer
engagement. The project will also develop an updated approach to mentoring by
building upon existing ATE proposal-writing workshop materials augmented with a
BILT emphasis. The project will identify and document new frequently asked
questions by the Ask-an-ATE Expert Help Desk to inform the development of new
resources for grantees. All on-demand, curated content developed by the project
will be made available without cost to the public. and beyond. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.