* 2039351
* MIP: 2D Crystal Consortium (MIP-2DCC)
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Nitin Samarth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Cooperative Agreement
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2026
* USD 12,949,244.00

Non-Technical Description: The Two-Dimensional Crystal Consortium (2DCC) is a
Materials Innovation Platform, an NSF mid-scale infrastructure program in the
Division of Materials Research, that is focused on advancing the synthesis and
characterization of 2D materials. 2D materials are atomically thin layers that,
due to the restricted electron and atom motion, have physical characteristics
that are not present in three dimensions and hold the potential for
revolutionary device technologies ranging from flexible electronics to quantum
computing. The full realization of this potential requires atomic-level mastery
over the synthesis of wafer-scale films and bulk crystals with high crystalline
perfection and also the discovery of new material compositions and structures.
The 2DCC focuses on advancing the synthesis science of 2D materials through the
development of state-of-the-art experimental and computational tools and
techniques for thin film deposition and bulk crystal growth supported by
advanced characterization and processing. A facility-wide data management system
captures and curates sample data with additional functionality to enable new
modes of data-enabled research. An in-house team of researchers works
collaboratively with external users to accelerate discovery of new materials, to
develop processes for synthesis of large area 2D films to transition toward
commercialization, and to disseminate knowledge, samples, data, and techniques
within a national user facility that acts as a hub for scientific training and
cross-fertilization. Outreach and training activities targeted at users and the
broader 2D community include webinars, an annual workshop on 2D materials, on-
line tutorials and a data science workshop. The 2DCC engages the materials
research community across academia, industry and government laboratories across
career stages, including students and faculty at minority serving or primarily
undergraduate institutions. On-site training opportunities are targeted at
developing the next generation of crystal growers and tool developers and
broadening participation in synthesis and advanced
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The development of
quantum materials in recent decades has led to transformative discoveries of
emergent phenomena resulting from the interplay of reduced dimensionality,
confinement, topology, and interactions. Two-dimensional layered chalcogenides
(2DLC) are a prime example of this class of materials, encompassing van der
Waals heterojunctions, topological insulators, topological semimetals, and high-
temperature Fe-chalcogenide superconductors. The 2D Crystal Consortium (2DCC),
an NSF Materials Innovation Platform, is motivated by the potential of 2DLCs for
new physics and high-impact technologies tempered by the significant challenges
associated with their synthesis. The Platform exploits 2DCC in-house expertise
in materials growth by molecular beam epitaxy, metalorganic chemical vapor
deposition, confinement heteroepitaxy, modeling of materials growth kinetics and
sample properties, and bulk crystal growth. New synthesis capabilities include
double-crucible Bridgman methods that target extreme stoichiometric precision
and an integrated plasma/evaporation tool for scalable synthesis of air-stable
2D polar metals. This synthesis web is interconnected with a comprehensive suite
of advanced spectroscopy, scanning probe and processing tools allowing sample
exchange while maintaining vacuum or inert-gas environments. Data generated
throughout the facility feeds into a sample data tracking system that embeds
knowledge graph functionality to enable new modes of data-enabled materials
discovery. Theory and computational tools are deployed in a tightly integrated
theory-computation-measurement-synthesis loop that targets the understanding of
both key kinetic growth processes and the results of in situ and ex situ
characterization, following the vision of the Materials Genome
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.