* 2039232
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel carbon dioxide emission free iron-making process
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,02/28/2022
* Ai Quoc Pham, ELECTRASTEEL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2022
* USD 255,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable an environmentally sustainable,
carbon-dioxide emission-free process for the iron and steel industry. The novel
process operates at relatively low temperatures allowing the process to start
and stop on demand, thereby enabling seamless integration with intermittent
renewable resources, like solar and wind energy. The process can use widely
available low-grade iron ores not commonly used in steelmaking today due to high
impurity content. Furthermore, the process uses only iron ore and renewable
electricity as a feedstock. Thus, the process plant is easily co-located with
mining operations to eliminate the logistics and carbon emissions from shipping
iron ore, supporting the domestic iron and steelmaking industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will validate the feasibility of a novel carbon dioxide emission-free
iron-making process. The proposed solution leverages intermittent renewable
energy to convert iron ore to iron metal via an electrochemical process. The
objectives of this project are to 1) develop a process to convert the solid iron
ore to a liquid electrolyte suitable for efficient iron extraction in a
subsequent step, 2) demonstrate high faradaic efficiency for materials
regeneration in a continuous closed-loop process, 3) build a novel
electrochemical device with total specific energy consumption comparable to the
energy intensity of the conventional process. The approach combines a
fundamental understanding of iron ore dissolution kinetics with a novel
electrochemical regeneration scheme to enhance iron ore dissolution and enable
efficient iron extraction. The project will seek to understand the impact of key
process variables and iron ore impurities on performance and stability. It is
anticipated that the core innovation will lead to a novel process of reducing
iron ore to high-purity iron for steelmaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.