* 2039800
* Experiences that Shape Undergraduate Computing Trajectories: A Equity-Focused Longitudinal Study at Center for Inclusive Computing Institutions
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Linda Sax, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,640,400.00

The Momentum: Accelerating Equity in Computing and Technology research program
at the University of California, Los Angeles will conduct a study to produce
knowledge that can guide departments’ decisions about recruitment and retention
in computing, especially with regard to ensuring equitable structures and
opportunities for students who have been historically minoritized. While
responding to workforce demands for trained computer scientists, undergraduate
computing programs are also increasing their focus on cultivating opportunities
for participation among women and students of color (specifically, students who
identify as Black or African American, Hispanic or Latinx, Native American,
Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander). The urgent need to address equity issues
in undergraduate computing departments is more salient now than ever before, as
U.S. colleges and universities currently face a turbulent road to navigate
operations amid and after the coronavirus pandemic. This study will provide
timely data that can inform undergraduate computing’s recruitment and retention
efforts in the current contexts. In collaboration with Northeastern University’s
Center for Inclusive Computing (CIC), the Momentum team will survey first- and
second-year students who enroll in computing courses at approximately 20
colleges and universities in the spring of 2021. This survey will ask a variety
of questions ranging from students’ backgrounds and precollege experiences to
their computing experiences in the 2020-21 academic year. Then, they will survey
these students again in the spring of 2023 to assess how their experiences with
computing have changed and the role these experiences play in shaping their
future plans. The project team will analyze these data to understand the
specific experiences that shape students’ trajectories in computing, especially
the pathways of women and students from historically minoritized groups. The
findings from this study will be disseminated widely within the computing and
higher education community to inform best practices to recruit and retain
students in computing majors and ultimately into computing
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Momentum research program at the University of
California, Los Angeles will conduct a longitudinal study of first- and second-
year students who enroll in computing courses at institutions involved in
Northeastern University’s Center for Inclusive Computing (CIC). The research
represents a partnership between Momentum and CIC to engage in research on
collegiate experiences that promote recruitment and retention in computing,
particularly for marginalized students in computing such as women of color.
Leveraging Momentum staff expertise and survey instruments to address key gaps
in our knowledge, the project team will first administer a baseline survey to
first- and second-year students enrolled in computing courses at CIC
institutions. This survey (administered in spring 2021) will focus on a variety
of factors, ranging from students’ background characteristics and pre-college
experiences to their transition to college and their first-year experiences in
computing. Then, two years later, in students’ third or fourth year in college,
the project team will administer a follow-up survey. The follow-up survey will
focus on the specific experiences known to shape students’ trajectories in
computing, including course experiences, interactions with instructors/faculty,
and extracurricular computing experiences (e.g., involvement in computing
organizations, undergraduate research, computing-related internships). This
survey will also focus on students’ longer-term plans, such as pursuing graduate
school or careers in computing. This study will contribute to knowledge about
broadening participation in computing in several ways. First, it will provide
insights to scholars, administrators, and policymakers about how students who
take computing courses in the first- and second- year of college may engage with
the computing department and how this engagement may differentially shape the
trajectories of students from various gender and/or racial/ethnic groups.
Additionally, following up with these students longitudinally will enable us to
learn how these students’ experiences and perceptions change over-time, as well
as to study the longer-term role played by a variety of computing environments
and outcomes. Overall, this study aims to build on existing literature about
what works to promote desirable outcomes for computing students and provide more
data on how and why certain experiences work (or do not work), thereby providing
actionable findings to stakeholders designing interventions to promote
broadening participation efforts in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.