* 2039433
* Wall Turbulence Control and Skin-Friction Drag Reduction with Novel Surface Microstructures
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Taiho Yeom, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/29/2024
* USD 352,549.00

Skin-friction drag is responsible for energy loss for ships, aircraft, and the
trucking industry. This project explores innovative methods of reducing skin-
friction drag using computations and experiments. One of the promising methods
for reducing skin-friction drag is to dampen wall turbulence passively using
surface microstructures. While a substantial amount of effort has been made to
advance wall techniques, the process is not yet completely understood. The
primary aim of this project is to provide a fundamental understanding of the
underlying physics of these novel surface microstructures and show that they can
provide systematic control of wall turbulence to minimize skin-friction drag.
The project outcomes will be disseminated to broader communities through many
educational and outreach activities, such as undergraduate research programs,
scientific publications, conference presentations, and summer science camps to
K-12 students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A micro airfoil structure,
which is a newly proposed surface microstructure, is expected to achieve unique
turbulence control capabilities due to its well-defined 3D geometry. The main
objectives of the project are: (i) to demonstrate the turbulence control
capability using the micro airfoil structure, (ii) to identify the connections
between the control inputs created by the micro airfoil structure and the
responses of skin-friction drag, (iii) to understand the fundamental mechanisms
of the turbulence control and skin-friction drag reduction by the micro airfoil
structure, and (iv) to recommend the optimum configurations of the single and
arrays of micro airfoil structure for the maximum reduction of skin-friction
drag. Direct numerical simulation and large eddy simulation will be used to
compute fundamental flows, and particle image velocimetry will be used to
measure velocities in the turbulent boundary layer. The fundamental knowledge
obtained through this project will provide insight to answer the long-lasting
questions about the dynamics of wall-bounded turbulent flows. The unique
turbulence control techniques achieved by the micro airfoil structure will
provide guidance to other research areas in aerospace, mechanical, chemical, and
ocean engineering where turbulence control may lead to drag reduction. This
project is jointly funded by Fluid Dynamics and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.