* 2039606
* EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Designing and Evaluating Curricular Modules for Inclusive Integration of Artificial Intelligence into Cybersecurity
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Selcuk Uluagac, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 02/29/2024
* USD 324,000.00

In today’s ever-changing threat landscape, artificial intelligence (AI)
techniques have become a key technology for cybersecurity researchers and
practitioners. Integrating AI into cybersecurity curricula is increasingly
necessary to better prepare the future cyber workforce but is also a serious
challenge. AI and cybersecurity are each difficult areas of study, appeal to
different types of students, and individually require significant commitments
within a fixed number of credit hours. Moreover, these challenges pose further
barriers for minoritized groups (e.g., Hispanics), many of whom are already on
the wrong side of the "digital divide". This EAGER project proposes to address
the following questions: how can AI be integrated into an already packed
cybersecurity curriculum, and how can this be done without further
disadvantaging minoritized groups? Although this project will focus on
minoritized groups, the educational modules will be designed to be culturally
mindful and inclusive of a broader population and therefore will extend the
project’s impact to any potential computer scientist who does not conform to the
stereotypes and normative expectations of the field. The results of this study
have the potential to expand and redefine who pursues cybersecurity, as well as
how we integrate it into the curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER
project will pursue three thrusts designed to address the difficult problem of
integrating AI effectively into cybersecurity curricula while attending
carefully to the effect of these integrations on minoritized groups, focusing
specifically on Hispanic students. First, the project team will design highly
adaptable AI curricular modules that can easily be leveraged by non-AI
cybersecurity educators and inserted into existing cybersecurity courses, with
each module associated with a suite of potential insertion points. Second, these
modules will include machine learning (ML) and natural language processing
(NLP). Topics such as NLP have been shown to increase the appeal of computer
science for diverse populations. Last, the project team will evaluate the
effectiveness of these modules at the curriculum-level within existing
cybersecurity programs that serve a diverse population. The specific research
questions to be addressed will include: (1) How did instructors perceive the
content’s efficacy? (2) What factors influence an instructor's participation in
curricular change? (3) What are the obstacles or considerations for AI
integration into cybersecurity curricula? (4) How do students perceive content
efficacy? (5) What (if any) influence do the modules have on interest,
engagement, and identity? This project answers the call for advances in
education research at the intersection of cybersecurity and AI through a fully
interdependent and integrated approach that draws on the expertise of the team.
It also leverages widely accepted theoretical frameworks and methods to evaluate
and assess the effectiveness of the work to ensure high impact and potential for
future scale-up.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by a special
initiative of the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to foster
new, previously unexplored, collaborations between the fields of cybersecurity,
artificial intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.