* 2039263
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Feasibility of Self-Propelled Nanoparticles for Heat Transfer Enhancement
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Pawel Keblinski, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 08/31/2021
* USD 68,193.00

The performance of many devices, such as computers, is limited by the ability to
remove heat from critical components. Improving heat removal technologies will
enable faster, smaller, more reliable, and lower-cost devices. The research
conducted under this award will focus on the enhancement of heat transfer fluids
resulting from active “stirring” elements in the form of self-propelled
microparticles. Theory indicates that substantial improvements may be possible.
If these predictions can be realized, the resulting technological advances could
lead to transformative improvements in the design of data centers, electric
vehicle batteries, solar panels, medical devices and other such devices,
potentially leading to cost savings of several billion dollars per year.

The research objective of this project is to measure the effect on heat transfer
of the addition of self-propelled microparticles to coolant liquids. A series of
heat transfer measurements will be obtained using two different designs of self-
propelled microparticles that have already been shown to generate bulk fluid
mixing and active turbulence. The measurement of thermal conductivity in a
microstirred liquid poses unique challenges. The figure of merit for heat
transfer enhancement used in this work is the effective thermal conductivity,
which is defined as the thermal conductivity of a fictitious stagnant liquid
that permits the same heat transfer rates as the self-propelled microparticle
suspensions. Enhancement is defined here as the increase in effective thermal
conductivity relative to the thermal conductivity of the liquid containing
identical particles but with their self-propelled motion deactivated.
Measurements will be taken over a range of particle diameters, speeds, and
volume fractions to quantify the effect of these parameters on effective thermal
conductivity. Experimental results will be compared to finite-element
simulations to facilitate comparison with extant theory and identify the
thermal-fluid transport phenomena underlying enhancement. The intellectual merit
of this research lies in a more comprehensive understanding of the thermal-fluid
behavior of fluid-particle mixtures under conditions where the particles propel
themselves through the fluid.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.