* 2039769
* EAGER:  Integrating animal movement ecology and multi-level social networks to investigate zoonotic disease dynamics
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Karen Mabry, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 08/31/2024
* USD 360,070.00

This project measures and models movement and social interactions in two bat
species and how these behaviors may influence spread of bat coronaviruses, such
as SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, among bats and between bats and
humans. Zoonotic diseases, such as bubonic plague, Lyme disease, flu, Ebola,
rabies, and COVID-19, are caused by pathogens transmitted from animals to
people, with devastating effects on humans. Not all potentially zoonotic
pathogens will emerge into humans, however, in part because movements of animals
and their social interactions with each other and with humans affect the
transmission and spread of pathogens. It is, therefore, important to know more
about behaviors of animals that are potential sources of zoonotic diseases so
that disease dynamics can be better understood and predicted. Viruses will be
identified by molecular techniques in bats in the desert southwest of the United
States, and the same bats will be followed with GPS trackers and radio-frequency
identification (RFID) tags (the same “microchips” used to identify pets) to
understand flight patterns when out of their roosts and contacts among bats
within roosts (“contact tracing”). The information obtained will be useful for
predicting the spread of viruses in bats, and is of relevance to SARS-CoV-2
should it ever “spill back” from people to North American bats. The broader
impacts of this work include a collaboration with a local science education
group to educate middle-school students about zoonotic diseases and
epidemiology. The project will also provide opportunities for training of
undergraduate and graduate students at New Mexico State University, a Hispanic-
Serving Institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research at the intersection of
animal movement, social behavior, and disease ecology is key to understanding
the dynamics of zoonotic diseases within animal hosts. How animals move through
their environments and how they interact with both conspecifics and
heterospecifics can influence the transmission and spread of zoonoses. This
project will investigate how animal movement and multi-species host social
network contacts shape risk of transmission of both endemic coronaviruses and
potentially the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 within and among North American bat
species. This work is facilitated by ever-smaller animal tracking devices and
advances in pathogen detection using genomic techniques, allowing the research
team to characterize the movements, social interactions, and “viromes” of
individual bats through time. By repeatedly sampling bat viromes, the
researchers will determine which viral strains are harbored by individual bats
through time. North American bats host multiple coronavirus strains, and there
is a risk that SARS-CoV-2 may “spillback” from humans into bats. The researchers
will also characterize the movements of individual bats using GPS tracking, and
will use contacts among RFID-tagged bats and fluorescent-powder tracking to
construct multi-species social networks for bats that share a roost. Integrating
the movement and social behavior of bats with their viromes will advance our
understanding of within-host dynamics of zoonotic pathogens. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be involved in the research, and educational resources
targeted to middle schools will help students whose lives have been disrupted by
the COVID-19 pandemic understand the origins of zoonotic diseases and basic
concepts in epidemiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.