* 2039373
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Toward Age-Aware Continuous Authentication on Personal Computing Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Shaun Canavan, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 03/31/2024
* USD 287,406.00

Current software for user authentication relies on the user to directly initiate
some interaction (i.e., active authentication). However, active authentication
systems are not accessible to individuals across all age groups. Continuous
authentication schemes transparently observe a user's natural multimodal
behaviors to leverage all possible signals as input for authentication, and
hence do not require explicit authentication interactions to be initiated by the
user, and are thus a promising framework for authentication by individuals of
different age groups. This project's novelties are 1) to advance understanding
of how individuals of different age groups use and perceive existing
authentication methods, especially concerning users' mental models and
acceptance of monitoring for the purposes of continuous authentication, and 2)
to collect and analyze a variety of user signals in multiple behavioral and
physiological modalities for age-aware continuous authentication on personal
computing devices. This research also informs the design of continuous
authentication interactions in other contexts such as public spaces and other
smart environments, in which continuous authentication might be useful.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research includes three phases. (1) Elicit the mental
models multi-generational users have of what it means to authenticate to a
system, if and when they expect the system to re-authenticate them to confirm
their identity as they continue to interact, and if and how they expect to
receive feedback of authentication attempts. (2) Produce a novel dataset of
behavioral and physiological data, such as touch gestures, keystroke dynamics,
heart-rate variability, and skin temperature, through a series of data
collection sessions wherein individuals of different age groups will be
recruited to complete a diverse set of tasks. (3) Develop fundamental knowledge
of age-aware continuous authentication through the analysis of these data using
state-of-the-art machine and deep learning techniques. This project broadens
participation in computing by involving students underrepresented in STEM and
through K-12 outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.