* 2039269
* EAGER: Nanoscale Elastocaloric Effect in  Phase-Change Nanowires for Solid-State Cooling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Rodrigo Bernal Montoya, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,995.00

Currently, most cooling devices (refrigerators, air-conditioning units) employ
environmentally-harmful fluids, known as refrigerants. They are also hard to
miniaturize, preventing their implementation in electronic devices, which due to
continued miniaturization and increase of processing power, necessitate novel
cooling mechanisms for the semiconductor industry to keep progressing. The
proposed research aims to investigate the nanoscale elastocaloric effect, a
cooling mechanism where deformation causes an atomic-level change in a solid,
which results in significant changes in its temperature. This effect promises to
eliminate the need for harmful fluids used as refrigerants, and to be applicable
both in miniaturized, cooling devices integrated inside electronic chips, and in
consumer products such as self-cooling fabrics and smart coatings. Mentoring,
research and outreach opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and K-12
students will also be enabled by this proposal. The graduate students will
mentor undergraduates and high-school students hosted in the investigator’s lab.
By doing meaningful research related to this project, they will be inspired to
pursue careers in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
is to pioneer the exploration of the elastocaloric effect in nanoscale
structures by assessing its promise in a model system: vanadium dioxide (VO2)
nanowires. The proposed research is experimental and aims to directly
characterize the effect’s output (temperature change) by infrared imaging, thus
proving its existence in VO2. Similarly, measurements of the deformation of the
nanowires as a function of temperature will provide metrics to put bounds on the
magnitude of the effect in VO2, thus assessing the promise of the material for
novel cooling devices, and the need for deeper investigations. Nanowires will be
deposited in flexible substrates by self-assembly and microfluidic patterning
methods, in order to align them in one direction and obtain a macroscale
nanostructured film. These films will then be deformed along the alignment
direction to trigger the elastocaloric effect. The resulting temperature changes
will be measured using infrared imaging. Finally, using state-of-the-art
nanomechanical testing, individual nanowires will be deformed in order to
characterize their response at two representative temperatures, thereby
quantifying bounds for the energetics of the phase transformation (i.e. its
entropy change).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.