* 2039862
* D-ISN: TRACK 1: Collaborative Research: Discovery, Analysis, and Disruption of Illicit Narcotic Supply Networks
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Subramanian Raghavan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 743,806.00

As transnational drug cartels continue to grow in size and scope, their
trafficking networks have become more complex and fragmented. This Disrupting
Operations of Illicit Supply Networks (D-ISN) project takes a multi-
disciplinary, scientific approach to build better insight and optimization of
counter-narcotics efforts in the United States. It refines analytic methods to
develop an understanding of the network structure and models of the flow of
cocaine, which supports disruption strategies of anti-narcotics and other law
enforcement agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project analyzes the dynamics of
narcotic supply networks and how interdiction strategies disrupt these networks.
Employing a convergent approach that combines operations research, computer
science, criminology, public policy, geographic, and economic perspectives, this
research exploits network analysis of temporal and spatial cocaine price data to
infer illicit supply chain network structure and flow. Artificial intelligence
and learning models are applied on the empirical data to extract network
behavior in response to interdiction activities, while game theoretic models
blend combinatorial optimization and agent-based simulation to evaluate the
outcomes of various interdiction strategies. Results will be integrated into a
network optimization model to explain the structure of illicit drug supply
chains and provide evidence to support successful disruption
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.