* 2039678
* D-ISN: TRACK 2: Building a Multifaceted Research Team to Examine the Use of Information Technology in the Creation and Disruption of Domestic Sex Trafficking Supply Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Stacie Petter, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 249,998.00

This planning grant award will contribute to the advancement of national welfare
and interests by building a multifaceted research team comprised of academics
and professionals to (1) assess how criminals use information technology to
support their domestic sex trafficking supply networks, (2) explore how the
criminal justice system has successfully used or struggled to use information
technology to detect, disrupt, and dismantle illicit supply networks, and (3)
create interventions to disrupt domestic sex trafficking supply networks based
on the knowledge gained from examining the use of information technology by
traffickers and criminal justice system professionals. Trafficker’s use of
information technology makes illicit supply networks more difficult to disrupt,
but this use of information technology creates digital footprints that can
enable criminal justice professionals to identify traffickers and obtain
evidence necessary for arrest and prosecution. Although many information
technologies have been developed to support the criminal justice system’s
efforts in detecting and disrupting illicit supply networks, these technologies
often fail to achieve the intended impacts due to resource constraints within
various agencies. This project creates a multifaceted research team of academics
and professionals to examine the varying levels of effective use of information
technology within the criminal justice system and to determine what policies,
practices, or training can be instituted to solve this problem. This research
will develop new training programs on domestic sex trafficking supply networks
for criminal justice system professionals; disseminate new insights to target
domestic sex trafficking supply networks; and encourage new policies or
practices to detect or disrupt domestic sex trafficking supply networks, which
will provide societal benefits to improve the human condition.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Through workshops and online collaborations, the project will bring
together academics and professionals as part of a multifaceted research team to
collaborate and develop a shared understanding of how criminals use information
technology to develop supply networks and how information technology is used (or
not used) for interdiction in domestic sex trafficking supply networks. Research
team members that are criminal justice system professionals will offer their
practical knowledge to inform current research. The academic research team
members from engineering, business, and social science disciplines will provide
expertise in supply networks, network analysis, human trafficking, and
information technology to stimulate creative ideas regarding how to effectively
disrupt resilient illicit supply networks. Since domestic sex trafficking supply
networks are often connected to other types of illicit supply networks, such as
labor trafficking, drug trafficking and money laundering, this research effort
will augment research examining the detection and disruption of other types of
illicit supply networks. The research team’s collaboration efforts will provide
a framework for future research on the disruption of domestic sex trafficking as
members of this multifaceted research team disseminate insights to their own
discipline through conferences, journal articles, reports, and panel
discussions. Additionally, new training programs based on the research team’s
findings will be developed and offered to criminal justice system
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.