* 2039060
* SBIR Phase I:  Microbial production of paraxanthine, a caffeine replacement
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Jeffrey Dietrich, REVEL TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 03/31/2022
* USD 255,999.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation (SBIR) Phase I project is
the development of a biomanufacturing process to produce paraxanthine for use as
a caffeine alternative in beverages and foods. For a large percentage of the
population, caffeine is known to have negative side effects, including anxiety,
jitteriness, and insomnia. In the case of anxiety, an estimated 40 million
Americans suffer from an anxiety disorder, which may be exacerbated by caffeine
in coffee, energy drinks, and other beverages. Paraxanthine is an active
ingredient that has stimulatory qualities similar to caffeine but is less likely
to cause anxiety and jitteriness. Thus, paraxanthine can play a role in
contributing to improved mental health.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project aims to develop a cost-efficient, biological method to manufacture
paraxanthine. Producing paraxanthine at low cost is currently a significant
technical challenge. The compound is only found naturally in substantial
quantities within the human body as the result of caffeine metabolism; it is not
produced in plants in above trace amounts. Furthermore, synthetic methods to
produce paraxanthine are complex, inefficient, and expensive. The research goals
of this Phase I project are to use a combination of protein and microbe
engineering to develop a biological method to fermentatively produce
paraxanthine at high yields and with high volumetric productivities. The
approach uses directed evolution to select for enzymes and microbes with
improved activity, enabling rapid iteration of the experimental design-build-
test cycle. If successful, this technology will not only deliver an efficient
paraxanthine production process, but it also establishes a novel, scalable
platform that can be applied to improve upon other food ingredients,
pharmaceuticals, and industrial chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.