* 2039951
* D-ISN: TRACK 2: Disrupting Wildlife Trafficking Networks through Convergence of  Physical and Virtual Ecosystems
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Renata Konrad, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2022
* USD 265,998.00

Wildlife trafficking occurs in both physical and virtual (both open and dark)
crime ecosystems; its illicitness is typically masked by the legal wildlife
trade. The security and economic impacts of unfettered wildlife trafficking are
existential threats to the U.S. To begin to address these impacts, information
gathering and analysis are needed; for example, machine learning tools to aid
discovery and help trace the status and trends of illegal goods could
significantly support law enforcement at U.S. Ports of entry. The promise of
inferences to bolster the disruption of wildlife trafficking networks depends on
a scientific community with capacity to distinguish 1) legal from illegal trade;
2) the financial, and 3) flows of other illicit goods within and across crime
ecosystems. This research converges engineering, computer and data science, and
social science in a deliberate fashion to improve understanding of illicit
supply network operations and strengthen ability to detect, disrupt and
dismantle them. This proposal integrates operational, computational, financial,
social, cultural, and economic expertise to build new research capacity to: 1)
identify analytically relevant data; 2) leverage united data and predictive
methods to draw associations and make inferences about interventions to combat
wildlife trafficking; 3) expand the research community by suggesting novel
research problems and directions, engaging civil society, federal agencies, and
private or non-profit entities; and 4) crystalize research questions for the
future. Although the team will focus on wildlife, the applicable methodology and
research questions are transferable to other problems such as human trafficking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s four-phase research approach: 1) distills
relevant analytic parts of the problem to diverse experts; 2) initiates team and
research capacity building activities to enable analytically relevant
unification of data; 3) implements activities to collate, organize, and identify
ways to analyze collected data through three strategic face-to-face meetings,
world cafés, a literature review and informational interviews; and 4) catalyzes
research questions through a wrap-up brainstorming session. Central to this
proposal are two undergraduate interdisciplinary team-projects directly
responding to needs identified by the anti-wildlife trafficking community and
lying at the intersection of science and society. The convergence of expertise
in environmental crimes, computer science, conservation biology, operations
modeling and analytics contributes to advancing knowledge in at least three
fundamental ways by: 1) understanding the landscape of physical and virtual
criminal ecosystems; 2) assessing data, technical and scientific needs
associated with linking the ecosystems, and 3) developing a strategy to deploy
intelligent techniques (e.g., information retrieval, analytics, AI and
engineering) to characterize and disrupt wildlife trafficking networks. Three
strategy meetings will generate in-depth discussion among experts from various
fields (e.g., social science, computer science, data science, engineering) and
organizations (e.g., parastatals, foundations, civil society organizations,
universities, private sector industries and government agencies), and open new
research directions and questions, illustrating the relevance of science for
disrupting wildlife trafficking networks to our research community. Future
research agendas may enhance discovery of other illicit supply chain activities
that help meet national security, law enforcement and economic development needs
and policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.