* 2039532
* SBIR Phase II:  Defining the Multimodal Signature of Stroke
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Sandra Saldana, ALVA HEALTH, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project falls within the scope of the grand challenges
in health informatics. There are excellent protocols for the management and
treatment of acute stroke, however, these protocols are only effective once
patients have been admitted into the healthcare system. Ischemic stroke affects
700,000 Americans, costs approximately $33 billion annually, and is the fifth
leading cause of death and a leading cause of disability in the US. Health care
providers, however, have limited interaction with their patients, and these
interactions occur in the highly constrained environment of the clinical
setting. Physicians have limited control over patient behavior and limited tools
to help patients recognize stroke symptoms outside the clinical setting. For
patients with high stroke risk, there is currently no system available to
monitor stroke symptoms and initiate a response in real-time. Thus, there is a
need to monitor patients remotely, where the current systems for stroke response
fail to provide coverage. The proposed solution will expand the provision of
stroke symptom monitoring to the daily lives of patients. Tracking patients as
they go through their daily lives will considerably enrich our knowledge of
stroke and will allow extension to monitoring for other neurological and
neuropsychiatric disorders and diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the real-time
detection of stroke. IV tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) has been an FDA
approved therapy since 1995, yet only 5-10% of eligible patients receive this
therapy. Arrival time in the emergency room after initial stroke symptoms is
directly associated with better outcomes after tPA and endovascular therapy,
with a time window of 4.5 hours and 24 hours for these treatments, respectively.
Despite massive public health campaigns, identifying symptoms of stroke and
activating emergency response systems remains a major challenge. The goal of
this project is to develop and test a wearable and computational solution to
effectively alert ischemic stroke victims and initiate emergency response in a
timely manner. The solution consists of a cloud-based analysis system for real-
time detection of stroke onset, enabled by body-worn sensors and a mobile app.
Once deployed, the device is expected to dramatically improve stroke emergency
response and increase the number of patients arriving in the hospital in time
for IV tPA treatment and other reperfusion therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.