* 2039384
* Collaborative Research: The Quasi-Biennial Oscillation and Madden-Julian Oscillation (QBO-MJO) Connection: Positive Feedbacks from Extratropical Wave Forcing
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Lon Hood, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 11/30/2023
* USD 358,647.00

The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) dominates the tropical climate variability
in the troposphere on the 30-to-60-day timescale. During the winter, convective
storms associated with the MJO excite planetary-scale wave disturbances that
impact the U.S. weather and perturb the stratosphere. The Quasi-Biennial
Oscillation (QBO) governs the variability in the tropical lower stratosphere and
guides how planetary-scale wave disturbances penetrate into the stratosphere.
Observations reveal that the QBO can modulate the occurrence and eastward
migration of the MJO pattern. However, this QBO-MJO relationship is not evident
in existing global climate models (GCMs). This research seeks to better
understand this relationship and address why it remains elusive in models. New
insight about the QBO-MJO connection may advance current knowledge of the
coupling between the troposphere and stratosphere, extend the forecast range of
weather prediction, and guide new GCM improvement. The work will support and
train a full-time graduate student and leverage the National Center for
Atmospheric Research Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model (namely,
WACCM6-110L), a GCM that simulates realistic MJO and
QBO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is to assess several positive
feedback mechanisms that may contribute significantly to the observed QBO
influence on the MJO. A key mechanism to assess involves the increased tropical
upwelling and destabilization of the tropical upper troposphere/lower
stratosphere (UTLS) region during the easterly phase of the QBO (i.e., QBOE) due
to the absorption and dissipation of extratropical Rossby waves. These waves are
influenced by both the MJO and the QBO. Five tasks are: (1) To quantify the
observed differences between QBOE and the westerly phase of the QBO (i.e., QBOW)
of the wintertime UTLS temperature and static stability as a function of
latitude and longitude; (2) To determine the strength of the MJO-induced
extratropical Rossby wave train and resulting upward wave activity flux as a
function of MJO strength and QBO phase; (3) To diagnose the strength of the wave
train and wave activity flux during the QBOE relative to QBOW; (4) To evaluate
if WACCM6-110L can simulate the observed QBO-MJO connection and the observed QBO
phase differences in UTLS temperature, subtropical jet structure, and wave
activity flux; and (5) To perform new experiments on WACCM6-110L to identify
needed model improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.