* 2039915
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: Social Media Based Analysis of Adverse Drug Events: User Modeling, Signal Reliability, and Signal Validation
* CSE,IIS
* 05/25/2020,07/31/2023
* Ahmed Abbasi, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 156,137.00

Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) have been associated with significant morbidity
and mortality, and have been a significant cause of hospital admissions,
accounting for as much as 5% of all admissions. About 2,000,000 serious ADRs are
reported yearly in the US; 100,000 annual deaths are related to adverse drug
events; serious ADRs rank 4th to 6th as causes of death. The problem stems from
the fact that the ADR profile of a given drug is rarely complete at the time of
official approval. The typically limited preapproval evaluation often results in
the possibility that when the drug is finally approved for use in the general
population (with significant diversity in race, gender, age, lifestyle), some
previously unidentified ADRs are often observed. This problem is acute for
psychotropic medications, given the fact that most people with psychiatric
diseases tend to have other health issues, with the individual taking multiple
drugs at the same time (both psychotropic and non-psychotropic), with often
unknown interactions between them. Initial results have shown the promise of
using social-media data for ADR signal detection. However, these methods are
still faced with two critical challenges, namely, signal reliability and
biological validation. Thus, this project proposes a detailed study on key
determinants of signal reliability: credibility of social media sources, model
of the users that generate source content, signal generation from such sources,
and validation of the generated signals. This work will be relevant to
government agencies charged with drug approval, drug monitoring, and disease
monitoring, drug companies, hospitals, and the general public. The impact of the
proposed work will go beyond drug surveillance, since the approaches proposed
can be adapted for other healthcare problems, and for other scenarios, such as
financial markets, and national security. Planned educational activities include
outreach to high-school students, and involvement of undergraduate and graduate
students. Research results will be disseminated via technical publications in
professional journals and conference presentations.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three specific aims: (1) Enrich signal
reliability in social media analysis of adverse drug events, using credibility
analysis, user modeling and signal fusion via deep learning; (2) Signal
validation via molecular level analysis; (3) Prototype development and
evaluation. The ubiquity, veracity and diversity of data from various social
media channels and other sources of user-generated content necessitate a serious
consideration of their credibility, recency, uniqueness and salience. To enrich
signal reliability, the team will propose novel methods for ADR signal detection
using credibility analysis, and for user modeling and signal fusion based on
deep leaning techniques. For signal validation, biological support for
hypothesized ADRs, essentially connecting high-level observations from social
media interactions to potential associations at molecular level networks and
pathways, will be used. The results will change the current largely passive
approach to post-marketing drug surveillance that relies heavily on voluntary
reports, by ensuring reliability in social-media based approaches, thus making
the public an integral part of a proactive drug surveillance system. The idea of
signal fusion and deep learning for user modeling and signal generation can be
extended for other uses beyond drug surveillance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.