* 2039551
* Developing Quantitative Methods to Address Sediment Modification
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Jay Quade, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 182,143.00

This project will study the chemistry of archeological waste in ancient
archaeological deposits for clues on the development of animal domestication and
associated growth in early human populations. From a geochemical perspective,
archaeological sites are highly dynamical features, a complex and overlapping
mixture of human and natural sediments and dissolved constituents. Tens of
studies over the past two decades have explored these rich geochemical records,
providing a new perspective on many aspects of human behavior and human
surroundings, their use of space, and plant and animal management. However, such
studies have generally overlooked the salt chemistry of ancient archeological
sites, and its implications. This is a missed opportunity, especially in some
arid land sites where post-occupation modification can be minimal and closed-
system retention of some elements is likely. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes to further develop a new way of looking at the geochemistry of arid
land archeological sites as a whole, using mass balance modeling. This approach
quantifies soluble salt additions and losses to a system to understand the onset
and evolution of animal domestication. Results so far demonstrate the power of
this model approach for understanding changes in site-use intensity and
livestock management over an approximately thousand-year time span.The salt
chemistry of the refuse is dominated by animal and human urine salts, which
increased steadily over the long term occupation, a reflection of expanding
human and domesticated animal populations. The project will also analyze dung
biomarkers, ancient gut microbiomes, and pathogens (e.g. Salmonella) that are
associated with human and animal waste at the site. This should lead to a better
understanding the relationship between animal waste products and ancient
pathogens and provide information about disease source and spread. This project
will support training of three early career scientists in a variety of
geochemical and field monitoring techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.