* 2039268
* SNM: Customized Inkjet Printing of Graphene-Based Real-time Water Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Junhong Chen, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2022
* USD 887,386.00

Low-cost sensors for real-time monitoring of contaminants in water, such as
toxic heavy metal ions, could provide early warning of contamination, thereby
improving drinking water safety and protecting public health. A graphene-based
water sensor platform is thus explored for rapid, sensitive, and selective
detection of various water contaminants, overcoming limitations of current
sensing technologies such as slow detection and inadequate sensitivity. However,
the commercialization of such a sensor system is limited by its relatively high
manufacturing cost due to the batch processing that involves traditional
lithographic electrode fabrication and multiple manual post-electrode
fabrication processes. This award explores a low-cost customized inkjet printing
process for manufacturing of graphene-based water sensors. The research entails
engineering various inks and modifying the standard inkjet printing process to
produce the complete sensor system, continuously. High throughput manufacturing
of the nano-enabled water sensing systems reduces their cost and enhances market
acceptance. The research outcomes provide the rationale for substrate selection
and treatment, scalable methods for producing various inks suitable for inkjet
printing, and process models for customized inkjet printing. Project results
could be used for many other applications such as solar cells, lithium-ion
batteries, and supercapacitors, enabling low-cost manufacturing of a wide range
of printable electronic devices. The project trains diverse student populations
including women and minorities on scalable nanomanufacturing, nanodevice design
and real-time water-sensing technologies through hands-on research experience, a
course module, and enriching existing curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sensor
platform is based on a field-effect transistor structure with reduced graphene
oxide as the sensing channel and gold nanoparticles as anchoring sites of
selective chemical probes. A major challenge for inkjet printing is the
customization of the inkjet printing process for a specific device or system
architecture. Customization involves engineering suitable inks, modifying the
standard printing process parameters, and integrating components at different
scales. The research team aims to close this knowledge gap by exploring inkjet
printing of the entire graphene-based sensor system to enable the large-scale
production via high throughput roll-to-roll nanomanufacturing of the sensor
devices, which should result in low cost. The scalable nanomanufacturing of inks
for all sensor components: electrode, sensing material, and probe, and their
printing and integration into water sensor systems are investigated, together
with methods for selecting and treating polymer substrates and customizing
inkjet printing parameters. The sensor performance is validated in industrial
testbeds through collaboration with A. O. Smith Corporation and NanoAffix
Science, LLC. The project leads to a low-cost, high-yield scalable
nanomanufacturing platform for graphene-based water sensor systems and other
flexible electronic systems that can be readily commercialized by industrial
partners.