* 2039633
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: A Novel Method for Laminar Burning Speed Measurement at Ultra High-Pressures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Fokion Egolfopoulos, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 12/31/2022
* USD 99,592.00

The next generation of advanced combustion devices will operate under ultra-high
pressure conditions in order to improve the combustion efficiency and reduce
emission of pollutants. However, at such extreme conditions, flame tends to
become unstable and experimental measurement of fundamental properties becomes
challenging. The principal aim of this project is to provide a detailed time-
and space-resolved measurements of the ignition process at high pressures. In
addition, the measurement methodologies and developed computational models will
have a broad and valuable impact on combustion and plasma communities by
enabling predictive capabilities for designing and optimizing advanced
combustion devices operating under extreme conditions. The project will also
encompass significant educational activities, including classroom and community
engagement, integration of research into relevant courses, undergraduate
research program, and an outreach program for K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to develop a
novel method to measure LBS in the ignition affected region using a spherically
expanding flame under ultra-high pressures. The complication with this region is
that, the kernel growth rate does not only depend on the chemical reaction but
also on other terms such as energy discharge, as well as radiative and
conductive energy losses. None of these terms has been adequately assessed, due
to the generation of ionized gas (i.e., plasma). The proposed research will fill
this broad knowledge gap via combined experimental and modeling studies focused
in three specific aims: (1) using a well-defined and well-controlled high-
pressure experimental configuration; (2) developing a self-consistent
theoretical framework to explain the influence of energy discharge on the plasma
formation and initial flame propagation; and (3) modifying an available high-
fidelity direct numerical simulation (DNS) code to account for the evolution of
the plasma kernel and the ignition process. On the experimental side, the
project will utilize high-speed imaging of the plasma kernel propagation in
conjunction with advanced laser diagnostics. The plasma properties will be
calculated using statistical thermodynamics. This project, for the first time,
aims to fundamentally understand the underlying physicochemical processes
controlling the ultra-high pressure ignition in a high temporal and spatial
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.