* 2039285
* EAGER: Emergent properties governing robustness in regulatory networks important for cell, tissue, and organ function
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Rosangela Sozzani, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,781.00

Plants are critical for all aspects of human life as the primary source of food,
fiber, shelter, and fuel. Game-changing advances are needed for plant
engineering to effectively and sustainably increase crop production and meet the
demands of a growing population. Regulation of plant growth and biomass is
dependent on the continuous generation of stem cells that differentiate to form
all the cells, tissues, and organs of the plant. Understanding the spatial and
temporal control of stem cell self-renewal and their differentiation is critical
for generating predictable outcomes and redesigning plants for our future needs.
At present, it is known that groups of cells differentiate and display functions
in response to positional information, and those local cell-to-cell interactions
drive cell-specific gene expression patterns. However, interrogating cellular
reprogramming has thus far been limited by the challenge of manipulating
individual cells. This EAGER award will lead to the development of novel
technological advances that will enable the direct study of plant cell
characteristics during organ formation. This project will combine
interdisciplinary and convergent research training for postdocs, graduate, and
undergraduate students. It will be coupled with professional development by
means of established and ongoing outreach activities (i.e., including a summer
internship for underrepresented minority undergraduates) to build the skill sets
needed for tomorrow’s workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research,
exploiting 3D bioprinting, quantitative image analysis, and single-cell
transcriptomics, will address the following question: What are the emergent
system-level characteristics involved in cell-to-cell communication, patterning
formation, and robustness that instruct cell identity and differentiation during
plant organ formation? Accordingly, by combining 3D bioprinting with single-cell
transcriptomics, this proposal will offer an innovative approach to study the
minimal cues, positional effects, and signaling pathways key for plant
developmental processes such as cell identity or differentiation in single
cells. This research will broaden the understanding of how various signals are
integrated with robust developmental programs, and this gained knowledge that
could lead to the discovery of new patterns and forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.