* 2039369
* RAPID Excellence in Research: The development of ultrasensitive, multiplexed DNA/RNA detection platform using printed nanocomposite biosensors
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Honghe Wang, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,993.00

The COVID-19 pandemic presents a serious public health crisis to the United
States and to the world at large. One critical need is for improved and
simplified methods to detect the SARS-COV-2 virus. Many of the available tests
lack specificity, take several hours to complete, and require centralized high-
complexity laboratory equipment. Researchers supported by this award will
develop and test a novel system for electrochemical detection of viral RNA
sequences without the need for complex laboratory procedures. The work will be
led by investigators at Tuskegee University, working in collaboration with
Auburn University researchers. In addition to the potential societal benefit
accrued from improved SARS-COV-2 testing, the undergraduate and graduate student
training conducted as part of the project will help to advance and broaden the
participation of students from HBCUs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Electrochemical
nanocomposite biosensors are powerful tools for the detection of biomarkers and
environmental hazards. DNA or RNA fragments found in clinical samples typically
fall below the detection limits of most methods of unamplified DNA/RNA
detection. The research supported by this award will test the utility of simple
nanocomposite sensor detecting DNA/RNA directly from unamplified samples. This
technology offers an unprecedented simultaneous and multiplexed detection of
different pathogen sequences in a high-throughput format with electrical
readout. The simplified approach has the potential to dramatically reduce sample
turnaround time due to their label free character and high sensitivity with a
disposable “sensor strip.” Results from these studies will be disseminated
through publication in peer-reviewed journals, presentations at scientific
meetings, and potentially through commercialization of the resulting technology.
This RAPID award to Tuskegee University is made by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure and is also supported by the NSF HBCU Excellence in Research
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.