* 2039136
* Prehistoric Communities Of Practice
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Tom Dillehay, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2024
* USD 187,215.00

The goal of this project is to study past development of food strategies,
cultural boundary and identity formations, and socio-economic organizations of
communities of specialized farmers and maritime fisherfolks. By studying these
early complementary food producing communities, researchers seek to better
understand how different food strategies coalesced to develop more complex and
integrated societies. One of the most impacting events in world history—food
production and its consequences—led to significant changes in landscapes and
human populations, eventually supporting the spread of a settled lifeway and the
rise of great civilizations in the ancient world. Yet, food production was more
than just a matter of subsistence and landscape changes. It also led to dramatic
shifts in social, ritual and symbolic practices, including challenges such as
the maintenance of social cohesion in the face of variable community formations,
increased social scale and differentiation, environmental changes, new
technologies to meet new economic demands, and the need for different ways of
developing new institutions to manage the changing nature of different risks.
However, managing those challenges through growing collective action and new
community norms and institutions may have been as problematical as arriving at
successful food production, especially when societies combined different food
strategies, which required different means of negotiation and organization to
deal with new challenges beyond those of a single mode of production such as
agriculture. Research at archaeological sites is best suited to study these
changes and challenges through time because they retain the empirical evidence
of past food technologies, people’s social and technological organization
strategies, and the practices and institutions they formed to deal with those
changes and challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeological knowledge of early
food production, inter-community integration, technological exploration,
innovation and development, and the antecedents and consequences of these
activities remains unclear. The offshore coastal waters provide some of the most
diverse and abundant marine resources and adjacent shorelines offer one of the
most appropriate places to study the socio-economic challenges and interactions
that developed between early fishing and farming communities. Such situations
representing the evolution of a settled lifeway, population expansion, different
labor demands, greater dependence on marine resources and terrestrial foods,
major climate fluctuations provide opportunities to study social movements
toward civilization. This research focuses on how these fishing and agriculture
communities built social cohesion by non-violent means and how they symbolically
expressed their changing social and cultural identities with new food production
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.