* 2039546
* I-Corps: Machine Learning based Clinical Decision Support Tool to Predict 30-day Hospital Readmissions for Congestive Heart Failure Patients
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Nauder Faraday, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a clinical decision support software tool to predict 30-day
hospital readmissions for patients diagnosed with congestive heart failure
(CHF). CHF is a chronic cardiac disease where the heart does not adequately pump
blood to the body. CHF is known to be the number one reason for hospital
admissions and readmissions. Hospital readmissions are independently associated
with negative patient outcomes, and Medicare spends â€¯$2.7 billion on CHF
readmissions annually. On top of that, an estimated 70% of those readmissions
are preventable, and as a result, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS) started to penalize health organizations for high rates of readmission.
Re-admission penalties were up to $550 million across all hospitals in 2018,
with ~2,500 hospitals being affected. The software tool may be generalized to
other diseases beyond CHF and has the potential to help reduce these avoidable
readmissions improving patient outcomes and leading to cost savings for
patients, payers, and hospitals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a clinical decision support tool to predict 30-day
hospital readmissions. This is a machine learning-based software tool supported
by large-scale clinical datasets to predict the likelihood of readmissions for
patients admitted to the hospitals and diagnosed with congestive heart failure
(CHF). This technology is a cloud-based software tool that will integrate with
electronic health records (EHRs) and can assist case managers with triage and
planning of congestive heart failure patients. Building on current information
from case managers and quality improvement directors, the team gathers
additional information to gain a deeper understanding of the clinical workflow
(e.g., attending physicians, transition guides, case managers, directors, and
chief nursing officers), revenue streams (e.g., hospital purchasing committees),
reimbursement requests (hospitals and payers), and regulatory requirements
(e.g., FDA 510(k) regulatory clearance process) to establish connections with
potential partners in industry. The goal is to build an evidence-based product
solution by interviewing these stakeholders and to establish plans to move the
commercialization of the technology forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.