* 2039542
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Secure and Privacy-Preserving Adaptive Artificial Intelligence Curriculum Development for Cybersecurity
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Latifur Khan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 239,855.00

In recent years, researchers have applied artificial intelligence (AI) to
effectively solve important problems in cybersecurity. While significant
research progress has been made in cybersecurity with the help of AI, there is a
shortage of highly educated workers who can solve challenging problems at the
intersection of AI and cybersecurity. This project will develop such a workforce
by educating qualified individuals from diverse communities in cybersecurity and
AI simultaneously. The project team will develop and deliver modular and
project-based courses for graduate students that cover the basics of AI and
cybersecurity using real-life problems. The development of innovative courses is
intended to strengthen the student experience and to build a strong and diverse
workforce in AI and cybersecurity that will fill the current voids in
government, industry, and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will
develop five modular courses for graduate students: (1) Scalable Advanced
Analytics, (2) AI including Explainable Machine Learning (ML), (3) ML for
Cybersecurity, (4) Cybersecurity for ML (e.g., Adversarial ML), and (5) Secure
Blockchain Technologies. The design of these modular and hybrid courses will
incorporate research-based pedagogies and innovative technologies. Courses will
be offered in both instructor-led and student-directed learning formats to study
the differences in learning outcome, if any, between these two different
approaches. This project will provide important information regarding optimal
methods to deliver interdisciplinary cybersecurity curricula and how the
education community can effectively broaden access to cybersecurity education
beyond typical classroom courses. The project team will conduct outreach
activities to ensure participation by underrepresented populations and will
disseminate findings through workshops at relevant meetings of professional
societies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by a special
initiative of the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to foster
new, previously unexplored, collaborations between the fields of cybersecurity,
artificial intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.