* 2039857
* D-ISN: TRACK 1: Characterizing the Global Illicit Trade in Energy-Critical Materials using Machine Learning, Remote Sensing, and Qualitative Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Kyle Davis, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2026
* USD 999,984.00

The objective of this five-year Disrupting Operations of Illicit Supply Networks
(D-ISN) project is to map and characterize the volume of illicitly-sourced
materials in energy-critical minerals (ECM) supply chains. ECMs are essential to
renewable, nuclear, and fossil energy generation and are included in the US
government’s list of 35 ‘critical materials’, yet their supply chains remain
opaque and vulnerable to illicit activity. There are currently no global
measurements of the licit-illicit composition of ECM trade flows or their
evolution over time. To address the problem, this project seeks to map and model
global ECM flows based on original research in several source, transit, and
destination countries. The findings and tools developed under this study will
improve discovery and traceability of illicitly sourced ECM, identify vulnerable
points along several ECM supply chains, and generate predictive models of their
dynamics in order to identify effective disruption strategies. The results will
be informed by data drawn from open and proprietary datasets, as well as data
gathered at national and subnational levels, and tested under extensive field
research. The project will advance our national ability to identify
vulnerabilities in the supply chains of energy-critical materials, catalyze
game-changing innovative technological tools and multidisciplinary methodologies
that enhance capacity for the detection and disruption of illicit activities
affecting ECM supply chains. This is a key step for ensuring transparent,
secure, and sustainable supply chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
integrates methods from machine learning, remote sensing, and multilingual
qualitative research to detect and disrupt illicit activities by characterizing
the global illicit in several ECMs: Cobalt, Lithium, Niobium, Platinum Group
Metals (PGM), Rare Earth Elements (REE), and Tantalum. Using complex systems
theory within a telecoupling framework, the project will (1) characterize and
model the processes through which licit and illicit ECM trade flows converge and
analyze linked trade, policy, and land use dynamics since 2000 (the what); (2)
identify sources of trade irregularities; (3) use remote sensing, human expert
analysis, and AI to calculate mining occurring beyond official concessions (the
where); (4) use human-in-the-loop machine learning to generate a predictive
model of correlations between illicit international trade flows and local land
use change, and then use qualitative methods from human geography to conduct a
causal mechanism analysis to identify “the how and the ¬why” of changing illicit
ECM trade flows. The project addresses a major gap and will generate actionable
science by providing a global assessment of: the credibility of official trade
data upon which supply chain analyses are based; the role of illicit commodities
in sustaining global ECM flows, including their relative occurrence in specific
destination markets, and; the level of illicit mining activity occurring within
the mappable extent of mining activities. This project advances scientific
theory through a convergence science approach that places social, physical, data
and computer sciences on equal footing in order to form a complete picture of
illicit ECM flows, and develops a first-of-its-kind multi-modal approach to
identify links between illicit ECM trade flows and specific locations of illicit
production on a global scale. The methods developed under this project will
enable detection of illicitly sourced ECM, will be applicable to other mineral
commodity flows, and will provide a strong foundation for continuing research on
the complex dynamics of illicit mineral production and trade. This project is
jointly funded by IIS and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.