* 2039267
* Community-Based Programs Expanding Geoscience Education Pathways
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,11/30/2021
* Olugbemiga Olatidoye, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 11/30/2021
* USD 49,858.00

The workshop seeks to continue the conversation on the National Technical
Association (NTA)-HBCU Geosciences collaborative strategic action plan. This
collaboration, between the community-based NTA and the campus-based HBCU-GWG
(Geoscience Working Group), is an untapped resource for broadening participation
in STEM leveraging local, regional and national efforts. The role of geosciences
in transforming education and career pathways to help broaden participation in
STEM builds on nine prior NSF-funded conferences, workshops and grants. One
conclusion derived from these previous collaborative activities is that the NTA-
HBCU initiative will capitalize on the extensive STEM training and research
experiences of these institutions. The purpose of the workshop is to expand the
work and reach of the NTA-HBCU Geosciences interdisciplinary community of
practice by creating a robust virtual infrastructure for producing STEM
geoscience-based curricula, faculty and student engagement while drawing upon
the untapped, culturally relevant and responsive capacities of these renowned
HBCU and NTA institutions in serving, training, graduating and integrating
underrepresented students in STEM professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the
impact of the COVID 19 Pandemic, the NTA will conduct a Virtual 92nd Annual
Conference to be held online. The conference will feature interactive remote
presentations from students and technical experts with live participant
interaction. Although climate change and COVID 19 are high priority topics,
preparing and growing the future STEM workforce remains at the core of the NTA
mission and the agenda. As a major component of the NTA conference, the HBCU-GWG
will hold two community focused interactive workshop demonstration and training
sessions. Clark Atlanta University will coordinate two workshop topics, one
focused on Community-Based Programs Expanding Geoscience Education that will
feature three community demonstration projects connecting campus and community
to deliver STEM experiential education in under-resourced Black communities. The
program will also include a Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the
Environment (GLOBE) workshop. GLOBE is an international science and education
program supported by NSF, NASA, NOAA and the US State Department that provides
students and the public worldwide with the opportunity to participate in data
collection and the scientific process. The Working Group has invested in faculty
development training to reinforce strategies for incorporating societal impacts
for several years, and they will engage community organizations in extending the
impact of GLOBE into the African American neighborhoods that surround HBCU
campuses. Specific workshop goals are to: Bring together university, government
and organizational leadership to explore new opportunities for STEM education
(partnerships, recruitment, curriculum, instruction); Explore HBCU responses to
the COVID 19 pandemic including research, impacts, technology and implications
for the future of STEM education; Identify and prioritize strategies proven to
actually increase diversity in the STEM pipeline, persistence and
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.