* 2039506
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Theory of Change Observatory on Disaster Resilience
* GEO,RISE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Michael Jacobson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries to address the
growing need for assessment and reduction of disaster risk, collaborative co-
design of resilience strategies with a breadth of stakeholders, and
scientifically and technologically enhanced responses to disasters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to enhance the capacity of regions in
Sub-Saharan Africa to better assess and respond to the effects of droughts and
flood risk. The project will develop a place-based observatory to monitor
environmental conditions and develop models that can aid decision-makers in
creating strategies to mitigate and manage risks associated to floods and
droughts. The international project team has expertise in climatology,
hydrology, remote sensing, cartography, modeling, environmental risk assessment,
and policy analysis. The team will work together to develop a new innovative
framework to address an important issue worldwide and has great potential to
advance risk preparedness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.