* 2039927
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Mobility in Human-Environment Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Kristina Douglass, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 31,556.00

Cumulative environmental change is negatively impacting the sustainability of
coastal communities. Archaeology provides a deep-time perspective into the
impacts of climate change on human populations, as our species has coped with
varying degrees of environmental change for most of our existence. This project
seeks to investigate the relationship between settlement choice and
environmental conditions in coastal foraging populations over the last 4000
years. This project will provide important insight into the interlinked social
and environmental factors that affect settlement choices. By investigating
community settlement choice in an area known for its extreme environmental
conditions, we can better understand variability in human responses to
environmental change. Clarifying the connection between human behavior and
environmental change is vital, as environmental change impacts on livelihoods
are intensifying. In addition to providing funding for the training of a
graduate student in anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data
collection and analysis, the methods proposed here will also assist communities
in conserving their cultural heritage by systematically recording human
activities on the landscape through time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three main
questions are posed by this project: 1) How important are natural resources in
human settlement choice? 2) Are major climate events accompanied by shifts in
the distribution and density of settlements? and 3) Do social factors, such as
community ties or networks, influence settlement patterns, and if so, to what
degree? Using an automated remote sensing procedure, this project will
systematically record archaeological deposits in this coastal foraging community
and researchers will survey and excavate identified locations to establish site
chronologies. Next, environmental conditions over the past several thousand
years will be reconstructed using fossilized corals. Finally, these data will be
incorporated into spatial statistical models to analyze the relationship between
environmental conditions and settlement distributions over time. The project
would advance archaeological knowledge about human-environment interactions, and
the role of mobility in human adaptations to environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.