* 2039498
* EAGER: Initiating a Transformative Building Water System Research Collaborative in Rapid Response to the COVID-19 Pandemic
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Andrew Whelton, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2023
* USD 185,473.00

2039498 (Whelton). There's been no other time in modern history where more than
5.6 million U.S. buildings have low to no water use, offering potentially
widespread chemical and microbial health risks across the nation. It is unclear
how these nationwide water stagnation events will impact water quality and
ultimately public health. Furthermore, there is even less data and communication
about effective water system rehabilitation practices following prolonged water
stagnation. The goal of this project is to rapidly organize and lead a nation-
wide Building Water Systems Research Collaborative with multiple institutions
focused on generating and sharing new knowledge within the research community
and with the public. The collaborative will share cutting-edge knowledge,
protocols, best analytical practices, big data, and field practices through a
series of formal interactions amongst an interdisciplinary team with a common
focus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of heightened health concerns, building
system complexity, and a variety of investigative approaches and reporting,
there is potential for public confusion and loss of confidence as studies are
published one at a time without context. Thus, it is in the public's best
interest that collaborations be fueled and researchers share knowledge towards a
broader understanding. This collaborative will help catalyze a deeper focus on
fundamental discovery, facilitate rapid sharing of knowledge being developed,
and also stave off potential confusion from the scientific community. Currently,
there's no formal mechanism by which institutions share methods, preliminary
results, research, and communication strategies in real time about building
water systems. There also is no training for researchers responding to a
disaster to gain expertise on relevant science communication â€“ before
communicating. This effort will help focus U.S. research efforts into a common
collaborative, thereby maximizing their robustness, and impact of results from
multiple studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.