* 2039582
* NSFGEO-NERC:Collaborative Research: Chemistry and Biology under Low Flow Hydrologic Conditions Beneath the Greenland Ice Sheet Revealed through Naturally Emerging Subglacial Water
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Trinity Hamilton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 06/30/2024
* USD 274,887.00

This project is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s Directorate
of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research Council
(UKRI/NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
component of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Weathering is an important process
that releases nutrients that are essential for life from rocks and minerals in
the Earth’s surface. This project seeks to understand the effect of large
glaciers on weathering processes beneath the Greenland Ice Sheet and the
consequences for life. During summer, nutrients and other products are flushed
out of the Greenland Ice Sheet with water from melting ice. While these products
have been sampled in spring and summer, it is not known how weathering processes
are different during winter. In this project, researchers will sample the
seasonal ice that forms in front of two of Greenland’s glacial outlets,
Isunnguata Sermia and Leverett Glacier, during the freezing months to assess the
chemistry and microbiology processes that reflect wintertime conditions beneath
the ice sheet – periods when input of fresh meltwater is minimal. These samples
will increase knowledge of winter conditions under the Greenland Ice Sheet and
help better understand the interior portions of the ice sheet which are largely
inaccessible. Such information will help in assessing past conditions, when
colder atmospheric conditions resulted in minimal meltwater input through the
ice sheet and to the glacial bed. These analyses will inform understanding of
the role of glaciers on earth’s nutrient cycles presently, under past ice age
conditions, and in a future deglaciating world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Greenland Ice Sheet is a major exporter of biologically important elements to
the world’s oceans. However, most of our knowledge of chemical and biological
fluxes from the ice sheet comes from the summer outflux of outlet glaciers whose
channelized waters contact only a limited portion of the glacier bed. The
majority of the glacier-bed interface contains slow-flowing, distributed waters
not representative of this flux. The project will test the hypothesis that
overwinter chemical and biological processes under outlets of the Greenland Ice
Sheet differ substantially from summer outflow and represent a window into
widespread, but typically inaccessible, distributed flow. The principal sample
collection method will be early spring coring of naled ice that forms at glacial
termini from wintertime subglacial flow. Chemical, mineralogical, and biological
constituents of this flow will be compared to material emerging from the
initial, peak, and terminal phases of the melt season. Elsewhere in the Arctic,
the chemistry of frozen overwinter subglacial material shows significant
limitation in oxygen or sediment supply compared with even the first spring
melt, supporting the idea that naled ice reveals a unique overwinter system. The
naled ice and outflow of Isunnguata Sermia and Leverett Glacier will be sampled
over two years. These West Greenland outlets differ by more than an order of
magnitude in the size of the catchments they drain, thereby testing the effect
of scale on biogeochemistry. Naled ice structure will be characterized by ground
penetrating radar and ice borehole temperature profiles. The aqueous
geochemistry, stable isotopes of carbonate and sulphate, and mineralogy of the
suspended sediment of ice and water will be assessed. These analyses will
document changes in the mineral flux and supply of atmospheric gases at the
glacial bed between winter low flow conditions and peak summer melt. Microbial
abundance, diversity, metagenomics, and stable isotopes of biomass will also be
measured to understand the concomitant relationship between geochemical
conditions and biological communities. Researchers will incorporate findings
into a number of outreach efforts including developing a new curriculum module
for the Center for Earth and Environmental Sciences, providing research
opportunities for underrepresented students as part of the Bridge to Research
Program and preparing hands-on activities for the Market Science
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.