* 2039584
* D-ISN: TRACK 1: Modeling Effective Network Disruptions for Human Trafficking
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Kayse Maass, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,047,780.00

This Disrupting Operations of Illicit Supply Networks (D-ISN) project will
enhance national health, prosperity and welfare by contributing new knowledge on
how to best disrupt and dismantle, rather than simply displace, illicit sex
trafficking networks. Sex trafficking is a human rights abuse and uses highly
exploitative and often violent means to control victims. These illicit networks
are supported by complex and agile criminal enterprises that coerce victims to
perform other criminal activities, such as committing theft or selling illegal
drugs, to enhance the commercial viability of the enterprise. The project is
expected to support insight into both how these networks operate and how they
dynamically react to interventions in order to ensure that (i) interventions
truly disrupt and dismantle the operations and (ii) interventions target the
operators and not the victims of the network. This project combines semi-
structured mixed methods qualitative research and operations research,
specifically network interdiction models, with input from a survivor-centered
advisory group and a human trafficking investigative task force in order to
model effective network disruptions for human trafficking. The expertise of
these non-academic groups will help ensure that our research captures the
consequences, both intended and unintended, that targeted interventions have on
sex trafficking operators and victims in order to understand what constitutes an
effective disruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build new network
interdiction models based on qualitative data gleaned from investigative case
files as well as input from an advisory group whose members have first-hand
knowledge of how trafficking networks respond to various disruption tactics. The
results of the network interdiction models will be validated through qualitative
research with knowledgeable stakeholders (e.g. survivors, law enforcement,
traffickers, and advocates). This research will contribute to our knowledge
about sex trafficking networks by understanding how they react to potential
disruptions and how sex trafficking victims are forced to conduct other illicit
activities. It will contribute to the network interdiction literature by
examining problems where the trafficker(s) react to disruptions prior to
operating their network. The project will also investigate how critical
infrastructure for financial flows and communications supports different
criminal activities involved in sex trafficking networks. The results of the
research will be communicated to organizations serving sex trafficking victims
and the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension Human Trafficking
Investigators Task Force. The policy implications of this research will help
identify unintended consequences of various sex trafficking disruption tactics
as well as the tactics that are effective from multiple stakeholder
perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.