* 2039871
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Changing the Paradigm: Developing a Framework for Secondary Analysis of EER Datasets
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Joachim Walther, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 02/29/2024
* USD 47,350.00

To help develop the nation’s engineering workforce, the National Science
Foundation has invested substantial public funding in engineering education
research over the past twenty years. This investment has helped markedly improve
courses and programs at many universities by testing and sharing research-based
practices that promote active learning, increase student motivation and
engagement, diversify the field, and better prepare students for work. At the
same time, the investment has typically focused on researchers collecting new
data, resulting in hundreds of data sets that remain underexplored. These
existing data sets have significant potential to be analyzed and even combined
in new ways to further support large-scale changes in how we recruit, teach, and
prepare engineering students for the demands and challenges of the 21st century.
Currently, however, engineering education researchers do not have productive and
effective ways for sharing and analyzing data beyond the original project. Thus
the full potential of these data sets remains untapped. This project will
address that gap by developing and promoting a viable approach that will enable
researchers to leverage the rich data currently available. In doing so, it will
simultaneously improve engineering education nationally and increase the return
on investment of public funds. The project will bring experienced researchers
together with those just beginning their careers to identify the major
roadblocks to sharing and re-using data, develop strategies and practices for
overcoming those roadblocks, and conduct a series of test cases that demonstrate
how to put those strategies and practices into action. The results will help
create a paradigm shift that can move both the study and the practice of
engineering education in the U.S. to a new level and spur the kind of sea
changes needed to keep the nation’s engineering workforce at the forefront of
the global marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changing the paradigm of single-use
data collection is a high-risk proposition that requires actionable, proven
practices for effective, ethical data sharing, coupled with sufficient
incentives to both share and use existing data. To that end, this proposal draws
together a team of experts to overcome substantial obstacles in data sharing and
build a framework to guide secondary analysis in engineering education research.
In particular, we will bring together established and emerging scholars to
deliver a tested framework that outlines methodological best practices for
formally and informally sharing data, making data sets public, combining data
from different studies, performing secondary analyses of both qualitative and
quantitative data, publishing and sharing the results, securing the needed
funding, and ensuring that the work is valued in the field. To create this
framework, the research team will hold a series of six workshops over two years.
In the first year, we will bring highly respected, experienced researchers from
institutions across the country together with newer researchers to create the
initial framework for data sharing and data re-use. In the second year, we will
test and refine that framework on two existing data sets. We will solicit data
sets from the wider community, and invite teams of scholars to conduct secondary
analysis on those data sets, in conversation with the original researchers.
Importantly, in selecting both the data sets and the approaches to secondary
analysis, we will emphasize methodological diversity to ensure that the
framework is widely applicable. The outcome will be a framework document that
will comprise a set of tested guidelines for data sharing and secondary analysis
in engineering education research, distributed through both journals and
workshops to promote widespread adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.