* 2039383
* 3D Volumetric Reconfigurable Active Metamaterials (VRaMM)
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* David Ricketts, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 372,626.00

The ability to shape and direct electromagnetic fields provides an important
area of investigation in engineering and science. In imaging, it can be used to
enhance and focus fields, for example in medical imaging or homeland security.
In wireless systems, such as wireless power transfer, it can be used to enhance
efficiency, protect humans and interference from foreign objects. In
communication it can be used to modulate, steer, confine and otherwise
manipulate the propagation of data carrying radio signals. To achieve this,
scientists have often relied on natural materials with the desired electrical
properties (permittivity) and magnetic properties (permeability) needed to shape
the fields as desired. Unfortunately, this limits the available options and
applications for field shaping to existing materials. The ability to
artificially engineer a material with targeted permittivity and permeability
provides an important dimension to the impact and scientific investigations that
can be undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate a new class of
artificial materials called active metamaterials. Active metamaterials have
macroscale properties, such as permittivity and permeability, that can be
engineered through the design of microscale electronic circuits and structures.
Historically these have been passive, which include loss and unwanted modes of
operation. This research will investigate new concepts to design and develop
active metamaterials, that will be able to remove or mitigate loss and unwanted
modes of operation. Past attempts on active metamaterial research faced
significant problems with stability, tunability and scale. A large scale and
stable active metamaterial with gain in the microwave domain has not yet been
demonstrated. This research will investigate circuits and structures for
providing gain compensation, stability, and scalability to 100-1000 of
microscale cells in order to realize a macroscale, active and reconfigurable
artificial material.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will use educational workshops to continue
to introduce microwave engineering to the community and integrate the ideas of
metamaterials and electromagnetics in future workshops. The PI plans to involve
undergraduate student researchers to work alongside with graduate student
researchers on the proposed project. The PIâ€™s outreach efforts also include
guest lectures on mathematics and robotics to local elementary schools and
engagement with national science museums (Franklin Institute, Carnegie Science
Museum, etc.), demonstrating engineering and science concepts to students at all
levels, from elementary to high school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research
the design and development of 3D volumetric reconfigurable metamaterials are
proposed which are based on active metamaterial elements which uses active
collaboration to stabilize, program and reconfigure new electromagnetic
materials. These materials will be fully programable and able to achieve diverse
inhomogeneous and anisotropic properties needed for advanced applications
envisioned by transformational electromagnetics. These new materials will be
realized through new research in solving the major challenges of self- and
inter-cell coupling, stability of large-scale systems and mitigation of unwanted
parasitic modes through active cancellation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.