* 2039226
* IMAGiNE:Dissecting neuronal and systemic responses to interacting environmental stressors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Jonathan Stallrich, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2025
* USD 560,000.00

Exposure to environmental chemicals can be harmful to ecosystems and organisms,
including humans. One type of chemical can produce Reactive Oxygen Species
(ROS), which are forms of oxygen that damage cells. Animals respond to ROS by
escaping and producing molecules that degrade ROS as a defense mechanism.
Laboratory experiments typically focus on analyzing animal responses to a single
chemical, but realistic scenarios involve mixtures of multiple chemicals.
Observed effects due to manipulating a single chemical could be heightened or
silenced when mixtures of chemicals are considered. This project focuses on
understanding how animals respond to mixtures of chemicals that produce ROS
using nematodes as a model organism. Key questions include how different
responses in the organism change with time, and whether the nervous system is
important in generating such responses. Understanding whether different
conditions and chemical mixtures result in different responses also is a key
objective. This work will build understanding about how animals respond to
environmental chemicals in realistic scenarios, which is important to understand
the effects of such exposures on the health of humans and other species. This
project also serves to develop several tools useful for the broader scientific
community, such as tools for measuring escape responses in nematodes and the
generation of defense enzymes. In addition, this project includes training of a
diverse workforce in the biological sciences as it interfaces with data science
and statistics. Finally, the outreach program associated with the project
focuses on engaging with high school students from under-represented groups in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different types of noxious environments can drive the
stress response and act through closely associated genetic pathways. Most
studies focus on exposure to single stressors and measure responses from a
single organismal readout. Yet, realistic environmental exposures consist of
complex mixtures through long periods of time. How multiple stressors interact
to drive the stress response in a time-dependent manner, and how diverse
responses from different cells and tissues orchestrate the organismal response
is not fully understood. A challenge to address these questions is the need to
acquire responses from multiple levels of the organism, and to perform a broad
range of combinatorial exposures that can probe a wide organismal stress
response space. This work uses the model organism C. elegans to answer: 1.
Whether oxidants and other stressors exhibit interacting effects on the stress
response; and 2. Whether oxidant detection plays a role in the organismal
oxidative stress response, and if so, whether neuronal and transcriptional
programs operate in different contexts and time scales. This work determines
whether different response modalities are elicited by different exposures,
involves measurement of responses from multiple biological units (neuron
signaling, transcription factor activity, and antioxidant enzyme gene
expression) with tissue specificity, and includes development of data-driven
models to identify functional relationships between different stress-response
signals in the organism. A large focus of this work is on assessing the
responses to combinations of chemical mixtures, and on studying the dynamics of
the organismal responses. The project goals are achieved through integration of
several complementary approaches, including microfluidics, fluorescence imaging,
optogenetics, neuronal silencing, and statistical
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.