* 2039086
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: A cross-institution Veterans in Green STEM program
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Djuradj Babic, East Los Angeles College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2023
* USD 143,832.00

This project aims to develop a cross-institutional geo/environmental science
diversity leadership program, between East Los Angeles College (ELAC) and The
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), to recruits from the veteran
community. The veteran community is comprised of men and women who, through
their service, have been exposed to a leadership-driven background which often
develops unique skills, experiences, and mindsets. This makes them prime
candidates to create diversity champions in the geo/environmental science
communities. But as with many underrepresented communities in the geoscience,
environmental science, and the STEM community overall, veterans have unique
barriers which must be addressed to facilitate their development as diversity
leaders. In many instances, these individuals are older, have been displaced
from the academic environment for multiple years, have additional life
responsibilities, and in some cases have unique circumstances which add
additional barriers to success in the university environment. These additional
barriers coupled with the rigorous academic curriculum associated with
geo/environmental science fields, and STEM fields in general, have led to
veterans being underrepresented in said disciplines. There has even been a
Federal response, namely the passing of the “Supporting Veterans in STEM Careers
Act – H.R. 425/S153” [1], on Feb 11, 2020, which has directed the NSF to expand
its efforts in increasing veteran inclusion in STEM. By developing a plan to
recruit from and simultaneously address these additional barriers while
developing leaders from a pool of veterans interested in the geo/environmental
science fields, the PIs will support unique champions of diversity; develop
current faculty leadership empathy towards the veteran community to better
inform them how to create expansion efforts to enhance inclusion; and, more
broadly, develop much needed insight into how the principles of the “Supporting
Veterans in STEM Careers Act” can be applied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
exploratory research effort will contribute to the development and application
of new methods that should effectively create diversity champions amongst the
geo/environmental science fields that recruit from the veteran community. The
approach will be cross-institutional, and involve the University of California,
Los Angeles (UCLA) and the Eastern Los Angeles College (ELAC). By examining
these two vastly different academic environments, the PIs will receive feedback
and data that is much broader and can aid in the development of a refined
approach that can be scaled. The project will be implemented withy 6 specific
goals: 1) Recruit veterans with an interest in geo/environmental science STEM
fields, and establish a cross-institutional community to facilitate said
interest among similar peers, 2) Establish a support system, 3) Establish cross-
institutional placement of veterans into geoscience and environmental labs for
research opportunities, 4) Develop diverse leadership through the participation
of members in various leadership engagements and roles, 5) Develop empathy and
understanding of veteran related circumstances to the current geo/environmental
science community, and 6) Record and analyze metrics on retention, performance,
engagement, and development of veterans through the duration of their academic
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.