* 2039244
* 2021 NSF CISE Proposal Development Workshop:  Increasing Participation and Competitiveness of Minority-serving Institutions
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Rocio Chavela Guerra, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 07/31/2023
* USD 450,504.00

The American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) will conduct a Proposal
Development Workshop for teams of researchers working at Minority-serving
Institutions (MSIs). The workshop’s goal is to increase the participation of
MSIs in the National Science Foundation’s (NSF) Computer Science and Engineering
(CISE) core programs. NSF has recruited a three-member steering committee to
host a series of workshops in fall 2020, focusing on individual constituent
groups: (a) historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs), (b) Hispanic
Serving Institutions (HSIs), and (c) Native-serving Institutions. The purpose of
these workshops is threefold: (1) to identify research ideas for NSF CISE core
programs, (2) to form research teams among researchers from MSIs, and (3) to
begin the groundwork on grant proposals. The participant teams that form during
these first three workshops will have the opportunity to apply to participate in
the 2021 ASEE Proposal Development Workshop.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Proposal
Development Workshop will be held in the Washington, DC area in late winter/
early spring 2021. ASEE estimates hosting roughly 96 participants. The Proposal
Development Workshop will increase the capacity of researchers from MSIs to
produce competitive proposals through a program of instruction, practice, and
review. The instruction will include interactive training sessions on how to
convey intellectual merit and broader impact and how to compose budgets and
budget justifications. Practice sessions will include research teams working
together on these key proposal areas. Researchers with track records of success
in implementing NSF CISE core programs will review the proposals and provide
feedback. Following the conclusion of the workshops, participants will provide
feedback through an online survey, distributed after the Workshop ends. ASEE
will produce a summary of the meeting that includes synopses of the plenary
talks, analyses of relevant discussions, and results from the post-event survey.
The Workshop is intended to encourage partnerships among MSIs that support the
submission of competitive research proposals to computer and information science
and engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.