* 2039693
* D-ISN: TRACK 1: Collaborative Research: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Understanding, Modeling, and Disrupting Drug and Counterfeit Illicit Supply Chains
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2025
* Damon McCoy, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 404,780.00

The objective of this five-year Disrupting Operations of Illicit Supply Networks
(D-ISN) study is to understand the operations of illicit actors in the
cyberworld, in both the open web and dark web, and the supply chains and payment
systems for online drug sales, counterfeit pharmaceuticals, and goods, including
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE). It seeks to catalyze game-changing
technological innovations by creating tools and supply chain models to improve
discovery and traceability of illicitly sourced products and identify effective
disruption strategies. These supply chains will be studied from source to
delivery through the money laundering of profits. The results will be informed
by datasets drawn from open and dark websites and from data made available by
industrial collaborators. The project will advance our national ability to
counter malicious activities in the cyberworld and social media innovative
approaches using mathematical models, supply chain analytics and computer
science for the detection and disruption of drug and counterfeit supply chains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a multidisciplinary set of methods which
include data analysis, mathematical modeling, and ethnographic approaches to
advance our understanding of online drug and counterfeit supply chains and how
to disrupt them. Specially, this project will address three major goals in
combating drug and counterfeit illicit supply chains: (1) understanding and
detecting the illicit trade patterns quantitatively and qualitatively by using
data from the payment processing, hosting, underground communications and court
cases; (2) constructing a description of the supply chain that can then be
modeled using appropriate techniques such as non-cooperative game theory
framework to study different disruption strategies; and (3) studying the
possibility of different disruption strategies that could be implemented by
government, corporate and multilateral actors. The project will integrate
advanced automated data collection and analysis tools, and sociological analysis
of the illicit trafficking networks, and adversarial game theory frameworks. The
project team's collaboration with industry and discussions with law enforcement
agencies will facilitate an interactive process that can fine-tune disruption
techniques and suggest pragmatic real-world implementation strategies and policy
recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.