* 2039762
* CCSS: Signal Processing for Single-Photon Detectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Vivek Goyal, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 06/30/2024
* USD 380,000.00

Light has a fundamental smallest quantity - a photon - that is very far from
everyday human experience. For example, the number of photons collected by the
camera in a mobile phone to form a typical photograph is in the trillions.
Nevertheless, there are some increasingly common devices that rely on measuring
light down to the smallest possible amounts. These are devices that perform
"single-photon detection" (SPD). SPD is used in combination with pulsed lasers
in the 3D imaging systems of self-driving cars, and it is used to enable
augmented reality in devices like the iPad Pro. Many types of scientific imaging
also use SPD to see individual molecules, track proteins, or determine chemical
concentrations through spectroscopy. Devices for SPD have complicated behavior
that is often modeled naively. Using more detailed modeling, this project will
develop data processing methods to use with SPD to improve various
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though SPD is on the verge of everyday use, signal
processing for SPD has lagged far behind. Both system design and device design
are guided by trade-offs, and those tradeoffs depend greatly on the
sophistication of the data processing. Therefore, novel signal processing will
not only improve applications that use SPD, it will also influence hardware
designs. Devices with single-photon sensitivity suffer a limitation by which
each detection event causes a non-zero "dead time" during which the system is
unable to register incident particles. Since signal processing methods to
mitigate dead time effects are few and not well known, it is customary to
carefully avoid dead time effects by operating systems such that photons very
rarely arrive during dead times. While this indeed makes the effect of dead time
negligible, one may naturally ask whether this is a good practice. Preliminary
results suggest that allowing appreciable dead time effects and compensating for
them can provide dramatic improvements in lidar. A project focus is to improve
and exploit modeling of dead time effects to create the most informative
measurements for lidar and other applications. In arrays for SPD, maintaining
low crosstalk is a major barrier to increasing fill factor and thus increasing
detection efficiency. Another project focus is to model and mitigate crosstalk,
starting with a deconvolution approach and progressing to more sophisticated
modeling of coupled Poisson processes. With these novel models and methods, the
project will develop several imaging innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.