* 2039771
* D-ISN: TRACK 1: Supply Chain Analysis to Thwart Illegal Logging: Machine Learning-based Monitoring and Strategic Network Inspection
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Dara Entekhabi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Disrupting Operations of Illicit Supply Networks (D-ISN) award will
contribute to the Nation's security by investigating strategies for disrupting
illicit supply networks, with specific focus on illegal logging. Illegal logging
refers to breaking local or international laws at any point along the supply
chain of timber, including illegal activities such as illegal harvesting or
over-logging at export nodes, misreporting of raw or processed product volume at
intermediate nodes, and misclassification of origin or species of timber at
import nodes. Despite several existing laws to combat illegal logging, these
activities continue to thrive at both local and global scale. Illegal logging
has been implicated as a leading cause of the destruction of major forest
ecosystems that play a significant role in carbon sequestration and in
supporting biodiversity. The effectiveness of laws and mechanisms for combating
illegal logging is limited by poor understanding of where, how much, and what
type of timber is harvested and where it goes in the global trade of wood
products. To address this systemic challenge, the project will develop
quantitative models and methods to monitor the rates of harvest and conduct
strategic inspection to detect illegally harvested or traded timber in the
global supply chain. The project will demonstrate how current monitoring and
inspection technology can be leveraged to: (1) quantify the flow of illegal
timber in the global supply chain; and (2) improve the compliance with and
enforcement of laws for legal trade of timber. The project will train graduate
students to work at the interface of operations research and environment
sustainability and will develop methods that can contribute to further advance
the sustainable development policies in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops spatiotemporal network models and
analysis tools to identify and thwart the flow of illegal timber throughout the
global supply chain. The project will investigate: (i) estimation of illegal
timber harvest rates in both protected and concession forest regions based on
remote sensing data, botanical characteristics, and ecology of timber species;
(ii) supply chain network analysis to evaluate the movement of illegal timber
and estimate illegal trade volume; (iii) strategic network inspection to improve
the detection of fraud and increase the forensic capacity for wood
identification at critical network locations. The project will build on advances
in machine learning, remote sensing, network optimization, and game theory. The
datasets and models from this project will be useful to multiple communities:
agencies responsible for tracking movement of illegal timber, researchers
seeking to advance scientific methods for analysis and certification of natural
resources supply chains, and ecologists interested in using machine learning to
assess the impact of human-induced changes on forest
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.