* 2039788
* Collaborative Research:  Organosulfate Multiphase Chemistry and Physicochemcal Properties--Oxidation and Sulfate Recycling in Aerosols and Cloud Droplets
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Jason Surratt, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/29/2024
* USD 474,387.00

This project addresses a gap in the understanding of mechanistic pathways that
lead to the formation of particulate organosulfates in the atmosphere.
Laboratory studies will be conducted to examine the fate of gaseous isoprene
epoxydiols and to study how the products of these reactions might alter the
properties of atmospheric aerosol. The results of these studies will help to
improve predictions of the formation of secondary organic aerosol in both air
quality and climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project
include the study of: (1) heterogeneous hydroxyl radical (OH) oxidation of
isoprene epoxydiol- (IEPOX) derived low-volatility particulate organosulfates
(OSs) to understand how relative humidity (RH), pre-existing aerosol composition
(including pH), and OH exposure alter daytime OS composition and physicochemical
properties; (2) heterogeneous nitrate (NO3) oxidation of IEPOX-derived OSs to
understand how RH, pre-existing aerosol composition (including pH), and NO3
exposure alter nighttime OS composition and physicochemical properties; and (3)
cloudwater oxidation experiments to understand how particulate IEPOX-derived OSs
recycle inorganic sulfate to yield multifunctional OSs, and thus aqueous
secondary organic aerosol (SOA) upon cloud droplet
evaporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes outreach efforts to high
school students through the NSF-funded Youth Engaging in the Science of
Resilience Program and the NIH-funded 21st Century Environmental Health Scholars
Program at the University of North Carolina and through the Detroit Research
Internship and Summer Experience (D- RISE) program at the University of
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.