* 2039975
* D-ISN: TRACK 1: Illicit Drug Trafficking Networks: Behavioral Responses to Interdiction
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Kevin Curtin, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 746,361.00

This Disrupting Operations of Illicit Supply Networks (D-ISN) project promotes
scientific understanding of illicit supply networks by providing insight into
the ways Central American cocaine trafficking networks adapt to US-led
counterdrug interdiction operations attempting to disrupt them. By offering an
interdisciplinary understanding of the environment in which interdiction forces
operate in the Central American transit zone between South American sources and
U.S. markets, this research ascertains the structure and function of cocaine
supply networks, as well as how they transform in response to interdiction
efforts. This project engages with U.S. government agencies and military
organizations charged with disrupting these illicit supply networks, and it
contributes to national and hemispheric security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates the adaptive behaviors of cocaine trafficking networks in
response to varied interdiction strategies within the transit zone of Central
America and associated maritime areas. The research leverages data science
analytical techniques and GIS systems in combination with a modeling approach
that identifies traffickersâ€™ behavioral tendencies for relocating existing
trafficking routes, creating new routes, and/or shifting cocaine conveyance
methods in response to interdiction operations. In doing so, this project
establishes convergence among operations engineering, geographic, data science,
and criminological perspectives, leading to comparative analyses of the dynamic
and adaptive interactions between illicit supply networks and law enforcement
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.