* 2039612
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Safeguarding STEM Education and Scientific Knowledge in the Age of Hyper-Realistic Data Generated Using Artificial Intelligence
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Christopher Doss, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,923.00

The emergence of artificial intelligence (AI) systems that can create hyper-
realistic data (e.g., images of human faces or network traffic data) presents
challenges both to people and computers trying to determine what is authentic
and what is fake. These advances pose both a threat and an opportunity for STEM
learners and cybersecurity networks. On one hand, the ability of AI to generate
hyper-realistic data has the potential to increase students’ interest in AI,
STEM, and cybersecurity. On the other hand, AI-generated data, without robust
cybersecurity guarantees, have the potential to reduce the veracity of knowledge
that is publicly available on-line. This project proposes to conduct a series of
studies where learners are presented with AI-generated STEM content and asked to
determine its authenticity. The project seeks to discover whether differences
exist in the level of vulnerabilities across diverse populations (K-12, higher
education, and the adult workforce). The project will lay the foundation for a
deeper understanding of the interconnectedness between STEM education materials
and cybersecurity networks, and the commonalities that they face when challenged
with the presence of hyper-realistic AI-generated data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF EAGER project brings together researchers from
K-12 (Challenger Center), higher education (Carnegie Mellon University), and the
workforce (RAND Corporation) to investigate risks posed to the free flow of STEM
education materials and computer network traffic data in the age of hyper-
realistic AI-generated data. Participants engaged in the study will be randomly
shown fake STEM content (i.e., STEM content that is generated by Generative
Neural Networks and has been modified to include misinformation) vs. STEM
content that is authentic in its communication of STEM information . Each
participant will be asked to classify whether the STEM content being displayed
is fake or authentic. Additional questions will probe how specific
characteristics of the STEM content displayed to participants serve as
indicators of authenticity by randomly assigning participants versions of the
STEM content that contain or omit those characteristics. The study of different
learner populations (K-12, higher education, and the adult workforce) will
elucidate the variability that exists amongst learners’ ability to decipher
factual education material from AI-altered STEM education material, given the
age and experience level of different learner populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by a special initiative of the
Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to foster new, previously
unexplored, collaborations between the fields of cybersecurity, artificial
intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.