* 2039324
* Sustaining Flybase: The Drosophila genomic and genetic database
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2025
* Norbert Perrimon, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 03/31/2025
* USD 974,115.00

FlyBase is a bioinformatics resource to capture, organize and present core
information on Drosophila (fly) genomics and genetics, both from literature and
large-scale data generation projects. FlyBase provides an openly accessible
centralized resource for Drosophila genetic and genomic data to enable
researchers and educators worldwide both in the Drosophila community and broader
biomedical sciences community to further their research. Drosophila is one of
the premier model organisms and provides cost-effective help in elucidating the
basic tenets of genetic and developmental mechanisms. FlyBase has three main
goals. First, it curates literature and reagents relevant to Drosophila
research, so that researchers can continue to rely on FlyBase to find the latest
innovations in the field. FlyBase prioritizes curation of data sets relevant to
gene expression, cellular functions, signaling pathways, and results relevant to
human biology, and displays the information in an intuitive, integrated, readily
searchable format. Secondly, it strives to be of value to the broader genetics
and population genetics communities, by curating and integrating relevant data
sets, and developing tools that enable better access to this wealth of data.
Finally, it seeks to develop and integrate tools to expand it's utility. FlyBase
has a long history of very successfully serving the scientific community in this
capacity. FlyBase works closely with other Model Organism Databases (MODs) to
integrate data sets and develop tools to enable cross-species analyses. NSF
funding allows FlyBase to maintain its three main
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities essential to the operation of
FlyBase include: Automated triaging pipeline; Full genetic curation with
emphasis on genome feature curation and physical interaction curation; Human
disease model curation; Allele-based curation of disease models based on the
Disease Ontology; Gene Group curation; Curation of datasets deemed to be of
highest general interest to the FlyBase user community; Import of graphical
abstracts in FlyBase references; Identification of new lncRNAs, anti-sense
lncRNAs and smORFs; Incorporation of available transcription start site data
into FlyBase; Addition of new anatomy terms; Review and improvement of
phenotypic class ontologies; Development of database modules for gene groups and
human disease models; Annotation of all Drosophila cell types and curation of
scRNAseq data sets; Update of the genomic sequences of all Drosophila Genetic
Reference Panel (DGRP) strains; Expansion of a Pathway page resource. To
facilitate integrative analyses and approaches FlyBase continues to expand its
utility as a platform by integrating and displaying large-scale studies,
transcriptomics and proteomics data sets. In addition, FlyBase improves access
and display of tools available within the community, and incorporates the most
useful data sets and tools for visualizing complex data sets to enable more
researchers to take a more global approach to their genetic research. NSF
funding allows for continued coordination with the ongoing operation and
maintenance of the existing infrastructure to enable discovery in the biological
sciences by supporting the computational database pipeline infrastructure of
FlyBase data. FlyBase will maintain and further develop the central database
that houses all FlyBase data; manage the incorporation of additional curated or
large-scale data into the database; produce weekly internal reports and bi-
monthly outputs that are transformed into the updates to the public FlyBase
servers; work closely with NCBI to incorporate genome annotation-related data
into FlyBase and to submit periodic whole genome annotation updates to GenBank.
Collectively, these activities maximize the impact of essential Drosophila
research on discovery and translation. Through their role in carrying out these
missions, FlyBase will continue to help Drosophila research advance as quickly
as possible for the ultimate benefit of various scientific communities via
http://flybase.org&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.