* 2039610
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Dynamic Adaptive Machine Learning for Teaching Hardware Security (DYNAMITES)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jeyavijayan Rajendran, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 08/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Cybersecurity is key to safeguarding societal wellbeing in the present digital
era. As threats at the hardware level become more prevalent, skills and
knowledge for hardware security become more crucial for cybersecurity
professionals. In addition, the rise of artificial intelligence (AI) promises to
rapidly evolve the threat landscape. To prepare the next-generation
cybersecurity workforce, students need opportunities to hone their skills on a
variety of different hardware security problems. Current curriculum on hardware
security focuses on theory and a small number of hand-crafted exercises, thus
providing limited opportunity to apply learning to evolving scenarios. To
address these drawbacks, this project intertwines AI and hardware security to
develop new tools for preparing students to be creative and flexible, and
ultimately, better prepared for dealing with newly emerging hardware security
threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve the state-of-the-art in hardware
security and cybersecurity education, this project is seeking new insights at
uncharted intersections of hardware security and AI-based decision making. The
project will investigate how to enable students to attack and defend hardware by
sparring against DYNAMITES, which is a dynamic adaptive machine learning tool
for teaching hardware security. The project will also examine hardware security
pedagogy to understand the impact of the tool in shaping students’ cognitive
processes. The major goal is to develop and evaluate DYNAMITES through research
in three directions: (1) investigating and adapting techniques to allow AI to
understand hardware, (2) exploring how AI can be used to produce new problems
intelligently, and (3) exploring how AI in the learning environment affects the
"security mindset" in students. These findings will allow hardware security
education to scale, reducing the barrier to entry and arming future
professionals with the skills needed to protect critical systems, as well as
jump-starting innovations in automated, scalable scanning and patching of
hardware vulnerabilities. The hardware attack/defense artifacts emerging from
this project will be released for use in teaching and research, and the project
team will disseminate tools/techniques that emerge from this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by a special initiative
of the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to foster new,
previously unexplored, collaborations between the fields of cybersecurity,
artificial intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.