* 2039425
* Shape-Morphing Living Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Taylor Ware, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 419,856.00

Designing Living-Synthetic, Shape-Morphing Composites &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program
in the Division of Materials Research, to the University of Texas at Dallas,
seeks to design and characterize shape-changing composites comprised of both
living cells and non-living materials. Single-celled organisms sense and respond
to very small changes in their surroundings, but it is difficult to use these
organisms as materials in engineering applications. By comparison, most
synthetic materials do not respond to their environment or only respond to very
large changes, but the properties of these materials can be readily controlled.
This research effort will focus on the synthesis, 3D printing, and
characterization of hybrid materials that combine the advantages of both living
and non-living components. Specifically, Baker's yeast will be embedded in a
hydrogel, a soft material largely comprised of water. The growth of these cells
causes the entire material to change in shape. By controlling the genes of the
yeast, materials can be built to change shape and produce specific biomolecules
after detecting specific, small changes in the environment. These materials may
be used for simple sensors capable of detecting and reporting changes in bodily
fluids or in the environment. The behavior of these new materials could also
enable drug-delivery devices that sense disease states in the gut and respond by
delivering treatment to the area. This research will also create opportunities
for K-12 students to learn about topics in both biology and materials science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
the proposed work is to harness the controlled proliferation of microorganisms
to create synthetic-living hydrogels capable of programmable shape change.
Specifically, Saccharomyces cerevisiae will be embedded in acrylamide hydrogels,
and the proliferation of these cells will induce shape change in the composite.
The primary advantage of this approach, as compared to engineering purely
synthetic, responsive materials, is that genetic engineering and material
formulation can be used to program the macroscopic composite response to
predetermined and incredibly specific stimuli. This work consists of four
research tasks: 1) Quantify local and global mechanical deformation during
proliferation-induced shape change of the composite and measure the effects of
hydrogel mechanical properties on growth, 2) 3D print synthetic-living
composites and measure the effects of geometry and porosity on composite growth,
3) Elucidate the fundamental relationship between dose and response and
elucidate the specificity of living composites to metabolites, proteins, and
light as stimuli that evoke shape change, and 4) Design hydrogel matrices that
respond controllably to enzymes produced by the yeast, enabling feedback control
of shape change. The effect of metabolites, stimuli, and proteins produced by
the yeast on growth throughout the composite will be measured, thus providing
understanding of the fundamental relationships that govern living materials.
This work will address a critical need for materials that sense highly specific
biochemical or weak physical cues and then respond in a controlled manner. These
materials will impact areas of critical national need, including drug-delivery
strategies that could be used in the gut and simple biochemical sensors.
Research activities will be coupled to outreach efforts for K-12 students on
topics including genetics, hydrogels, and yeast. These efforts will be aimed at
both increasing participation of underrepresented groups in science careers and
dissemination of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.