* 2039949
* D-ISN: TRACK 2: Building a Community to Use Intelligence from Online Underground Markets
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Robert Harrison, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 249,966.00

Illicit commerce, in both conventional markets and online darknet markets,
relies on a supply chain in much the same way as licit commerce. The supply
chain coordinates the production, sales, information and capital flows that
define the markets. However, while extensive research attention has been devoted
to understanding the illicit supply chains of drugs, arms, and counterfeit
commodities, no previous study has empirically investigated the interactions
between different actors on the illicit supply chain of virtual goods, and the
flexibility and adaptability of this supply chain to different events like law
enforcement interventions, health crises, and rival groupâ€™s efforts. Moreover,
although there are strong reasons to believe that virtual goods such as credit
cards and individual personal identifiers may play an important role in the
production of fake documents, previous research has not paid extensive attention
to identification of potential overlap of these two related supply chains. This
Disrupting Operations of Illicit Supply Networks (D-ISN) planning grant seeks to
leverage the team's documented expertise in the flow of information, banking,
data gathering and analysis, and theoretical perspectives drawn from several
scientific disciplines (for example, criminology, political science, and
economics) to generate a better understanding of the illicit supply chains of
virtual goods, counterfeit money and fake documents, the interaction between
them, and the junctions in which disruptive efforts should be implemented in
effort to dismantle these networks. This planning project will explore the
effectiveness of disruptive strategies in impacting the activities of different
actors along the supply chains empirically in the field, and will support the
development of machine learning models and tools that support the potential
traceability of actors along the two supply chains. Moreover, the project will
generate low-cost but powerful tools for academic, industry, and law enforcement
agencies to counter the efforts of illicit supply chains of online virtual
goods, counterfeit money and fake documents actors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will achieve its goals by building a local research community that
includes members of academia, industry, and law enforcement who possess a unique
combination of expertise and which will result in effective, ethical, and legal
interventions in the criminal markets. The team will first host working group
meetings and conferences. Based on the outcomes of these meetings, the team will
design and deploy pilot studies to work on the development of appropriate tools
for collecting and analyzing data from the field. Further meetings and workgroup
meetings will be used to refine the tools and their implementation. The data
collected will allow better understanding the online and offline dimension of
the supply chain supporting the underground markets of virtual products (for
example credit cards, online identities), counterfeit currency and fraudulent
documents. These efforts should result in empirical evidence, expert insights
and solid institutional relationships which could support the development of a
future high impact project which is consistent with the D-ISN
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.