* 2039637
* EAGER: SaTC-EDU: A transdisciplinary program for pre-college youth to prepare the future workforce for FATE in AI
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Matthew A. Cannady, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 10/31/2021
* USD 299,987.00

The techniques and algorithms associated with artificial intelligence (AI) are
simultaneously an outstanding benefit and a looming threat to cybersecurity. AI
can aid in the detection of malicious attacks but can also contribute to the
efficacy of such attacks. As AI-enabled systems become embedded in our most
critical social institutions, the manipulation of their intended behavior is a
serious threat to many fundamental rights. The challenge is not only technical,
but also apparent in interactions across physical, social, and technological
spheres. In order to respond to these challenges, it is critical to establish
transdisciplinary approaches that bring together the fields of AI,
cybersecurity, and social sciences to effectively understand and apply fairness,
accountability, transparency, and ethics (FATE) principles in AI. To support
this goal, this project will develop a novel educational approach called
TechHive: AI. The approach will focus on recruiting teens from marginalized
communities and providing them with training in how to address AI cybersecurity
threats in ways that adhere to the FATE principles. The project’s focus ensures
that students will receive the necessary preparation to pursue career pathways
in AI and cybersecurity. In addition, it will support the development of an
informed public capable of understanding the privacy, confidentiality, ethics,
safety, and security implications of AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
transdisciplinary project team will develop a set of design principles and
processes to support learning at the intersection of AI, cybersecurity, and
FATE. Specific deliverables will include: (1) a transdisciplinary curricular
model for teaching cybersecurity and AI; (2) guidelines for the development of
effective online and hybrid learning models that integrate STEM and social
science curricula with FATE principles in cybersecurity and AI; and (3) a
research report that will detail the effectiveness of this model to support high
schoolers’ development of workforce skills. In addition, the project aims to
address the following research questions: (1) Is there increased awareness
and/or value of FATE principles among participating students? (2) Do students
have increased awareness of the effects of technology on society and development
of skills to design and deploy technology in ways that maximize societal
benefit? (3) What design principles and processes best promote learning at the
intersection of AI, cybersecurity, and FATE principles, especially among high
schoolers within a hybrid/online instructional context? The design principles
and processes produced through this collaborative effort will support the
development of a knowledge base of best practices in integrating technical
education with ethical training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
by a special initiative of the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program
to foster new, previously unexplored, collaborations between the fields of
cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns
with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the
National Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social
and economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.