* 2039488
* EAGER: DEIBA STARS (Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, Belonging, and Accessibility Skill-building and Transfer in the Atmospheric and Related Sciences)
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Melissa Burt, American Meteorological Society
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 03/31/2024
* USD 257,272.00

This project meets the goals of the GOLD-EN EAGER framework by providing a
mechanism to identify, recruit, promote, and support a growing cohort of
diversity leaders. It will empower those leaders by developing their skill to
champion diversity and by inserting them into the extensive volunteer structure
of the American Meteorological Society (AMS). That volunteer structure reaches
across the academic, government, and private sectors. The project will involve
experts in diversity, equity, and inclusion training to expand and hone the
DEIBA STARS (Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, Belonging, and Accessibility Skill-
building and Transfer in the Atmospheric and Related Sciences) curriculum needed
for professional development to produce successful diversity leaders. It will
also offer a mechanism to apply that curriculum to early career members of the
community and expand their impact across the breadth of the community as those
individuals move into leadership roles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed DEIBA
STARS project will work with DEIBA experts to hone curricula for use in expanded
Early Career Leadership Academy (ECLA) programing. It will serve early career
professionals by providing pathways to exercise their new leadership skills
through volunteer service, while also building their professional networks in
programs that align with their expertise and career goals. It also engages
individuals trained in DEIBA who have the skills to promote positive cultural
change in the AMS volunteer structure in addition to other forms of engagement
they can exercise at their home organizations. Critically, this approach will
also help retain members of historically underrepresented groups by enhancing
their peer networks, which can serve as a strong support system, and by
providing these individuals with new opportunities for professional satisfaction
and career advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.