* 2039062
* CPS: Medium: Correct-by-Construction Controller Synthesis using Gaussian Process Transfer Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Eric Frew, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project proposes a novel and rigorous methodology for the design of
embedded control software for safety-critical cyber-physical systems (CPS) with
complex and possibly unknown dynamics by embracing ideas from control theory,
formal verification in computer science, and Gaussian processes (GPs) from
machine learning. Embedded control software forms the main core of autonomous
transportation, traffic networks, power networks, aerospace systems, and health
and assisted living. These applications are examples of CPS, wherein software
components interact tightly with physical systems with complex dynamics. Recent
technological advances in sensing, memory, and communication technology offer
unprecedented opportunities for ubiquitously collecting data at high details and
large scales for CPS. Utilization of data at these scales poses major challenges
for a rigorous analysis and design of CPS, particularly in view of the
additional inherent uncertainty that data-driven control signals introduce to
systems behavior. In fact, this effect has not been well understood to this
date, primarily due to the missing link between data analytic techniques in
machine learning and the underlying physics of dynamical systems in a rigorous
system design. In addition, most of the existing results proposed in the
literature on the formal verification or synthesis of CPS are model-based,
whereas in many applications, a model may not be always available or may be too
complex for current techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates
a novel correct-by-construction controller synthesis scheme for CPS with complex
and possibly unknown dynamics by embracing ideas from the GPs. Particularly,
given temporal logic requirements (e.g. those expressed as linear temporal logic
formula or by omega-regular languages) for the CPS, they will be decomposed to
simpler reachability tasks based on the types of automata representing those
properties. Then, the project develops an approach to solve those simpler tasks
by computing so-called control barrier functions together with their
corresponding hybrid controllers using regressed GPs of the unknown CPS. In
addition, the investigators develop an adaptive transfer learning approach that
leverages previously learned GPs and emploies them as sources of information in
learning new ones especially when limited training data are available. The
project develops a scheme on either transferring the controllers designed for
old GPs to new ones or safely modifying them on the fly while formally
guaranteeing their correctness for the new GPs. The algorithms are implemented
into design software tools and evaluated on actual CPS platforms, namely,
autonomous underwater vehicles and aerial robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.