* 2039963
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling distributed deformation during early-stage rifting in the Western and Southwestern   African Rifts
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Cynthia Ebinger, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2025
* USD 111,006.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rifting, which leads to the
breakup of continents and the formation of new ocean basins, is one of the
fundamental processes in plate tectonics. East Africa is the prime example of
present-day continental rifting. While a number of studies have yielded
important insights in the older, more developed rifts in northern East Africa,
there are major gaps in our knowledge of how rifting begins and develops due to
sparse data in the younger Western and Southwestern rift systems. In particular,
there is significant uncertainty about how far ground deformation related to
early-stage rifting extends across the region and to what extent deformation may
occur without earthquakes. This project will use a combination of ground
deformation data from GNSS/GPS data, Synthetic Aperture Radar Interferometry
(InSAR), and permanent seismometers to measure and investigate the kinematics of
early-stage rifting across the Western and Southwestern rifts. Results will
improve our understanding of fundamental tectonic processes and earthquake
hazard estimates in the region. The project will provide student research
opportunities at both the undergraduate and graduate levels, develop
international research collaborations, and contribute to capacity building in
science and technology through outreach in secondary schools in the USA and
Africa and providing opportunities in training in data processing and analysis
through in-country workshops and visits to US research
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to test
existing models of how rifting is distributed across uplifted and faulted areas
of Central Africa surrounding the Western and Southwestern segments of the East
African Rift and determine what component of the active rifting is aseismic. To
achieve this goal, geodetic measurements, including campaign and continuous GNSS
and InSAR, in this under-studied area will be increased. This will provide
improved constraints on the tectonic strain field across multiple temporal and
spatial scales. Catalogue and regional seismic source data will be combined and
then Kostrov summation comparisons of seismic and geodetic observations across
the region will be performed in order to evaluate the amount and spatial
variation in aseismic deformation and to constrain lithospheric properties. The
new geodetic and seismic results will be used to generate an improved model of
the kinematics of deformation in the region that is consistent with other
geological and geophysical data and can be used to evaluate current models of
strain localization in cold, strong lithosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.