* 2039850
* Collaborative Research: BEE: Impacts of abiotic environment, pathogen resistance and Pre-Columbian human management on Neotropical canopy palm abundances
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Miles Silman, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 03/31/2024
* USD 295,471.00

In tropical rainforests, local abundances of closely related tree species can
vary by several orders of magnitude, providing a compelling context in which to
revisit a core theme in ecology: why is it that some species are extremely
common, while others are rare? This project seeks to answer this question in
South American canopy palm trees, a diverse group that includes several
geographically widespread species that vary in degree of usefulness to humans
and in patterns of abundance. The research seeks to quantify the relative and
combined influences of ecological, evolutionary, and anthropogenic processes on
palm abundances. The research is expected to advance scientific knowledge by
integrating perspectives from separate disciplines to achieve a more synthetic
understanding of how human, ecological, and evolutionary impacts interact to
shape biotic systems. The project has important societal and economic
implications because palms provide food, income, and material for basic needs
for millions of humans around the globe. Educational films and teaching modules
produced during the project are expected to be used by thousands of high school
and college students in the United States. Graduate and undergraduate students,
post-doctoral fellows, and high school teachers will receive
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research employs a multi-scale sampling
design to link local ecological and microevolutionary processes to landscape
patterns of abundance to test two major hypotheses: 1) that effective defenses
via resistance genes (R genes) give common species the ability to escape
negative density dependence, and 2) that human management over the past several
millennia has promoted the abundances of useful species. This is achieved by
combining contemporary genomic analysis and aerial imaging and machine learning
capable of identifying and mapping individual canopy trees over vast areas.
Regular censuses provide information on survival of adults and seedlings of
focal species in relation to local abundances, and a nursery experiment will
further explore relationships between R gene diversity and seedling survival.
The project also tests potential impacts of Pre-Columbian humans on contemporary
tree populations using paleo-ecological sampling of soil cores, including
charcoal and phytolith sampling, while accounting for abiotic environment. This
approach is expected to shed light on the relative and combined impacts of
negative density dependence, abiotic environment, and Pre-Columbian human
management, all thought to influence abundance in some way but typically treated
in isolation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.