* 2039172
* RAPID: SaTC: Information Privacy Tensions and Decisions in Families during COVID-19.
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* France Belanger, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 199,849.00

COVID-19 has thrown the world into a global health crisis and the largest
economic downturn since the great depression. A key factor that allows economies
to open is a contact tracing program consisting of apps on smartphones that know
who people have been in contact with and can quickly notify those who have been
near someone with a positive COVID-19 result. For contact tracing to work, a
significant portion of the community must use the apps, raising privacy
concerns. Tensions can arise in families as each member must decide whether to
allow contact tracing on their smartphone. Any individual decision can affect
the entire household. For example, if families go to dinner together and one
member has contact tracing turned on, the entire family is functionally traced,
leading to family disagreements about the acceptance of contact tracing. The
objective of this research is to understand how these within-family tensions on
privacy affect contact tracing choices and suggest
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to develop a family-level
privacy process model that explains the series of activities and events that
lead to a familial decision about privacy settings and use of contact tracing.
The research uses a longitudinal qualitative and quantitative survey of parent-
teen dyads at two points in time in different regions with both mandatory and
volitional use of contact tracing. The research examines how decisions regarding
usage of contact tracing technologies are negotiated within households and how
to foster contact tracing acceptance within families. By identifying the
processes and barriers to contact tracing acceptance, this research facilitates
the domino effect of family-level adoption. Because each family’s identity
extends beyond their household, this cascading effect can increase adoption to
the household’s broader social networks. By understanding and reducing barriers
to adoption within a family, we will be able to help obtain the critical mass of
users necessary for successfully keeping COVID-19 infections at a manageable
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.