* 2039932
* Data CI Pilot: NCAR and NEON Cyberinfrastructure Collaborations to Enable Convergence Research Linking the Atmospheric and Biological Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Gordon Bonan, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 10/31/2022
* USD 599,996.00

Numerical models of weather and climate such as those developed at the National
Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) are essential research tools to advance
atmospheric science. At the same time, the National Ecological Observatory
Network (NEON) provides long-term, comprehensive data on the state of the
terrestrial ecosystem at sites distributed across the US. Ecologists use these
data to develop a predictive understanding of ecosystems at large spatial
scales. NCAR models are highly complementary to NEON data products and can
inform data quality, the types of data to collect, and the frequency of data
collection. As these models have matured, the role of terrestrial ecosystems in
climate processes has come to the forefront. To maximize the benefits to
atmospheric science and ecology, this project will deliver new
cyberinfrastructure tools to bring together NEON observational data products and
NCAR modeling capabilities. As a result, scientific discovery and innovation
will be advanced at the confluence of the geosciences and biological sciences,
through more seamless and rapid integration of NCAR models and NEON
observations, and the ability to provide model outputs to NEON for use by the
ecological community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon NCAR’s
modeling of the land surface and its terrestrial ecosystems and NEON's
observations and monitoring of terrestrial ecosystems to develop synergies
between two heretofore independent research communities. We will link NCAR’s
modeling capabilities in terms of the Community Earth System Model (CESM) and
its Community Land Model (CLM) with NEON's measurement network through two
cyberinfrastructure activities: First, we will create a portable containerized
computing environment that allows university researchers to use and
scientifically develop the model in conjunction with NEON data, with seamless
transition across a variety of computational platforms from high performance
supercomputers to laptops to cloud computing. The container image will be
further enhanced by the addition of a built-in JupyterLab environment for
visualization and analysis, and a collection of common notebooks that provide
in-line examples and documentation of analysis methods, model configurations,
and additional data transformations. The modeling system will be enhanced with
automated data acquisition and preprocessing for standard configurations,
enabling scientists to focus on the research rather than the technical details.
Second, we will develop an automated operational analysis mode to allow for
near-real time modeling of terrestrial ecosystems across the NEON network, both
to verify model simulations and to supplement NEON measurements with model
output, as well as validate NEON input data. We will use a cloud-based version
of CESM/CLM in conjunction with cyberinfrastructure that monitors NEON outputs
to spin up a configurable set of analysis runs whenever new data are available.
The operational analysis will include site-specific runs focused on NEON
measurement locations, giving regular feedback to modeling and observational
teams, improving the quality of both. The ability to ingest near real time data
is a novel capability, in contrast with standard datasets for model evaluation
that are typically several years old.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.