* 2039014
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: A CPS approach to tumor immunomodulation; sensing, analysis, and control to prime tumors to immunotherapy
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Bala Natarajan, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Cancer remains the second leading cause of death in the US. Immunotherapy is a
cancer treatment that aims to help the body’s immune system fight cancer. While
excellent responses have been observed for a large number of patients with
varying disease types, a considerably larger number of patients have received
little to no benefit from immunotherapy. This varied outcome has been attributed
to the highly heterogeneous physical and physiological profile within and around
tumors that suppress the immune system’s response. Various physical, chemical,
and biological treatment modalities are under investigation for altering the
tumor environment from a state where immune effects are suppressed, to one
supportive of an anti-tumor immune response. However, these approaches are
hampered by the lack of techniques for monitoring the tumor state in response to
candidate treatments. Technologies that enable continuous monitoring of the
tumor’s immune state, and thereby guide precise delivery of interventions to
drive tumors to an immunostimulatory state, offer the promise of unlocking the
full potential of immunotherapies. A cyber-physical systems (CPS) perspective is
uniquely suited to addressing this challenge, treating the tumor as an “in body
CPS” with the development of sensors and analytical techniques for longitudinal
assessment of the tumor, coupled with co-located methods for delivering
physical/chemical treatments for modulating the environment within the tumor
towards an immunostimulatory state. If successfully developed and translated,
the CPS framework for immunomodulation investigated in this project may
ultimately guide selection and optimal delivery of priming interventions prior
to immunotherapy delivery, determine when priming interventions have
successfully modulated the tumor to an immunogenically favorable state, and for
assessing treatment response. The investigator team will develop a graduate-
level course on biomedical cyber-physical systems along with modules on
implantable biomedical sensors for undergraduate courses. Further, this project
will provide summer research opportunities for students from under-represented
groups via the Pathways to STEM program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate a CPS framework for immunomodulation of the tumor microenvironment
(TME), integrating: (1) a unique 3D micro-array sensor and treatment (MIST)
device consisting of a sensing/actuation platform for longitudinal sensing and
control of physical and physiological parameters within the TME; (2) novel
model-informed machine learning techniques for determining tumor immune state
from TME physical/physiologic characteristics; and (3) model-guided therapy via
the MIST device for driving the TME to an immunostimulatory state. Advanced 3D
fabrication technology will provide implantable micromachined multimodal sensing
devices to enable longitudinal in vivo sensing of TME parameters such as tissue
oxygenation, pH, pressure, and metabolism, and co-located treatment on a single
device. Data gathered from implantable sensors will be fused with computational
models of biophysical parameters informed by tumor-specific vasculature maps
using a graph neural tensor completion approach. The novel hybrid machine
learning approach for data imputation and fusion will systematically incorporate
uncertainties and provide the basis to infer the immune state of a tumor,
validated against gold-standard molecular biomarkers of immune state in
experimental small animals. A graph-based clustering approach integrated with a
recurrent neural network will be used for the prediction of tumor state changes.
Finally, we will evaluate the efficacy of model-guided delivery of energy-based
interventions to transform the TME to a pro-immunogenic state and the impact of
these interventions on immunotherapy outcomes in small
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Cyber-
Physical Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.