* 2039976
* I-Corps: Fiber to Chip Photonic Packaging with Low Loss
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Jaime Cardenas, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development and translation of a photonic integrated circuit packaging
technology that will help in the advancement and scalability of integrated
photonics. Silicon photonic devices are poised to enter high volume markets such
as data communications, telecommunications, and laser-based radar. The
integrated photonics market is predicted to grow from $600M in 2017 to $1,600M
by 2022 and to $4,000M in optical transceivers in the data communications market
by 2025. However, up to 80% of the cost of a silicon photonic device is in the
packaging. The main cost driver for optical packaging is permanently attaching
fiber to the photonic chip with high optical efficiency. The proposed technology
substantially decreases the footprint of a photonic device and increases the
performance of a photonic device by four times the current standard. Currently,
80% of the total cost of a photonic device comes from packaging and testing, not
from fabrication. Current techniques for attaching the fiber to a chip without
dissipating electrical or electromagnetic energy (loss) are time consuming
and/or use bulky fixtures for packaging. The proposed technology permanently
attaches a fiber to a chip using laser fusion splicing, which is robust, low
loss, and scalable to high volume manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a packaging solution for
integrated photonic devices. The technology provides a novel method for
packaging integrated photonic devices using fusion splicing, with the lowest
loss, cost, and time. The laser fusion splicing process melts a fiber to an
integrated photonic chip at the glass-glass interface. The technology includes a
mode converter, which improves the performance of the device and acts as an
interface for splicing the fiber to the chip efficiently. Recent results show a
loss of 1dB per facet after fusing a fiber to a photonic chip, which is the
lowest measured loss in a completely packaged photonic device. The proposed
technology may scale manufacturing of photonic chips at a lower cost, faster
speed, and higher performance than existing technologies. Further, the
technology enables higher temperature processing, which simplifies current
packaging processes leading to additional cost
reductions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.