* 2039316
* RTG: Combinatorics, Geometry, Representation Theory, and Topology at University of Oregon
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Patricia Hersh, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,899,390.00

This Research Training Group is led by seven faculty members at the University
of Oregon whose research activities cover a wide range of topics in the fields
of geometry, topology, representation theory, and combinatorics. The award will
support the training of at least four postdocs and 20-30 talented graduate
students and will engage up to 40 undergraduates in summer research activities.
The award will also support a summer workshop series in representation theory
and a regional conference series in combinatorics and related areas. These
researchers will undertake a collaborative approach to the supervision and
mentoring of early career mathematicians. In addition to research training, a
main goal of this RTG will be to broaden participation in mathematics through
several mechanisms: flexible postdoc positions built on remote strategies for
training and collaboration, development of skills for graduate students by
incorporating them into the university’s prison education program, collaborative
mentorship strategies, and other activities, all aimed at the development of a
vibrant, cohesive, and welcoming research community designed to help students
and postdocs reach their full potential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects
conducted as part of this award will primarily focus on derived categories in
algebra and geometry, equivariant topology, the geometry and topology of posets,
and cohomology and representation theory in positive characteristic. The project
activities will foster a flow of ideas among these various subjects, with the
goal of creating new bridges and connections. Vertically integrated mentorship
and learning opportunities will be key components of the RTG activities,
offering valuable skillsets to the early-career
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.