* 2039480
* DCL: GOLD-EN EAGER: CUltivating socially Responsible ATmospheric scientists through Education, Leadership, and Action (CURATE)
* GEO,RISE
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Emily Fischer, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 11/30/2023
* USD 150,892.00

A challenge of note in STEM is that diversity, equity and inclusion is often
siloed from many aspects of the scientific process and portions of the
atmospheric science scientific community. New approaches and entry points at
higher levels of engagement are needed to foster “a diverse community of
researchers, scholars, and practitioners” in the geosciences. To this end, the
PIs will develop a novel hybrid (face-to-face and online components) atmospheric
science course designed to break down traditional barriers for entry into
diversity, equity and inclusion engagement by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers. The course will provide the structure and resources to help
participants emerge as new “diversity leaders,” better prepared to address
issues of participation, representation and inclusion challenges that are
uniquely faced in the geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan to bridge
DEI gaps by developing a new atmospheric science course, for inclusion in the
graduate curriculum, designed to break down traditional barriers for entry into
DEI engagement by graduate students. The course will provide the structure and
resources to help participants emerge as new “diversity leaders,” better
prepared to address issues of participation, representation and inclusion
challenges that are uniquely faced in the geosciences. This course will provide
an action-oriented mechanism and model to train, educate, and empower a growing
cohort of diversity leaders. Specific course and related activity objectives
include training on how to 1) identify social identity and how it shapes
scientific thought and practice, 2) evaluate and explain the impacts of science
and technology on marginalized groups, 3)identify and respond to manifestations
of implicit and explicit bias in STEM, 4) recognize social justice issues in the
geoscience community and beyond with a focus on designing and implementing
interventions and 5) act as advocates and allies for people with different life-
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.