* 2039616
* EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Mathematically-grounded metaphors to teach AI-related cybersecurity
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Kelly Caine, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 07/31/2023
* USD 335,982.00

As the use of artificial intelligence (AI) becomes increasingly widespread in
modern society, the need for children to learn cybersecurity practices that
protect against the privacy and security risks created by digital systems is
increasingly urgent. This project will address this need by developing and
implementing a time- and teacher-friendly learning module that is geared towards
middle school students. The learning module will be designed to integrate into
existing middle school math curricula. There is a critical need to develop such
educational materials, particularly for adolescents from minority groups that
are underrepresented in STEM because they unduly experience harm from AI-related
cybersecurity issues and are less likely to have school-based experiences that
can inform their responses. The project seeks to empower middle school
adolescents to manage their own digital identities and risk-taking in an
increasingly AI-influenced world. This project will also support graduate
students in computing and education to participate meaningfully and gain
experience in collaborative, school-based, transdisciplinary research. The
project will share materials developed to provide flexible, widespread access to
the resources for middle school education stakeholders across the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve middle school students’
use of security “best-practices” in their day-to-day online activities, while
enhancing their fundamental understanding of the underlying security principles
and math concepts that drive AI and cybersecurity technologies. To this end, the
project team is developing a learning module that relies on the educational
principle of “metaphors as reification” to teach AI-related cybersecurity. The
innovation in this approach entails grounding these metaphors in their
underlying mathematical principles. The project transcends research on
“explainable AI” by giving end users a fundamental understanding of the
mathematical principles behind AI, which constitutes a key advance in
cybersecurity training. To investigate middle school students’ AI-related
cybersecurity competencies relative to their mathematics knowledge and
behaviors, the project team will use a mixed methods, exploratory research
approach. A combination of pre- and post-tests of students’ cybersecurity
knowledge, behavioral intention surveys, math affinity, observed decision-making
in a “cybersecurity drill,” and module-specific test scores, will be used to
evaluate the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project is supported by a
special initiative of the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to
foster new, previously unexplored, collaborations between the fields of
cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns
with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the
National Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social
and economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.