* 2039521
* I-Corps:  A two-step approach for dissolving barite for the oil and gas industry
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Hamidreza Samouei, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a chemical method to dissolve and remove solid deposits (scale)
that block and damage pipelines. This problem is one faced by the oil and gas,
geothermal, water treatment, and boiler industries. The cost to remove scale
ranges from $15,000-150,000 per treatment per oil or gas well without
considering the loss in revenue from the interruption in production.
Approximately $5 billion is spent on just handling and managing the scale-
associated problems in the oil and gas industry every year. In some cases, the
scale is contaminated with radioactive material (called naturally occurring
radioactive material, or NORM) and, in addition, some treatments release toxic
gases. These conditions become extremely dangerous to the field workers and the
environment and it is a serious liability for the energy companies and
operators. This project explores the requirements needed to simplify the
treatment method of scale removal to reduce the cost by 75%, to allow for more
energy production by reducing production-halt time from 2 weeks to one day, and
to prevent the buildup of the harmful NORM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a two-step approach to dissolve barite,
one of the most common scale minerals. In the first step, the barite is
converted to a value-added chemical product using an active solution. In the
second step, the value-added chemical is dissolved by using formulated water.
The second-step prevents the buildup of toxic material which provides an added
benefit by enabling easier waste management. The benefit of the two-step
technology is adaptability. Current scale dissolvers only work in very specific
regions and cannot be applied to other domestic or international markets.
Through simple modifications and additives, the proposed solution may be made
compatible with a wide range of environments providing greater efficiency and
flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.