* 2039519
* GOLD-EN EAGER: Bringing a diversity program to scale at the Jackson School of Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Ginny Catania, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The overarching goal of this project is to design and execute a program to
support the development of Diversity Champions (DC) at the largest academic
geoscience program in the world, the Jackson School of Geosciences (JSG) at the
University of Texas (UT). By virtue of its current lack of diversity, its size,
and the breadth of geoscience topics being studied, the Jackson School presents
an ideal test case to understand and overcome the barriers to upscaling
development programs elsewhere across the country. The PIs propose a two-year
program aimed at training faculty, administrators, and research scientists in
the JSG to become DC. Training will consist of a series of workshops and
activities focused on effective mentorship of students from diverse backgrounds
and understanding the barriers for expanding diversity in geosciences. DCs will
then participate in recruitment activities and a research mentoring experiences
with historically underrepresented students. Simultaneously, the historically
underrepresented students will be supported with a focus on building community
across the school that enhances their research experience. The overarching goal
is to publish workshop materials and create accessible training tools for future
DC at a wide range of academic institutions across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build, normalize, and empower a
community around issues related to diversity in the geosciences at the Jackson
School of Geosciences (JSG) through training and social support. The PIs
approach is based on two themes: 1) Identify, train, support and incentivize
'Diversity Champions' (DCs) from within the existing community of scholars at
the JSG, including faculty and research scientists and 2) Build an underlying
program of support for URM undergraduate students at the JSG that includes a
range of activities and opportunities aimed at improving community support for
students and their mentors/advisers and reducing the support needed by research
mentors. In the context of the two themes, the project will focus on identifying
and ameliorating the barriers to recruitment of DCs and their successful
completion in the program as well as understanding how the program of support
benefits historically UR students. By providing the tools and knowledge to train
internal Diversity Champions at a large geoscience research program the PIs will
produce a cadre of allies for future generations of students to the program, and
ultimately the geoscience community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.