* 2039445
* EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Identifying Educational Conceptions and Challenges in  Cybersecurity and Artificial Intelligence
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Mark Guzdial, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) has significant applications to many data-intensive
emerging domains such as automated vehicles, computer-assisted medical imaging,
behavior analysis, user authentication, cybersecurity, and embedded systems for
smart infrastructures. However, there are unanswered questions relating to trust
in AI systems. There is increasing evidence that machine learning algorithms can
be maliciously manipulated to cause misclassification and false detection of
objects and speech. With the growing adoption of AI-based techniques, it is
therefore important to teach students the skills needed to analyze
vulnerabilities in AI-based systems and how such systems may fail, as well as
how to mitigate such issues to help create more trustworthy AI-based systems.
This project brings together experts from the areas of education, AI, and
cybersecurity to identify challenges and potential solutions to teaching topics
in trustworthy AI with the goal of evolving coursework that will appeal to, and
engage, a diverse student body. It is critical to diversify the workforce
operating at the intersection of cybersecurity and AI because AI-based systems
can be prone to implicit vulnerabilities and blind spots due to imbalanced
datasets or training methods that focus only on the overall accuracy of
available datasets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team proposes to teach and
study three courses at the intersection of cybersecurity and AI, including
creating a new course on trustworthy AI. Coursework will address topics that
will spur students to consider how segments of the population may be
differentially impacted in areas such as authentication, privacy, and user
safety. Learning science and educational psychology approaches (specifically
focus groups and clinical interviews) will be used to identify learning and
teaching challenges and to characterize conceptions and misconceptions. The
project will produce five deliverables: model curricula at the crossroads of
cybersecurity and AI; strategies for managing cross-disciplinarity in such
curricula; characterizations of student concepts; identification of student
learning challenges; and identification of new research directions in
cybersecurity and AI. The findings and curricular ideas will be disseminated
broadly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by a special initiative
of the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to foster new,
previously unexplored, collaborations between the fields of cybersecurity,
artificial intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.