* 2039338
* EAGER-Indigenous Geoscience Community
* GEO,RISE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Wendy Todd, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,167.00

The Indigenous Geoscience Community proposes to bring together diverse
Indigenous communities in an environment that will strengthen individuals,
communities, and academia and professional spaces, by fostering cross-cultural
exchange of Traditional Knowledge (TK), present diverse strategies for
addressing environmental issues that directly impact sovereignty and human
health, provide opportunity for cross-cultural collaborations with benefits of
building these relationships, identify Indigenous mentors to provide a support
system for youth and early career professionals, foster the development of
innovative solutions for geoscience research and education, and deepen the
knowledge of geoscience. The PIs have developed a successful method of engaging
Indigenous communities in geoscience research methodologies and policy and in
conducting geoscience research in both the lab and in the field and in using TK
to teach STEM. Participant deliverables include, developing research methods
based on cultural background, blogs, research papers, posters, and conference
presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PThe Indigenous Geoscience Community aims
to address obstacles (e.g. feelings of isolation, lack of support, and
disillusionment due to a lack of self-efficacy, misalignment of cultural
ideologies, and contrasting worldviews) encountered by Indigenous students and
professions in the geosciences. The project will provide a secure environment
for participants to; 1-present their whole identity as an Indigenous
geoscientist, 2- discuss both TK systems blended with their geoscience research,
3- build peer and mentor support networks, 4- identify Indigenous geoscience and
cultural practitioners as mentors, and 5- establish a community that understands
and applies a culturally aware and ethical framework, 6- to develop a guide of
best practices for engaging in research and education with Indigenous
communities using collective input from multiple Indigenous
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.