* 2039677
* EAGER: Improving the Quality and Reducing the Burden of Producing and Reusing Publicly Accessible Research Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Alicia Carriquiry, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Reusability of research data is central to successfully maximizing the benefits
of public access to publicly funded research outputs. The purpose of this EAGER
proposal is to improve understanding of factors that lead to reusability of
research data. It proposes to do this by 1) developing a framework for
understanding data reusability, 2) identify concomitant practices for improving
data reusability, and 3) propose a path for accelerating the data reusability
readiness of the research community. The project would accomplish this through
targeted research and feedback sought through a group meeting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research teams at Iowa State University and the University
of Virginia will pursue this goal by first gathering descriptive information on
targeted research communities with different levels of maturity in their
practices of research data sharing and reuse, as well as trusted repositories
that have adopted practices for evaluating data sources prior to data ingest and
reuse. This descriptive information will inform a draft framework articulating
common elements of data reuse, and processes for depositing data in ways that
promote reusability. The framework will also examine incentives and barriers to
data reusability. Feedback from a community meeting will inform subsequent
refinement of the framework, which will be used in small scale tests using
publicly accessible data sets and research groups at ISU and UVA. The final
version of the framework would include a discussion of strategies for
accelerating the sharing of research data and the corresponding culture changes
needed for success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.