* 2039443
* I-Corps:  Manufacturing method for blends of anhydrous probiotic bacteria and low-water, high-fat content nut butters
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2021
* Rebecca Menapace, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
translation of a manufacturing technology to produce a shelf-stable probiotic
supplement using peanut and other nut butters. The availability of probiotics in
certain food products has become a major factor in the choice of processed foods
by health-conscious consumers. Probiotics in foods may provide a number of
benefits, including limiting the growth of pathogenic gut bacteria, reducing
bloating, helping to control certain digestive problems such as lactose
intolerance, and enhancing nutrient absorption. However, the shelf-life and the
need for refrigeration is a major deterrent in the widespread adoption of
probiotics food products. Americans consume about 800 million pounds of peanut
butter a year and the U.S. market for nut butters totaled $2.3 billion in 2018.
The aim of the proposed technology is to define the requirements of providing in
nut butters a healthy source of probiotics with a long shelf-life at room
temperature. The health benefits from the addition of probiotics to peanut
butter and other culinary butters may give these products a competitive
advantage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based exploring the
translation of a food manufacturing technology to produce nut butters with
probiotics. This manufacturing method uses blends of anhydrous probiotic
bacteria and low-water activity, high-fat content culinary butters made from
roasted nuts. Typically, a slurry is made from freeze-dried probiotic bacteria
and edible oil, which is subsequently blended into a warm nut butter at the time
of the addition of melted structuring fat and before fat crystallization and
product packaging. Dispersing and storing probiotics in such an anhydrous fatty
food environment helps keep probiotic bacteria viable for a longer time at room
temperature. Long-term viability of probiotic bacteria was tested over a
12-month period by measuring the number of colony-forming units (CFU) from the
different bacteria stored at 4 oC and 20 oC in multiple low-water activity, fat-
based foods including peanut butter, anhydrous butterfat, and palm fat. Room
temperature-stable probiotics products do not require refrigeration during
shipping or storage. Eliminating cold storage in the value chain is important
for both consumer pricing and sales convenience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.