* 2039275
* The 3nd National Symposium to Build Historically Black Colleges and Universities(HBCUs) Research Capacity through Collaborative Partnerships with STEM Advocates and Policymakers
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Erin Lynch, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2022
* USD 80,531.00

The third HBCU RAP Symposia will build on 2 years of the Quality Education for
Minorities' (QEM) evaluated experiences aimed at expanding the influence of
HBCUs on STEM policy, with respect to national priorities for underrepresented
students in STEM. This year, PIs propose a year-long strategy to amplify
scientific innovation at HBCUs as a catalyst for improving the social,
educational, health and economic status of African Americans. The PIs will use
select components of NSF’s “Big Ideas” to guide the community of practice and
topics for forums and workshops including: Future of Work at the Human-
Technology Frontier; Growing Convergence Research; Harnessing the Data
Revolution; and NSF INCLUDES. QEM brings 30 years of leadership in STEM
initiatives and conferences with the HBCU community. This series builds on
research that uses organizational learning theory and focus group research to
understand the process through which HBCUs acquire knowledge and translate
knowledge into dynamic capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Quality Education
for Minorities (QEM) Network requests one year of support to host a virtual
workshop in conjunction with the 2020 Congressional Black Caucus Foundation
(CBCF), 49th Annual Legislative Conference, September – October 2020. The year-
long project has 3 primary goals: (1) To fortify a community of practice among
HBCU researchers who are dedicated to advancing an independent and collective
research agenda that positively changes the lives of Black people; (2) To
provide HBCU researchers and executive leadership with the information and
resources necessary to develop robust, translational cutting edge research at
their institutions; and (3) To strategically position HBCUs to make a national-
level imprint on scientific issues that impact the Black community. In 2020 -
2021, QEM will use the lessons learned over the prior two years to set a one-
year agenda of activities for HBCU researchers within a community of practice,
within the context and confounds of the COVID-19 pandemic. HBCUs have a
strategic importance to this nation, because they have played a prominent role
in advancing scientific innovation and Black social and economic progress in
American society. HBCU-based researchers providing national thought leadership
through the sciences is a national imperative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.