* 2039039
* Extending the catalytic activity of enzymes to unnatural reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Romas Kazlauskas, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 04/30/2024
* USD 388,369.00

Engineering of enzymes creates useful catalysts for sustainable chemical
synthesis, and it also demonstrates an understanding of how enzymes work. In
this project, protein motion will be modeled to identify enzyme mutations that
impart new abilities. These mutations will be evaluated experimentally to
validate the model. Underrepresented minority students will be recruited to work
on the project. A free textbook for protein engineering will be developed as
well as web tools for protein engineering. If successful, the project will
enable the broader application of enzymes for industrial applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein engineers cannot currently design efficient
enzymes. This project focuses on the simpler problem of extending a natural
enzyme's catalytic abilities to unnatural reactions. This allows more accurate
computational approaches to test the hypothesis that distant residues contribute
to catalysis by precisely positioning the substrates and catalytic groups. More
realistic models of how enzymes work will be created by validating computation
with extensive experimental data. The model system will be the evolution of
esterases into hydroxynitrile lyases. The minimum number of amino acid changes
between these enzymes that are needed to exchange their catalytic activities
will be identified. Computational predictions will be tested experimentally by
constructing enzyme variants and measuring their contributions to catalysis.
These refined computational models will next be used to predict which
substitutions will extend the catalytic activity of hydroxynitrile lyases to
nitroaldol addition, an unnatural reaction. The potential contributions to
science and engineering are the first computational approach to predict how
residues outside the active site contribute to catalysis, and the first rational
design of efficient enzymes for unnatural reactions. These abilities will enable
biocatalytic synthesis of pharmaceuticals and fine
chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.