* 2039653
* EAGER: Live Reality: Sustainable and Up-to-Date Information Quality in Live Social Media through Continuous Evidence-Based Knowledge Acquisition
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Calton Pu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Social media have complemented traditional press with immediate reports and
worldwide coverage. However, they also receive and propagate significant amounts
of misinformation and disinformation such as fake news. A skillful mixture of
verifiable facts and outrageous fiction, fake news aim to attract reader
attention, make an immediate initial impact, and then quickly forgotten. Even as
disposable novelty, fake news have had significant impact on real world events
such as elections. For human readers and machine learning (ML) classifiers,
distinguishing fake news from real news has been challenging due to their
sophisticated construction, camouflaging fiction with facts, as well as
continuously evolving by incorporating the newest and hottest topics as they
mutate. The Live Reality project will track the evolution of fake news through
continuous import of reliable, verified facts from authoritative sources, and
separate the facts from fiction, to catch fake news in the act. The automated
real-time tracking capability is a significant innovation compared to
traditional ML classifiers generated from manually labeled training data, which
are constrained to finding historical fake news, long after the
fact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the short lifespan of disposable novelty (days
or hours), catching fake news in the act requires significant innovation in two
dimensions. First, the ML classifier must be continuously updated to recognize
true novelty that have never been seen before. Second, the update must be
sufficiently timely to catch disposable novelty before they expire, e.g., within
hours of their initial dissemination. Continuous collection of live social media
and authoritative sources will generate novel fake news and associated ground
truth, which are integrated through the Evidence-Based Knowledge Acquisition
(EBKA) approach, which adds reliable information from authoritative sources into
a continuously adaptive teamed classifier to distinguish the verifiable facts
from the fiction in fake news. As news topics evolve, fake news are expected to
follow, and EBKA will generate and integrate new sub-models into the live teamed
classifier to recognize the new topics. The EBKA approach will be demonstrated
on live data containing fake news on a variety of topics, specifically disaster
management such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Due to the disposable novelty nature
of fake news, EBKA will be evaluated in two dimensions: classifier performance
in terms of accuracy and precision, and timeliness of classifier identifying
truly new fake news soon after their appearance in the real
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.