* 2039564
* I-Corps: Vanadium Redox Flow Batteries for Small Urban Businesses
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Pritam Das, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of energy storage to provide reliable uninterrupted power supply to
homes, businesses and hospitals along with the ability to restart the grid after
a blackout. Electrical energy storage augments grid resources (renewables such
as wind, solar and hydroelectric) as well as conventional nuclear and fossil
fuel plants. Energy storage creates long-term benefits and reliability, saving
consumers money, improving grid reliability and resilience, enabling integration
of energy generation sources, and helping reduce environmental impacts. Grid
operators in the United States have identified and acknowledged energy storage
as important for stabilizing supply and demand through demand response. Vanadium
redox flow batteries provide an essential element in enabling demand response to
play a positive role in balancing supply and demand on the electric grid into
the foreseeable future. Vanadium redox flow batteries have the ability to be
integrated into such utility infrastructure as distribution substations and, in
certain cases, to support transmission and other electrical infrastructure.
Incorporating this technology in existing utility infrastructure has the
potential to extend the capabilities and operational lifetimes of these
facilities at a much lower installation cost than simply adding more traditional
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of vanadium redox flow batteries as energy storage technologies.
Utilities maintain efficient power flow by balancing power supply and demand to
meet the ever-changing electricity demand by adding or subtracting more fossil
fuel burning plants. Utilizing these extra plants creates more pollution and is
costly. Solar and wind energy have significantly increased their market share
and are now cost competitive. However, the sun does not shine at night and in
many places wind resources are not ideal. As more solar and wind resources
increase, energy grid flexibility is needed. This flexibility can be achieved
through “demand response,” i.e., the capability to balance supply and demand by
turning power on or off from customers to limit power demand. Energy storage
enables demand response to balance the ever-changing grid. Vanadium flow
batteries operate by undergoing reversible electrochemical reactions during
charge and discharge. This project explores the requirements of vanadium flow
batteries in enabling the development of a more reliable, uninterrupted power
supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.