* 2039477
* Pulmonary Aerodynamic Valves: Distribution &amp; Function
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Colleen Farmer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 06/30/2024
* USD 566,507.00

This project addresses a major, poorly understood question in vertebrate
evolution related to the lung's extraordinary structural diversity, especially
the structures that give rise to one-way airflow. Bird lungs have held a special
place in this regard, because their design is so radically different from
mammalian lungs, and it has been thought that one-way airflow is related to the
energetic demands of flight. However, the lungs of other non-flying vertebrate
animals, including snakes, turtles, and chameleons, also differ from those of
mammals. This research will provide a better understanding of how aerodynamic
valves in the lungs of reptiles give rise to one-way airflow, the physiological
significance of these patterns of flow, and their distribution across vertebrate
animals. It will reveal fundamental, form-function relationships linking lung
structures to patterns of airflow in reptiles and amphibians; enhance
understanding of the effects of these patterns of airflow on gas exchange,
respiratory water loss, and heat loss; and be applied to reconstruction of the
respiratory systems of extinct tetrapods. The project also includes significant
educational and outreach activities, including science communication training
for lab personnel, participation in public-education, distance-learning programs
run by Utah's Hogle Zoo, and development of virtual reality infrastructure for
research, outreach, and teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three primary activities
will result from the proposed research. (1) A phyletic survey will be made of
patterns of airflow in the lungs of amphibians and reptiles. (2) Tests of the
following hypotheses for the mechanistic basis of pulmonary aerodynamic valves
will be made by measurements and visualizations of patterns of airflow,
computational fluid dynamics simulations, and physical models: i) that turtles
have a pulmonary Tesla valve; ii) that the expiratory valve of archosaurs
functions like an internal nozzle, where a Coanda surface induces and amplifies
flow; iii) that the expiratory valve arises from a caudal guiding dam. (3)
Balloon catheters will be implanted into the lungs of alligators which will
allow unidirectional flow to be converted to tidal airflow. Under these two flow
regimes hypotheses for the functional significance of aerodynamic valves will be
tested: i) that alligators have counter-current or cross-current gas exchange;
ii) that unidirectional flow reduces rates of evaporative water and heat loss,
and improves wash-out of lung CO2 and wash-in of O2. Measurements will made of
O2 extraction and CO2 removal with each breath, rates of lung washout of CO2,
rates of respiratory evaporative water loss and heat loss, and rates of
ventilation relative to rates O2 consumption and CO2 excretion. The proposed
research has four strands of educational and outreach broader impacts: 1)
Recruitment of underrepresented participants into STEM; 2) Training of lab
personnel in science communication, working closely with the Natural History
Museum of Utah; 3) Outreach to the lay community, including K-12 schools,
through distance-learning programs of Utah's Hogle Zoo; 4) Development of
virtual reality infrastructure for research, outreach, and
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.