* 2039980
* D-ISN: TRACK 1: Understanding and Disrupting Key Convergence Nodes of the Illicit Gold and Mercury Supply Chains in Latin America and Africa
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Kady Seguin, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 01/31/2026
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Disrupting Operations of Illicit Supply Networks (D-ISN) award will enhance
national health, prosperity and welfare by contributing to a better
understanding of illicit supply chains and the ability to detect, disrupt, and
disable them. The project involves an examination and comparison of key
convergence nodes in the global supply chains for illicit gold and mercury in
Latin America and Africa. It specifically focuses on Peru and Kenya because of
the similar characteristics they share on their respective continents as
important trading hubs to other regional markets via both air and maritime
transport, as well as acting as trading hubs for other illicit commodities and
goods. In addition, both countries have significant artisanal and small-scale
gold mining (ASGM) sectors, that often operate at sites of informal gold
production where the illicit gold supply chain begins and that use mercury to
extract gold from the ore, representing the end of the mercury supply chain.
This provides an opportunity for comparative analysis across two continents. One
major challenge in Peru is that there are no organized records of illicit
activities related to the gold and mercury supply chains, which presents
difficulties in making decisions to combat them. Additionally, Kenya has not
been thoroughly examined as an emerging hub for illicit gold in East Africa,
especially gold from the ASGM sector originating from the DRC. Furthermore,
actors from around the world are involved in the gold and mercury supply chains,
and the micro problems in Peru and Kenya have global implications, including
some that directly bear upon the national security of the United States. A more
thorough understanding of the ways in which the illicit gold and mercury supply
chains operate will support policy and enforcement interventions that target
illicit actors without unduly harming vulnerable communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance knowledge of the illicit gold
and mercury supply chains in Peru and Kenya, the international destinations of
this gold, and the origins of the mercury entering the countries. It seeks to
fill a knowledge gap raised in recent research coordinated by the International
Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN): the co-dependency between the
mercury and gold supply chains. Our interdisciplinary team with expertise in
engineering, social science, computer science, and law will map the routes of
gold from inland sites to major export hubs and the routes of mercury from major
import hubs to inland mining sites. Particular emphasis will be placed on the
maritime and air dynamics of the gold and mercury supply chains by focusing on
the major convergence nodes, or collection points, transshipment hubs, and
actors through which the illicit mercury and gold supply chains flow and
intersect. This research expands the methodologies used to evaluate and
understand illicit supply chains, by collating publicly available data, such as
surveillance platform data and conducting ethnographic fieldwork with artisanal
and small-scale gold miners and community members, other operators in the gold
and mercury trades, and sources in security, law enforcement, and regulatory
enforcement. By combining these data with a graph analytics approach, we will
develop models that identify patterns transnationally and can help to disrupt
both the illicit gold and mercury supply networks, as well as make connections
with other types of illicit activities occurring and connected to global supply
chain networks. This project will train STEM graduate students in
interdisciplinary research methodologies, expose them to the complexities of
mineral supply chains, provide them with tools to better understand these supply
chains, and allow them to work with faculty, students, and collaborators from
different disciplines. This research represents a concerted effort to leverage
existing and emerging technologies, such as machine learning and advanced data
analytics, to inform public policy not only in the targeted countries but also
in other states facing related challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.