* 2039313
* Investigate the roles of endogenous salicylic acids in de novo organogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Chung-Jui Tsai, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 07/31/2024
* USD 506,904.00

Plants have the unique and important ability to regenerate a new organ or even
an entire seedling from a small piece of tissue. This process of tissue
regeneration is a foundation for modern agriculture and horticulture. The
propagation of many fruits and vegetables heavily relies on techniques involving
tissue regeneration, such as grafting, tissue culture, and rooting from stem
cuttings. These techniques provide a non-transgenic approach to produce chimera
or improved cultivars and, eventually, to increase plants' vigor and resistance
to pathogens. Thus, understanding the underlying mechanisms of tissue
regeneration is important for food quality and security. This study investigates
how plant regeneration occurs under the influence of microbial pathogens, which
are constant threats to our agriculture. New molecular and cellular technologies
will be used to examine the function of plant hormones in regulating the balance
of regeneration and defense against pathogens. Knowledge obtained from this
study will promote practical and scalable strategies to help regeneration in
species where wound-healing and regeneration after cutting remains a critical
bottleneck for propagation. The proposed project will also provide students at
different levels with experiential learning of modern plant biotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study aims to elucidate the role of salicylic acid
(SA) in wound-induced de novo Root Regeneration (DNRR), in which adventitious
roots form on detached leaves. De novo organogenesis is a fascinating
developmental process involving a drastic transition of cell fate. The molecular
crosstalk between pathways governing biotic stress and regeneration represents a
major knowledge gap. A general hypothesis is that antagonistic interaction
between NPR family members fine-tunes the SA-mediated suppression of DNRR. The
following specific aims will be addressed. Aim1: Determine the spatiotemporal
patterns of SA response and accumulation during DNRR. Aim2: Test the hypothesis
that NPR3/4 and NPR5/6 antagonistically regulate DNRR. Aim3: Characterize the
function of an NPR4-TGA complex in DNRR. Completion of the proposed study will
establish foundational knowledge about how endogenous SA suppresses the cell
fate transition during DNRR. Characterizing the contribution of NPR family
members and their interactions with TGA transcription factors will expand our
knowledge of the distinct and overlapping function of NPR proteins in SA-
mediated defense and development. Plant regeneration is an intriguing
developmental process for students to observe and to gain hands-on experience.
Select partners involved in undergraduate and K-12 education will participate in
this study to enhance the experiential learning of plant development, especially
for underrepresented groups in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.