* 2039090
* SBIR Phase I:  A Machine-Learning Tool for Social-Emotional Learning, Development, and Intervention for Remote or Hybrid Child Development Support (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,04/30/2023
* Nicole Lipkin, HEYKIDDO, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to detect social-emotional issues in children
(ages 5-12) for early intervention. A growing trend in juvenile mental health
concerns was exacerbated by the recent COVID-19 pandemic and the associated
disruption in child development. This project proposes a machine learning (ML)
system that learns from interactions with the child and parent independently and
can detect potential social-emotional concerns. The ML system enables
personalized evaluation and monitoring outside a clinical setting in a remote or
hybrid context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project advances algorithms for integration into a social-
emotional skill building curriculum. The project proposes: 1) User segmentation
based on a comprehensive assessment of social-emotional functioning, 2)
Correlation of the relevancy and effectiveness of modules to segmented users,
and 3) Collection of information to identify social emotional deficits (red
flags). These activities enable a feedback loop to learn and deliver
recommendations for each child-parent dyad, personalizing learning in real-time.
These algorithms learn from behavioral, social, and emotional inputs from both
the parent and child when they engage with the technology. The system will also
detect red flags correlated with social and emotional deficits, promoting early
intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.