* 2040830
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Increasing the Representation of  Minorities in Engineering (IRME)
* EDU,EES
* 11/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Kamal Ali, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 02/28/2023
* USD 100,000.00

NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Increasing the Representation of Minorities
in&lt;br/&gt;Engineering (IRME)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES planning
grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of
Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a
comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and
innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion and broadening participation in
STEM at scale. The goal of this planning grant is to address the urgent need for
the development of a diverse and equitable engineering-capable workforce by
planning for an alliance of institutions that will broaden the participation and
success of Black, Hispanic, and other underrepresented groups in higher
education engineering programs. This collective impact effort, led by Morgan
State University, builds on an existing partnership that includes Jackson State
University, North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, and
Ziker Research. Propelled by the momentum of a strong backbone organization,
GlobalMindED, the IRME project will develop a shared vision for an NSF INCLUDES
alliance that will catalyze access to engineering careers and broaden the
participation of underrepresented students in engineering; and crystalize
partnerships between a consortium of engineering programs at historically Black
colleges and universities (HBCUs) and Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs),
nonprofit organizations, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IRME project
will contribute critical knowledge to the field of broadening participation
research by engaging in catalytic activities that include: 1) synthesizing
trends in broadening participation efforts and best practices in engineering
education; 2) producing an evidence-based brief developed through the
implementation of an online workshop designed for listening to and capturing the
voices and perspectives of students, faculty, administrators, and industry
partners seeking to hire engineering graduates; and 3) developing a robust
research agenda that will examine the social, political, and academic factors
that influence the success of groups historically underrepresented in
engineering. Strategies for promoting equity, persistence, and effective
practices will be identified and shared with the NSF INCLUDES National Network
through the NSF INCLUDES Coordination Hub, as well as at relevant engineering
conferences. The IRME project has the potential to bring about systemic change
that will broaden participation in engineering by engaging relevant stakeholders
in a multi-sector collaboration to increase minority representation in
engineering through the development of an NSF INCLUDES
Alliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.