* 2040536
* EAGER: Learning Graphical Models of High-Dimensional Time Series
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Jitendra Tugnait, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Undirected graphical models have been increasingly used for exploring or
exploiting dependency structures among different random variables underlying
multivariate data, representing complex systems. Graphical models are an
important and useful tool for analyzing multivariate data. A graphical model is
a statistical model where random variables and the conditional dependencies
between them are specified via a graph. Graphical models were originally
developed for random vectors with multiple independent realizations (independent
and identically distributed time series). Such models have been extensively
studied, and found to be useful in a wide variety of applications such as
biological regulatory networks, functional brain networks, and social networks.
They have also proved to be useful for clustering, semi-supervised learning and
classification tasks. Graphical modeling of time-dependent data (time series) is
more recent. Time series graphical models of dependent data have been applied to
intensive care monitoring, financial time series, air pollution data, and
analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging data to provide insights into
the functional connectivity of different brain regions. Almost all existing
works on dependent time series are limited to low-dimensional series where
number of variables is much smaller than the data sample size. To address high-
dimensional time series where number of variables exceed, or are comparable to,
the sample size, it is (almost always) assumed that the series is independent
and identically distributed in choice of objective function, and algorithm
design and analysis, for both synthetic and real data. This project aims to fill
this gap by focusing on methods for graphical modeling of high-dimensional
dependent time series. The project will also provide training and research
experiences for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel, innovative,
general statistical signal processing approaches to graphical modeling of real-
valued dependent multivariate time series in high-dimensional settings are
investigated in this research. An emphasis is on frequency-domain approaches
without requiring detailed parametric modeling of the underlying time series to
capture any dependencies in the time domain. Frequency-domain formulation leads
to consideration of complex-valued Gaussian graphical models for proper Gaussian
random vectors, a topic that has received scant attention. The following thrusts
form the core of this research: (1) Design, analysis and optimization of
penalized log-likelihood functions to fit graphical models. (2) Analysis of
theoretical properties (such as consistency and sparsistency) of the obtained
solutions. (3) Application to synthetic and real data to evaluate the efficacy
and computational efficiency of the considered
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.