* 2040114
* Selected-Eddy Simulations (SES): a revolutionary approach for turbulence simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Diego Donzis, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 302,741.00

Turbulent flows can be extremely complex and often not well understood. This
lack of fundamental understanding limits our ability to accurately predict the
climate, dispersion of pollutants in the atmosphere and the ocean, and to design
optimally efficient engines, transportation vehicles, and energy generation
systems. Turbulence has a wide range of scales which makes experimental
measurements and computational predictions challenging. Over the past 4 decades,
significant progress has been made through direct numerical simulations (DNS)
which resolve all relevant turbulent scales to improve turbulence models that
are critical in automotive and aircraft design. However, DNS are computationally
prohibitive in realistic scenarios. The main objective of this project is to
develop a potentially transformative approach to simulate turbulent flows,
capturing the detailed physics at a fraction of the cost of DNS while improving
the accuracy of unsteady turbulent predictions. The project will seek to involve
Hispanic men and women students; the principal investigator actively
collaborates with several Hispanic organizations to enhance Hispanic studentsâ€™
experiences, education, and quality of life on campus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a revolutionary new approach
for accurate turbulence simulations at a fraction of the cost DNS and with
significant advantages over other low-order approaches such as Large-Eddy
Simulations (LES), where large-scale turbulence is computed and smaller scales
are modelled. The new approach, termed Selected-Eddy Simulations (SES), is based
on solving a subset of scales across the entire spectrum, unlike LES which is
limited to low wavenumbers. Thus, SES uses the true dynamics of the Navier-
Stokes equations over a subset of all scales. This has tremendous advantages in
reproducing Navier-Stokes dynamics especially in flows where small-scale
features are critical such as mixing of weakly diffusive species, dispersion of
small particles, shocks, and flames. The selection of modeled scales are control
parameters in SES. The SES modeling approach will be compared with DNS and LES
results to assess accuracy versus computational cost. The study and modeling of
unresolved modes will provide insights into the physics of energy transfer and
the dynamics of turbulence in general. Thus, a successful SES concept will
result in a more complete understanding of the role of turbulent scales and a
more accurate, potentially less expensive, computational tool that can be used
to predict and control flows critical for a wide range of engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.