* 2040302
* Collaborative Research: Interactions of Airborne Engineered Nanoparticles with Lung Surfactant Films
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Alexander Neimark, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 09/30/2024
* USD 359,999.00

Rapid developments in nanotechnology have led to the production and use of
various types of engineered nanoparticles. It is inevitable that airborne
nanoparticles may be released to the environment and may cause potential
consequences for human health, in particular, in the respiratory tract including
the lung (alveolar region) once inhaled. The lung surfactant, which covers the
alveoli as a thin liquid film, represents the first line of defense against such
airborne nanoparticles at the air-liquid interface. This collaborative project,
involving a synergistic combination of experimental and computational studies,
seeks to study the effects of physicochemical and structural properties of
engineered nanoparticles on interfacial flow behaviors and stability of
surfactant films. This research activity also is aimed at obtaining a better
fundamental understanding of the molecular interactions arising between
surfactant films and potentially hazardous engineered nanoparticles in
realistically imitated physiological conditions. Fundamental knowledge gained
through this project is, therefore, expected to provide new insights into the
subsequent retention, translocation, and clearance of inhaled nanoparticles and
the sequential processes associated with engineered nanoparticle toxicity
overall. The project results will also advance the basic knowledge of the fate
of biological nanoparticles, such as coronavirus virions, in the lungs that may
have practical implications in medicine. Educational and mentoring aspects of
this project include training graduate students in advanced surface science
tools and computational techniques, mentoring underrepresented undergraduate
students in research, and developing teaching modules and subjects relevant to
nanoparticle interactions in biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the
production and use of engineered nanoparticles increases day by day, it is
inevitable that these nanoparticles will be released to the environment.
Therefore, the occurrence and fate of engineered nanoparticles in the
environment, and the potential consequences on human health have been
increasingly recognized as issues of critical importance. In particular,
airborne nanoparticles can result in a much greater likelihood and extent of
exposure to the environment and thus living beings. This collaborative project
will focus on improving our fundamental understanding of the molecular
interactions between engineered nanoparticles and lung surfactant films at
multiple-length scales. The project will evaluate the distribution and fate of
inhaled airborne nanoparticles in the respiratory tract. This research project
is structured around two specific objectives. First, this project aims to
determine the effects of physicochemical and structural properties of inhaled
engineered nanoparticles on the viscoelastic responses and interfacial stability
of lung surfactant films. Second, the project will generate fundamental data
concerning the molecular mechanisms of interfacial interactions in lung
surfactant monolayers and multilayers in the absence and presence of engineered
nanoparticles at multiple length scales in physiological environments. To
achieve these goals, a synergistic combination between experimental and
computational approaches will be employed. Experimental advances include a
specially modified Langmuir trough, a quartz crystal microbalance with
dissipation coupled with a custom-made particle generator unit, and a highly
sophisticated surface forces apparatus. The computational component is based on
a new coarse-grained computational framework for investigations of nanoscale
interfacial processes at air-liquid interfaces, including dissipative particle
dynamics models to predict the composition dependent surface tension,
elasticity, viscosity, and stability of lung surfactant monolayer and bilayers
with doped engineered nanoparticles. These collaborative experimental and
computational studies of nanoscale interfacial phenomena are expected to provide
qualitative and quantitative information on the viscoelastic properties of lung
surfactant films and the attendant response to shear stresses upon breathing
affected by adhered/piercing engineered nanoparticles. In addition, the
principal investigators will generate systematic information on molecular
interactions of engineered nanoparticles with the lung surfactant system,
especially in terms of adhesion and fusion behaviors that are related to the
structural integrity of lung surfactant films. The findings gained through this
project will improve mechanistic understanding of the adhesion and translocation
of nanoparticulate matter (e.g., coronavirus virions) across other general cell
membranes. Educational components of this project involve training graduate
students and mentoring undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in
engineering through various programs offered at Rutgers University and the
University of California, Riverside.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.