* 2040043
* STTR Phase I:  Novel Inhaled Nitric Oxide Therapy For Pulmonary Treatments (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* steven riesinger, MedChem Partners LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project relates to the unmet need for new and effective
therapeutics that target the lung. This proposal outlines a novel treatment for
the pulmonary manifestations of COVID-19; however, this technology will also
find use in other acute pulmonary disorders, such as acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), emphysema, and
cystic fibrosis. Currently the options for treatment of pulmonary disorders
include supplemental oxygen, ventilators, or nitrous oxide (NO) gas, which is
toxic and cumbersome to use. Current technology uses gaseous NO which is a toxic
gas supplied in high pressure tanks and is present only when inhaling the gas.
The proposed project will develop a long-lasting, inhaled NO delivery system to
improve lung function of patients suffering from ARDS brought on by COVID-19 or
other causes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase
I project advances translation of a novel molecule which sequesters NO
chemically as a stable solid and can be engineered to degrade at a controlled
rate for in situ continuous release. This proposal develops NO donors with
optimized performance and stability for pulmonary delivery. Tasks include:
develop and test libraries of NO donor compounds for the ability and rate of NO
release; evaluate and select compounds with good solubility characteristics to
formulate for aerosolization/ nebulization; test candidates for improvement of
lung function in animal models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.