* 2040273
* RAPID: Antimicrobial Coatings for the mitigation of virus transmission on high-touch surface
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* John Scully, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2022
* USD 199,954.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed work is to limit the
transmission of the COVID-19 virus and influenza virus through the development
of new antimicrobial materials. The work focuses on metal alloys that can be
used to coat regularly touched surfaces. Such surfaces are a major contributor
to the spread of a virus as they become contaminated by an infected individual
and lay in wait to infect a healthy person without any direct contact between
the two individuals. An effective antimicrobial coating can dramatically reduce
the length of time a virus can survive on such surfaces through release of
oxidized copper and in that way minimize the likelihood of transmission. In this
work, the focus is on balancing the antimicrobial behavior of the materials with
the other critical aspects of a coating, specifically, the corrosion and
passivation behavior, the surface preparation, and the impact of cleaning.
Surface preparation and cleaning are important factors since it is vital that
any coating be robust and effective in real-world environments. By obtaining a
thorough understanding of the corrosion behavior, it becomes possible to better
understand the science underlying the antimicrobial behavior and enables the
future development of coatings either targeted to other viruses or suitably
broad-spectrum to address a wide range of viruses so that the threat of future
pandemics can be addressed by this strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to determine the efficacy of
antimicrobial functional copper-based alloys deployed as coatings in reducing
the survivability of bacteria and viruses on high-touch surfaces. The process of
mitigating virus viability is dependent on the concentration of copper ions
released, the rate of release from the alloys as well as oxygen radicals
produced as a result of electrochemical reactions, and the nature,
concentration, and inoculum of the virus. These reactions and the fate of copper
depend on alloy composition and the details of surface structure, morphology,
and the nature of the passive oxide surface film produced by pretreatments and
ambient exposure. A given copper cation concentration reduces virus viability
depending on environmental factors and virus attributes. Hence, in this work
virus viability is investigated using a palette of viruses representative of
SARS-CoV-2 as well as influenza strains. Using a judicial selection of copper-
based alloys and expected surface treatments as the starting point, the
antimicrobial performance of these alloys, judged by virus unit death over time
of exposure will be determined as a function of alloy composition and surface
character produced by surface preparation. Detailed surface and electrolyte
characterization is carried out to elucidate the details of the corrosion
mechanism, which enable virus mitigation. This work seeks to enable the
immediate selection of specific copper alloys for deployment as high-touch
surfaces by answering the question of optimal alloy composition and treatment as
well as affect future scientific principles of alloys further optimized for this
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.