* 2040527
* NSF Convergence Accelerator-Track C: Chip-Scale Integrated Multibeam Steering System for Cold-Atom Quantum Computing
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Benjamin Bloom, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 05/31/2022
* USD 794,725.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. The project
aims to develop a chip-scale, acousto-optic multi-beam steering system.
Developing a multi-beam acousto-optic beam steering (AOBS) system will address
the bottleneck of scaling optical manipulation of atoms and ions. This system
will enable a scale-up of cold-atom quantum computing systems to more than 1000
qubits. This project will generate new knowledge on acousto-optics, miniature
diffractive optics, quantum optics and quantum computing. Developing training
opportunities through internships and community outreach programs will engage,
the project seeks to enhance the quantum workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to develop a chip-scale, integrated acousto-optic beam steering
system that can manipulate over 1000 laser spots, handle a wide range of
wavelengths to as low as 500nm, have a high operation speed (&gt;10MHz) and a
high angular resolution, and include no moving parts. The scalable beam steering
system will independently perform gate operation on a 2D or 3D lattice of
approximately 1000 cold-atom qubits. Being fully integrated at chip-scale, the
system will be mass produced using industrial foundries to be disseminated in
volume to the quantum computing community at a low cost. The system will enable
quantum simulation tasks such as quantum chemistry applications, optimization
algorithms, and quantum error corrections. The use-inspired research is at the
convergence of cold atom (as well as ions and molecules) science, integrated
photonics, micro-electro-mechanical systems and material science to
significantly accelerate quantum computing and simulation. Deliverables include
a beam steering hardware to be made available to a broad user-base as well as
standardized process flows and design rules that can be implemented at
industrial semiconductor foundries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.