* 2040729
* NNA-CO: A Community Office for Coordination, Partnership, and Capacity-Building to Support Convergence Research in the Rapidly Changing Arctic
* GEO,RISE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Anne Gold, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 01/31/2026
* USD 4,972,677.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by coordinating NNA projects and broader communities, focusing on
interactions among social systems, the natural environment, and the built
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Navigating the New Arctic Community Office
(NNA-CO) provides leadership to support use-inspired convergence research that
solves complex challenges related to the changing Arctic. This approach is
crucial for addressing societal needs, such as food sovereignty, climate
resilience, and environmental security. The NNA-CO builds awareness,
partnerships, opportunities, and resources for collaboration and equitable
knowledge generation within, between, and beyond NNA projects. The NNA-CO
increases recognition of Indigenous knowledge and data sovereignty; promotes
inclusive and collaborative research design and implementation; and coordinates
effective knowledge dissemination, education, and outreach. The office builds
capacity in early career researchers and provides unique opportunities to
inspire and engage a wide audience toward a more holistic understanding of the
Arcticâ€”its natural environment, built environment, and diverse cultures and
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NNA-CO is a distributed office with three
parts located at the University of Colorado Boulder (CU), Alaska Pacific
University (APU) and the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF). The Central
Office at CU gains efficiency through affiliations with the co-located
Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences (CIRES), the
National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC), and the Institute for Arctic and
Alpine Research (INSTAAR). APU, a tribally controlled, Alaska Native-serving
institution, hosts a Community Extension Office for Arctic communities by
facilitating local/regional NNA research partnerships and interfacing NNA
research with Indigenous cultures, knowledge systems, and research needs. An
Education and Outreach (E&amp;O) Field Office at UAF facilitates connections
among NNA researchers and communities, teachers, and students across Alaska to
maintain coordinated, culturally appropriate, and place-based E&amp;O
activities. The NNA-CO serves the NNA community through enhanced communication,
coordination, and learning, with a focus on (1) co-production of knowledge with
Indigenous Peoples, (2) convergence research, (3) culturally responsive
education and outreach, and (4) open science for greater integrity, data-
sharing, and reproducibility within NNA projects. The future activities of the
NNA-CO will be guided by research and Indigenous advisory boards. Rapid Response
and Convergence Working Groups, focused on a range of research areas (e.g., food
security, coastal systems, and global connections), bring together relevant NNA
investigators and partners to serve as the primary organizing mechanisms. NNA-CO
activities extend the impact of NNA projects by creating collaborative
opportunities for applying knowledge and usable science to Arctic decision-
making. The NNA-CO is essential to advancing knowledge and awareness of the role
of the Arctic in the global system, including within biophysical, economic, and
socio-cultural contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.