* 2040595
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Inclusive Biologists Exploring Active Research with Students (iBEARS)
* EDU,EES
* 11/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Michael Moore, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Bernard Grant
* 02/28/2022
* USD 99,999.00

NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Inclusive Biology Exploring Active Research with
Students (iBEARS): Infusing 21st Century Skill Development in Undergraduate STEM
Curriculum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is
funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of
Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a
comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and
innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion, and broadening participation in
STEM at scale. The goal of this planning grant is to create a shared vision by
connecting current and future Inclusive Biologists Engaging in Active Research
with Students (iBEARS) collaborators (faculty from biology and education
departments, middle school science department administrators, and middle school
science teachers) to expand and scale up the current, ongoing project infusing
21st century professional skill development into undergraduate STEM curriculum.
For the purposes of this grant, 21st century professional skills are skills with
domain-neutral competencies (such as communication, creativity, and problem-
solving) that employers identify as important for success in an economy
characterized by globalization and rapid technological change. Minoritized
populations in undergraduate science programs have access to fewer opportunities
to acquire 21st century professional skills when compared to other peer groups,
which may make them less competitive for high paying or prestigious jobs after
graduation. This inequity results in a lack of diversity of perspectives in the
STEM workforce, leading to reduced innovation and creative
output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach to the shared visioning
project is to hold a workshop bringing together biology and education faculty,
4th-8th grade teachers, and school administrators interested in inclusion to
share resources and evidence-based practices for iBEARS implementation.
Specifically, a two-day workshop will be convened to help new iBEARS network
members plan for iBEARS implementation and assessment in the classrooms as well
as facilitate the collaboration of network participants to develop new iBEARS
resources and products. Participants will experience iBEARS presentations from
current 4th-8th grade classes, participate in question and answer sessions with
iBEARS undergraduates and 4th-8th grade teachers, and learn about the evidence-
based instructional techniques used in iBEARS-supported classrooms. Participants
will leave the workshop with a detailed plan as to how faculty will be supported
to implement iBEARS in classes and institution wide. It is also expected that
teams may come up with novel research questions to explore, thereby developing a
novel research agenda based on participantsâ€™ specific interests. To provide a
platform for collaboration and house all iBEARS resources, making the resources
freely accessible, a QUBEShub website will be constructed. This website will
facilitate interactions between iBEARS collaborators, iBEARS steering committee
members, and other key stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.