* 2040736
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Developing a Collaborative Infrastructure for Educating STEM Undergraduate Students who are Neurodiverse Learners
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Kelly Roberts, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The growth of the United States STEM workforce is important to economic and
global competitiveness. Developing STEM talent among all sectors of society is
needed in order to grow the workforce. The proposed collaboration brings
together personnel from Northern Arizona University, The Ohio State University,
Auburn University, the University of Missouri-Kansas City, the University of
Hawaii and Kansas State University, to address the five key elements of
collaborative infrastructure for a future alliance of stakeholders and a
national broadening participation agenda. The team will focus on the challenge
of increasing people with neurodiversity in STEM fields, by increasing the
number of undergraduate students with Autism, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder (ADHD) and other diverse neurological disabilities who succeed in STEM
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team’s plan includes multiple regional
convenings of team members and community stakeholders. The project is expected
to eventually engage a broad group of representatives from dozens of
universities, colleges and community colleges, including those institutions of
higher education that are known to serve specific diverse populations, such as
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSIs), and Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs). Included among
these institutions are former recipients of the NSF Research in Disabilities in
Education (RDE) program’s Alliance for Students with Disabilities in STEM awards
and NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot grants (DDLPs).
Additionally, stakeholders from national organizations, industry, vocational
rehabilitation, and STEM students who identify as neurodiverse will be involved.
The planned stakeholder meetings will provide a forum for partners to build a
culturally appropriate collaborative infrastructure: To develop a shared vision;
to expand the partnerships to include a broad community of organizations and
institutions; to establish shared goals and metrics; to solidify the leadership
structure; to establish and improve communication across the partners; and to
scale or expand the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES planning grant
is funded by the NSF’s Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of
Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science program (NSF INCLUDES),
a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries
and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion and broadening participation
in STEM at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.