* 2040847
* Preparing for the Future of Survey Research
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2021
* D. Sunshine Hillygus, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jan Leighley
* 09/30/2021
* USD 39,778.00

This award provides support for a (virtual) conference about the future of
survey research in the social sciences. The conference brings together an
interdisciplinary group of researchers from various academic fields and from
various industries to discuss innovations in social, behavioral, and health
surveys. The goal is to overcome common disciplinary divides and to foster
communication and collaboration about innovations that might address current and
impending challenges for survey research. In particular, the conference focuses
on the themes of increasing the quality of survey data, improving the utility of
survey data, assessing advances in technologies applicable to survey data,
integrating survey data with auxiliary data, such as census and social media
“big data,” and examining the prospects for new institutional innovations in
survey research across the social and behavioral sciences, governments, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The virtual conference will bring together
scholars and practitioners from diverse backgrounds and fields in the various
social and behavioral science areas that employ the highest quality survey
research to support their activities. The conference focuses on four subject
areas over the two days: 1) Data quality and transparency. Discussion of this
topic helps to establish the standards by which data collections are evaluated.
2) Survey methods innovations. Discussion of this topic is aimed at assembling
novel advances at the research frontier. 3) Survey Plus or looking beyond survey
responses. Discussion of this topic is aimed at consideration of integration of
auxiliary data, such as administrative records and other new types of “Big
Data.” 4) Imagining new institutions. Discussion of this topic builds on the
earlier foundations to consider the potential for new frameworks and
collaborations for conducting survey research in the social
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.