* 2040102
* EAGER: Room-Temperature Fabrication of Electroceramics
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2022
* Rick Ubic, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 03/31/2022
* USD 297,265.00

Modern electronic circuits contain many kinds of materials, but heating
different materials together during processing is difficult due to
incompatibilities in chemistry, densification behavior, and/or thermal
expansion. High temperatures are typically required, but there is an urgent need
for innovative design principles which would allow electroceramics to be
processed with organic or semiconductive materials and silver electrodes at
temperatures &lt; 400°C. The room-temperature fabrication method could be one
such technology. Unfortunately, many electrical properties improve only after
subsequent heating; thus, the goal of this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project is to determine the densification mechanisms/kinetics
involved and thereby develop room-temperature processable capacitor oxides with
useful electrical properties which can be applied throughout the electroceramics
industry to lower costs, energy consumption, and consequent greenhouse gas
emissions. This research directly supports the continued US competitiveness and
supports many commercial defense applications promoting national security. The
integration of this research with education will be achieved in several ways,
including being included in a Ceramic Processing online graduate
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-firing different materials is difficult due to
chemical incompatibility at high temperatures as well as differences in
sintering behavior and thermal expansion. Due to the slow, thermally-activated
diffusional processes, high temperatures are typically required for
densification. It is possible to enhance the driving force by the application of
pressure during sintering; however, there is an urgent need for innovative
design principles which would allow electroceramic compositions to be co-fired
with organic or semiconductive structures and silver electrodes at temperatures
&lt; 400°C. The room-temperature fabrication method could be one such
technology, but the physics involved are not yet completely understood, nor are
its implications for the properties of functional ceramics. The goal of this
project would be to use in situ transmission electron microscopy studies to
determine the densification mechanisms/kinetics involved, and in so doing
develop a fuller understanding of the mechanisms and kinetics of the room-
temperature densification of oxides. With this information, the aim is to
develop ultra-low-temperature sinterable capacitor oxides with relative
permittivities up to ~200 and loss tangents &lt; 0.1 in the radio frequency
range. The method involves the use of aqueous solutions as transient solvents to
effect densification of ceramic powders via a mediated dissolution–precipitation
process. Unfortunately, many dielectric properties improve only after annealing
to remove strain, secondary phases, grain boundaries, and point defects which
can lead to electron/ion motion. The goal of this research is to develop ceramic
dielectric materials which densify at ultra-low temperatures and exhibit the
requisite properties for microelectronic applications without any additional
thermal processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.