* 2040570
* The role of strike-slip fault interaction on long-term slip rates
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Michele Cooke, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 03/31/2024
* USD 371,071.00

Accurate estimates of earthquake hazards depend on knowledge of both the
location of active faults in the Earth's crust that host earthquakes and the
loading on those active faults. Faults with faster loading are capable of more
frequent earthquakes than faults with slower loading. When records of past
earthquakes are used to estimate future fault activity, future loading on the
fault is assumed to be the same as the past. However, in regions with closely
spaced active faults, such as California, faults can interact so that the local
loading is not constant through time. This project will use physical laboratory
experiments to mimic the growth of faults in the Earth’s crust. While hundreds
of thousands of years are typically required for new faults to develop and old
faults to be abandoned, the same processes can be replicated within hours in an
experimental apparatus. This enables direct observation and documentation of the
variations in local loading on faults that happens as a system evolves. This
research will produce numerical models that simulate laboratory experiments and
use properties of the Earth’s crust in order to replicate the same processes
acting within the Earth. Results from this study will show which regions along
faults are more likely to experience changes in local loading. Information from
this investigation can guide how we use records of past earthquakes to estimate
hazards of future earthquakes. The project team includes women, first generation
college students, and persons with disabilities. This team will strengthen the
development of a diverse STEM workforce and increase scientific literacy and
public engagement, through several mentoring, outreach and science communication
efforts. These efforts include teaching outreach programs, developing
instructional videos for the UMass Geomechanics YouTube channel and mentoring
deaf and hard of hearing geoscientists and academic
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic hazards assessments of active faults
rely on estimates of their long-term slip rates. These assessments presume that
long-term slip rates determined from the geologic record can be reliably used to
forecast future seismic hazards. However, this presumption is only valid if
active faults have constant long-term slip rates. Where strike-slip fault
systems host multiple active faults with irregular geometry, reorganization of
the system, such as via the growth of new fault segments, may impact slip rates
along nearby faults. Geologic slip records cannot always characterize slip
behavior through time, nor can these records reveal the processes responsible
for slip rate variations. Therefore, direct observations of fault system
evolution from physical and numerical experiments are needed to characterize the
processes that drive variations in long-term slip rates. In order to assess the
role of fault reorganization on long-term slip rates, this project will use
scaled physical experiments to directly observe fault system evolution and
document slip behavior. Experiments with different fault configurations and
different analog materials will be scaled to simulate a wide range of crustal
faulting conditions and permit direct assessment of fault slip response to fault
interaction and reorganization. Numerical models will be benchmarked and
validated by comparisons to experimental data, and will utilize crustal rheology
and scale to inform long-term slip rate behavior in response to strike-slip
fault reorganization and interaction. The experiments will reveal the array of
driving mechanisms intrinsic to a fault system that can contribute to temporal
variations in fault slip rate and the time spans over which these mechanisms
act. The findings from these physical and numerical experiments will help to
evaluate the relative reliability of geologic slip rate records in order to
estimate future slip rates at different structural locations along strike-slip
faults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.