* 2040201
* RAPID: Impacts of a massive dust storm on a tropical forest
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* William McDowell, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 238,927.00

The movement of dust across the surface of the Earth is an important process
that brings nutrients to ecosystems. This process is especially important for
tropical ecosystems that are often extremely nutrient limited. While tropical
forests in the Northern Hemisphere receive dust inputs annually from the Sahel
and Sahara deserts, it is difficult to calculate the quantity of nutrients and
the overall effect of the dust because of very low background rates of
deposition. A major dust storm was generated in June 2020 from the deserts of
North Africa that was transported across the Atlantic Ocean and into the
Caribbean. The specific dust storm was estimated to be the biggest in the last
fifty years. This event provides an opportunity to study the impacts of dust on
tropical ecosystems. The project will quantify the dust inputs, their effect on
soil and water quality, and their impacts on a tropical forest. The project will
also develop a set of education and training opportunities for under-represented
students. Broad dissemination of results will occur through making data
available to the public. Multiple peer-reviewed manuscripts will be produced
that describe this extreme event and its ecological significance for tropical
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dust from the Sahel and Sahara of North Africa
provides an annual and reliable source of calcium, magnesium, and phosphorous to
tropical forests in the Caribbean. This dust is usually deposited in small
quantities, but in June 2020 Puerto Rico experienced a large magnitude dust
storm. The effects are likely to be significant for biological processes that
can be nutrient-limited in highly weathered landscapes. To study these effects,
sampling of soil water, wells, and streams will occur at high frequency (weekly)
in watersheds of the Luquillo Mountains of Puerto Rico. A network of water
quality sensors is already in place and will record water quality every 15
minutes, as well as the biotic signatures of stream primary productivity and
respiration through changes in dissolved oxygen. These data will be used to test
the hypothesis that massive dust inputs alter watershed-scale biogeochemical
cycles. To understand the watershed-scale response, these dust inputs will be
connected to soil solution and groundwater chemistry, following their subsequent
export to the stream network, and the biotic response of the stream ecosystem
will be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.