* 2040350
* EAGER: Science and Ethics in Informal STEM Contexts
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Kendall Moore, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 11/30/2023
* USD 299,917.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This EAGER seeks to explore the state of research ethics in practice in science
and, specifically, how ethics plays out in informal STEM institutions, through
lenses of multiple cultural traditions and perspectives. By means of producing a
documentary, Decolonizing Science, the project will engage scientists and
informal STEM educators in considering how informal STEM institutions could re-
envision their work to fundamentally embrace inclusivity and belonging. The
exploratory process will challenge and inform informal STEM learning
institutions and the scientists with whom they work to consider how to navigate
contemporary social tensions, support research that values diverse perspectives,
and promote decolonizing practices. A significant component of the project
includes screenings, workshops, and difficult conversations, in conjunction with
informal learning institutions that are already on the front lines of new
language and knowledge creation. The project will be a collaborative process as
participants’ thoughts, views, and arguments will shape the project from the
beginning. Once the film is made, collaboration will continue by engaging
science-based practitioners at institutions that serve communities of color and
that are invested in working towards greater diversity, inclusivity, equity, and
access. Discussions related to the film’s screenings will inform how informal
learning institutions can radically re-imagine their work and their spaces,
including teaching, curation, research, communication, and knowledge and
literature production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The film will explore the origins,
creation, and evolution of Western science as an enterprise that can sublimate,
marginalize and re-narrativize the practices, procedures, ethics, and
contributions of the underrepresented people of color in science. Through focus
groups, interviews, and facilitated discussions, this EAGER will document and
share the interactions among scientists, informal STEM educators, and filmmakers
as they explore how to practice more ethical science in communities of color, on
their lands, and within their nations, as well as how science can be portrayed
and enacted within informal STEM learning institutions. The project seek to
challenge and shift both informal STEM learning institutions and the sciences,
through a yet-untested, well-considered, and humane approach to ethical
practices of science and their implementation in informal STEM learning
institutions through a film and by envisioning possible futures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Directorate for
Education and Human Resources/Advancing Informal STEM Learning Program, the
Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences Ethical and Responsible
Research program and the Directorate for Geosciences Education and Diversity
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.