* 2040288
* Collaborative Research: Specific Energy-Based Prognosis for Machining Surface Integrity through Integration of Process Physics and Machine Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Robert Gao, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 349,999.00

Manufacturing employs more than 12 million jobs and contributes over $2 trillion
to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) annually. At the same time, manufacturing
accounts for about 28 percent of the annual total energy consumed in the U.S.
This is particularly true for metal cutting and machining processes, which have
been a major contributor to the national economy in value creation, education,
workforce development and employment. Despite rapid advancement in sensing and
communication technologies, real-time process monitoring and prediction of the
surface integrity of machined parts have remained a challenge for energy
efficient, high-quality machining. Although the incorporation of real-time
sensing data into physics-based machining models has the potential for model
updating and calibration, and emerging machine learning (ML) techniques have
demonstrated the effectiveness in data analysis for manufacturing, the general
black-box nature of ML models has limited rigorous, physics-based
interpretations of ML outcomes. This award addresses this existing gap by
introducing a physics-guided learning method for machining surface integrity
prediction with improved accuracy and transparency, through the complementary
strengths of data science and process physics. The outcome of this project
impacts multiple industry sectors, from aerospace to automotive, energy, and
healthcare. The project’s interdisciplinary nature helps train the next
generation of manufacturing workforce by broadening participation of women and
underrepresented minority groups in research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates the compounding
effects of machining process parameters on the surface integrity of machined
parts. The research approach is multifold. (1) Develop physical models for the
specific energy associated with machining surface integrity; (2) Develop a data
generative method to synthesize images of cutting tool wear and machined
surfaces by automatic characterization; (3) Integrate cutting physics into a
recurrent neural network (RNN) for physics-guided surface integrity prediction
to improve the interpretability and transparency of the ML outcomes; and (4)
Experimentally evaluate the developed methods on a production-grade machine. The
resulting methodology reduces the time and cost for post-machining product
quality inspection, and creates new knowledge in three areas: (1) Introducing a
new, energy-centric learning method that characterizes the machining surface
integrity by means of specific energy; (2) Developing a new data synthesis
method to address limitations in surface integrity data availability for model
construction and evaluation; and (3) Demonstrating an effective pathway to
integrate machine learning with physical knowledge for improved interpretation
of the network structure and its prediction logic, thereby enhancing the
network’s transparency and acceptance by the manufacturing
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.