* 2040613
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track D America's Water Risk:  Water System Data Pooling for Climate Vulnerability Assessment and Warning System
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Casey Brown, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 05/31/2023
* USD 999,982.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project on Water System Data Pooling for Climate
Vulnerability Assessment and Warning System addresses a major gap in the
resiliency of America's Water Supply, viz., resiliency to climate variability
and change, especially focusing on the vulnerability of thousands of smaller
utilities in the United States that may lack the financial wherewithal and
technical capacity to analyze these risks and assess their impact on operations.
This project establishes a convergence research agenda by bringing together
experts in water systems, climate science, AI technologies, emulation models and
software development for the conceptual design, development, and sharing of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) models to quantify
America's water supply risk at the level of water utilities and their regulatory
state and federal agencies. The aggregated data sources and scalable models for
climate and water risk analyses will be made available and accessible to all
communities interested in this information. The project employs AI-based
techniques to facilitate the exploration of climate observations, climate model
simulations and corresponding water system response to help create breakthroughs
in our understanding of water supply risk. The models developed will assist in
the strategic planning and operations of water systems in the face of an
increasing frequency of floods and droughts under climate change and aging
infrastructure conditions—factors that constitute significant risks to the
nation’s safe supply of water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A cloud-based, multi-scale
AI-enabled modeling, and model and data sharing, platform will be developed to
support user-centric analyses for the water supply industry. The platform
provides multiscale modeling for feature identification, spatiotemporal modeling
and forecasting, functional dependence, inverse problems and transfer learning.
Physics-based models as well as AI models will be explored in this context. A
diverse set of data sources will be used, including national-scale water data
will along with utility-collected data. The outputs will be responsive to
identified user needs and will become a community data and modeling resource. A
deep collaboration with industry partners via the Columbia Water Center’s
America’s Water initiative and through the University of Massachusetts’s Water
Innovation Network for Sustainable Small Systems guides this process. A broad
range of organizations and their constituents will be engaged via webinars and
on-site training and demonstrations about the platform. A particular focus of
this effort is on organizations and representatives of underrepresented
communities that are especially vulnerable to climate driven disruption.
Educational materials will be targeted towards users from such communities with
the goal of developing additional trained individuals locally who could support
the use and interpretation of ML tools for water risk analysis in a local system
context. Outreach activities will be especially targeted to the smaller water
utilities who may be resource constrained and can, thus, benefit from the shared
platform that will be created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.