* 2040215
* TWC: Large: Collaborative: Computing Over Distributed Sensitive Data
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Marco Gaboardi, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2022
* USD 95,700.00

Information about individuals is collected by a variety of organizations
including government agencies, banks, hospitals, research institutions, and
private companies. In many cases, sharing this data among organizations can
bring benefits in social, scientific, business, and security domains, as the
collected information is of similar nature, of about similar populations.
However, much of this collected data is sensitive as it contains personal
information, or information that could damage an organization's reputation or
competitiveness. Sharing of data is hence often curbed for ethical, legal, or
business reasons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a collection of
tools that will enable the benefits of data sharing without having the data
owners share the data. The techniques developed respect principles of data
ownership and privacy requirement, and draw on recent scientific developments in
privacy, cryptography, machine learning, computational statistics, program
verification, and system security. The tools developed in this project will
contribute to the existing research and business infrastructure, and hence
enable new ways to create value in information whose use would have been
otherwise restricted. The project supports the development of new curricula
material and train a new generation of researchers and citizens with the
multidisciplinary perspectives required to address the complex issues
surrounding data privacy.