* 2040066
* Acquisition of a 4K high accuracy digital microscope
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Aurelie Germa, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 126,390.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2) to acquire an ultra-high accuracy digital microscope
(KEYENCE VHX 7000) to support research and teaching in mineralogy, petrology,
and volcanology conducted at the University of South Florida (USF) - School of
Geosciences (SGS). Robust quantitative measurements of microscale features
(e.g., grain size and shape, textures of rocks) are crucial to better understand
the physical factors that control volcanic eruptions and broader geological
processes. This digital microscope allows, with a single instrument, to capture
images usually acquired separately with regular cameras, binocular and
polarizing microscopes, and automated particle analyzer, allowing to investigate
material ranging in size from a few micron-meters (mineral grains) to several
decimeters (blocks, hand specimen) as well as petrographic thin sections.
Moreover, the instrument is virtually maintenance-free and includes a robust and
innovative image processing software performing much faster and robust
quantitative analyses than conventional systems. In the USF-SGS, the instrument
will be used primarily for research in volcanology, but also in geochemistry,
paleoclimatology, paleontology, structural geology, and astrobiology. The
instrument will also be used to generate 2D and 3D digital models of geologic
samples that will be part of an accessible digital sample library, hosted by the
USF Library, and shared with the international geoscience community through
current cyberinfrastructure platforms (Vhub, Earthcube) with the longer-term
goal of using this database for online teaching, a capability that benefits K-12
and college students and educators. This new analytical facility will support
scientific collaborations throughout USF colleges, as well as with U.S. and
international investigators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system will advance
various research and educational projects within its first two years of use and
beyond. The instrument will allow PIs to collect fundamental data to better
constrain the conditions that control volcanoes’ eruptive behavior as well as
expand users’ analytical capabilities across the full spectrum of sample sizes
to advance research in volcanology. This instrument will enhance the PIs’
research projects to investigate crystallization, mixing, and melt segregation
in shallow plumbing systems; magma fragmentation and conduit flow processes
during explosive eruptions; and the generation, transport, and deposition
mechanisms of various surficial volcanic hazards (fallout, pyroclastic currents,
lahars). Data obtained with the instrument will be used to constrain (1) the
eruptive source parameters of a unique ignimbrite deposit in Martinique island;
(2) plagioclase textures related to magma mixing in the Lesser Antilles and
Ecuador, (3) crystallization rates and melt segregation in various volcanic
plumbing systems of the western US, and (4) pyroclastic deposits from recent
explosive eruptions in the Lesser Antilles, the Americas and Indonesia. Beyond
volcanology, the system will enhance research in karst geology, paleobiology,
sedimentology, paleoclimatology, and geoscience education within the USF-SGS.
The microscope will be freely available to students and faculty in the wider USF
community, specifically Anthropology, Biology, Marine Science, and Civil
Engineering with an SGS collaborative project aim that targets mineralogical and
geochemical characterization of various materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.