* 2040074
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Chronologically Related  Changes in Material Culture Composition
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Kenneth Sassaman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2022
* USD 30,195.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the factors underlying
long term social change. It will use geochemical, petrographic, and other
technical data derived from pottery along the northern Gulf Coast of Florida to
examine social changes associated with the abandonment of large size settlements
in which people lived. Judging from the diversity of settlement and pottery
technology that followed, social outcomes varied. The objective of this research
is to determine the extent to which these changes involved social movements.
Social movements in the modern world are often the impetus for transformative
social change, including those which are often called "collapse." However recent
scholarship on societal collapse has illuminated how social groups in fact can
enact structural change through deliberate collective action, a curative to the
bias that collapse was necessarily a matter of failure or "devolution" of
society. In its emphasis on materiality and the material conditions of human
experience, study of the past holds good potential for contributing to the
cross-cultural study of social movements well beyond the reach of ethnography,
sociology, and literary history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pottery from 12 sites
across the study area will provide data on clay provenance (neutron activation
analysis), composition (petrography), manufacture and use (technofunctional
analysis), and surface treatment (stylistic analysis) as analytical proxies for
social identity and affiliation. Pottery from sites spanning the period of
abandonment and resettlement varies wildly with respect to surface treatment and
vessel form, Provenance and compositional data may be equally variable, but this
is not yet known. Compositional data embody choices for clays and aplastic
additives that carry the weight of tradition inconspicuously, and are thus
possibly indicative of shared practices that took form over generations of co-
residency of potters at civic-ceremonial centers and then continued into the
ensuing centuries of dispersed settlement. As the samples for this project are
drawn from sites on public lands that are vulnerable to the negative effects of
rising seas, this research will contribute to federal mandates for the
inventory, assessment, and conservation of archaeological sites. Furthermore,
this research will: (1) contribute to ongoing archaeological critique of popular
"collapse" narratives and the development of alternatives based on empirical
studies; (2) add information concerning a period of time that is poorly
understood in the area and throughout the southeastern United States; and (3)
provide case material to the growing body of studies on the archaeological
signatures and material implications of social
movements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.