* 2040323
* RAPID: Stabilization, Curation, Digitization and Data Management of the Wales, Alaska, Archaeology Project (1996-2006) Collections
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Scott Shirar, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 02/29/2024
* USD 278,503.00

The site of Wales, Alaska, on the coast of Bering Strait, exists at a crossroads
of continents and provides a rich sequence of human activity for over 1200
years. Wales was the site of ten years of recent archaeological investigations,
which produced approximately 30,000 artifacts, faunal and floral remains, and
sediment samples. Artifacts include chipped and ground stone; carved antler,
bone, and ivory objects; wooden implements; and pottery, much of which was
recovered in excellent condition due to preservation by permafrost. These
materials record over a millennium of human adaptation to an Arctic maritime
environment, including the development of Indigenous whalingâ€”a process of
critical importance to understanding the North American Arctic
past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will stabilize, curate, and digitize
materials and documents produced by the Wales archaeological excavations between
1996 and 2006. All specimens will be cataloged and rehoused in archival-quality
acid-free bags and boxes, ensuring they will be safely stored and accessible to
scientists and descendant Inupiaq communities. Organic artifacts, currently in
danger of degradation and irrevocable loss, will be evaluated and conserved.
Artifacts and raw materials will be identified in the Inupiaq language and the
terms will be incorporated into the collections database so that both Western
scientific and Alaska Native designations are available to users. Selected
artifacts will be photographed and scanned in 3D to enhance use of the
collections. The entire Wales database will be made publicly available via a
searchable web-based project-specific interface. Upon completion of project
activities, artifacts, plant and animal remains, sediment samples and excavation
documentation will be accessible for study, education, and heritage
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.