* 2040532
* NSF Convergence Accelerator - Track D: ImagiQ: Asynchronous and Decentralized Federated Learning for Medical Imaging
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Daniel Rubin, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 05/31/2022
* USD 999,770.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future.This project
will result in a new, use-inspired platform for collaborative AI model
development that removes the hurdles of sharing sensitive medical imaging data.
The new platform will accelerate the translation of AI models into clinics,
while still more rigorously validating them on large, heterogeneous patient
data. For patients and doctors, this innovative technology will help to improve
the quality of healthcare by augmenting the cognitive capacity of clinicians
with more accurate, trustworthy, and safe AI. For medical researchers, the new
platform will considerably accelerate scientific discovery by removing the
hurdles of extramural model training and validation. For industry, the newly
developed open-source ImagiQ platform will serve as a convenient framework for
developing FL solutions. Externally to medical imaging, the proposed concept is
easily extensible to broader areas, where sharing sensitive data is the major
bottleneck, such as connected vehicles, national security/defense, consumer
electronics, etc., and will benefit the society with safer and more reliable AI.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovation in the medical imaging arena will be achieved
by enabling collaborative model development and validation. To eliminate the
current hurdle of direct patient data sharing, a novel decentralized,
asynchronous federated learning (FL) scheme will be developed. In particular,
the new concept of peer adaptive ensemble learning will be explored, in which
the FL task is framed as a large collection of machine learning problems, each
with a different and evolving model and data population. Peer-to-peer model
sharing will eliminate the need for a centralized server that is difficult and
costly to maintain. Asynchronous model updates will enable more nimble and agile
model development. Decentralized blockchain ledgers will permit a secure and
trustworthy exchange of AI models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.