* 2040541
* Collaborative Research: Co-producing Understanding of Drivers and Consequences of Environmental Arctic Change: Science Support for SEARCH
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2026
* Brendan Kelly, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Renee Crain
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,513,268.00

The Arctic is home to Indigenous Peoples and other residents who rely on the
productivity of Arctic ecosystems for their livelihood and for subsistence
hunting and gathering that is vital to health; wellbeing; and cultural,
landscape, and social connections. The Arctic is also an important driver of
climate globally as part of the earth system. Decision makers at the local,
regional, state, and national level often lack consistent access to actionable
knowledge about environmental change in the Arctic, despite the growing body of
scientific understanding and the profound knowledge held by Indigenous Peoples.
Responding to rapid and unprecedented loss of sea ice and other environmental
changes in the Arctic requires policies informed by scientific research and
expertise in social, economic, and ecological systems. This project brings
together a complex collaboration of scientists, Indigenous Peoples, and decision
makers (from government and business) to both create comprehensive understanding
of the processes and consequences of Arctic environmental change and to make
that understanding broadly accessible to decision makers and wider audiences.
Information will be brought together across scientific disciplines and
Indigenous Knowledge systems in a co-produced synthesis. This contributes to
NSF’s mission by increasing scientific understanding of the drivers of Arctic
environmental change and the consequences of these changes in terms of health,
prosperity, welfare, and national security using a convergent approach to
combine knowledge systems and interdisciplinary research. The project will
broadly disseminate the outcomes to further the ability of multiple scientific
disciplines and Indigenous Knowledge holders to produce actionable knowledge in
collaboration with decision makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a
convergent approach termed ‘complex collaboration’ to co-produce and share
actionable knowledge to inform decisions about socio-ecological systems in the
Arctic and lower latitudes. The project goals are to (1) build and sustain
complex collaborations among Arctic experts including scientists, Indigenous
People, and decision makers; (2) co-produce a conceptual framework of the Arctic
system including drivers of change; (3) apply the framework to identify drivers
and consequences of Arctic change in terms of natural, social, geopolitical, and
economic environments; and (4) share holistic understanding in formats
accessible and specific to scientific, Indigenous, and decision-making
audiences. The project brings together diverse networks of co-PIs, Indigenous
People, and partner organizations into three co-production teams focused on
understanding and predicting the processes of Arctic environmental change and
the consequences in holistic, actionable terms for human well-being and
geopolitical and economic stability. A co-produced conceptual framework of the
Arctic system (goal 2) will establish the basis for syntheses that identify
drivers and consequences of Arctic change (goal 3). The holistic understanding
achieved by synthesizing across epistemologies will be shared in distinct
products tailored to specific audiences including policy makers, members of
Arctic communities, and scientists (goal 4). The project builds on past work by
members of this team to increase collaborations with Indigenous Peoples and
advance approaches to co-production of knowledge by sharing lessons learned with
other Arctic researchers and by adding to the growing body of literature on
successful co-production of knowledge. The project will contribute a framework
for complex collaboration on urgent environmental issues that address economic
sustainability and racial equity in the face of climate change in the
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.