* 2040994
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: A Collaboration of Tribal Colleges, Professional Organizations and Four-Year Degree-Granting Universities to Advance Native American Students in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2020,05/31/2023
* John Poolaw, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 05/31/2023
* USD 98,865.00

The growth of the United States STEM workforce is important to economic and
global competitiveness. Developing STEM talent among all sectors of society is
needed in order to grow the workforce. This planning grant project includes a
leadership team of experts from the American Indian Science and Engineering
organization, Nueta Hidatsa Sahnish College and the University of North Dakota.
The project leaders will engage Navajo Technical College, the Southwestern
Indian Polytechnic Institute, the College of Muscogee Nation, Salish Kootenai
College, Arizona State University, the University of New Mexico, Oklahoma State
University, the University of Oklahoma, Montana State University and the
American Indian Higher Education Consortium (AIHEC), to build a collaborative
infrastructure. The planning grant has two primary goals: To engage a core group
of partners to inform the development of a Native American Indian STEM
undergraduate student transfer model using best practices, and to develop a
national network of partners who will adopt the model to strategically address
the successful transfer of Native American Indian STEM students from two-year to
four-year institutions. By addressing both goals, the collaborators will be
prepared to create an alliance, large-scale network or center for adapting and
implementing the Native American Indian STEM student transfer model at scale
across the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participating colleges and
universities will be engaged in paired collaborations to facilitate
relationships, communication and the development of the shared vision and the
partnership model that is functional and builds upon existing transfer support
practices. All of the partnering institutions and organizations will meet four
times during the project duration to address the project goals. By the
completion of the project, the partners plan to engage all tribal colleges and
universities in the US, and to connect and leverage resources with members of
the existing NSF INCLUDES network. The planned meetings will provide a forum for
representatives from partnering colleges, universities and organizations to
build a culturally appropriate collaborative infrastructure: To develop a shared
vision; to expand the partnerships to include a broad community of organizations
and institutions; to establish shared goals and metrics; to solidify the
leadership structure; to establish and improve communication across the
partners; and to scale or expand the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
INCLUDES planning grant is funded by the NSFâ€™s Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science program (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance
U.S. leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity,
inclusion and broadening participation in STEM at
scale&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.