* 2040737
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track C: Chiral-Based Quantum Interconnect Technologies (CirquiTs)
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Jonathan DuBois, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 05/31/2022
* USD 920,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. Just as
classical computers have allowed us to solve critical problems faster, find
solutions to complex problems, and transfer information from one location to
another, quantum computers could spur new breakthroughs in science. These
breakthroughs would have real societal impact by enabling the discovery of
medications to save lives, accelerate medical diagnostics, and bringing about
new computing capabilities and functionalities that do not exist today. This
grant will address the scaling challenge of quantum systems by offering new
technology to spur the development of quantum computing via novel quantum
interconnect technology. Quantum interconnects are a critical component for
quantum information-processing systems. The quantum interconnect is a device or
process that transfers information between different types of physical media.
This research will advance several quantum information transport technologies by
utilizing highly specialized properties of materials: topological and chiral
properties. The techniques will significantly improve interconnections between
quantum circuit elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this grant, topology and
chirality engineering is used to develop topological quantum materials operating
in frequency ranges compatible with common supercomputing and other qubits.
Delivering highly tunable, cryogenic compatible, quantum interconnects will
address several challenges limiting advancements in modern quantum computing.
The proposed CirquiT chips will mitigate technical barriers that have impeded
progress in quantum interconnects due to issues of lossy transmission and
dephasing of quantum information due to unwanted crosstalk. In terms of broader
impacts, the research outcomes and impacts will be leveraged via partnerships
with Quantum LA and the Quantum Economic Development Consortium (QED-C) to
connect students and industry sectors, and coordinate outreach to K-12 students
and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.