* 2040490
* FAI: Using AI to Increase Fairness by Improving Access to Justice
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Kevin Ashley, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 01/31/2024
* USD 375,000.00

This project applies Artificial Intelligence (AI) to increase social fairness by
improving public access to justice. Although many AI tools are already available
to law firms and legal departments, these tools do not typically reach members
of the public and legal service practitioners except through expensive
commercial paywalls. The research team will develop two tools to make legal
sources more understandable: Statutory Term Interpretation Support (STATIS) and
Case Argument Summarization (CASUM). STATIS is an AI-based legal information
retrieval tool to help users understand and interpret statutory terms. It helps
them find sentences explicating the terms of interest and cases applying these
terms. Inputs to the system are queries about a statutory term and the provision
from which it comes. The system outputs a list of sentences retrieved from case
law that mention the term in a manner useful for understanding and elaborating
its meaning. CASUM summarizes case decisions in terms of legal argument triples:
the major issues a court addressed in the case, the court’s conclusion with
respect to each issue, and the court’s reasons for reaching the conclusion.
Given a case text, it outputs simple argument diagrams graphically summarizing
arguments in the decision. Ultimately, the tools will be deployed through legal
information institutes (LIIs) that provide free access to the public. They will
help the lay public to understand, as well as to access, legal source materials
by making it easy for them to find sentences in legal cases that provide
definitions, tests, examples or counterexamples of statutory terms and to see
the issues, conclusions, and reasons a court addresses in a decision.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project applies the latest natural language processing
approaches. Pre-trained legal language models will improve the performance of
machine learning in identifying sentences in legal cases that explain statutory
terms or state issues, conclusions, and reasons. Recent developments in
extractive and abstractive summarization, text simplification, and argument
mining will generate high quality legal information for diverse users. A legal
language model will be pretrained on a large corpus of publicly available court
decisions and fine-tuned to identify features that play a significant role in
retrieving high value sentences explaining statutory terms. A prototype module
for retrieving and ranking such sentences by explanatory value and a graphical
user interface ultimately deployable via an LII website will be developed. Using
the legal language model, techniques for matching annotated sentences from case
summaries to the corresponding sentences in the full texts will be developed and
fine-tuned to classify sentences in which a court identifies issues,
conclusions, and reasons justifying the conclusions. Finally, a prototype module
for graphically summarizing cases in terms of argument diagrams depicting legal
argument triples will be developed and applied to summarizing cases that explain
statutory terms. Planning will be done for a user interface suitable for
integration with the LII websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.