* 2040727
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track D: Towards Intelligent Sharing and Search for AI Models and Datasets
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Rajesh Gupta, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 12/31/2022
* USD 947,200.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. A major goal
of AI-driven applications is to discover the underlying patterns in domain-
specific datasets, which typically requires tremendous field experience and
interdisciplinary knowledge to design or even select suitable AI models. This
project will develop a hub and portal for AI data sets and models. It will offer
data and model matching recommendations, the use of domain knowledge to improve
search strategies for data sets and models, and support for privacy. The hub and
portal will engage a broad range of users (in STEM and non-STEM fields) creating
AI-driven innovations in various domains that we can only imagine today.
Successful execution will provide new tangible artifacts consisting of model and
data schemas, software, systems, and services that would make the AI models and
datasets easily discoverable, accessible, interoperable, and
reproducible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four novel techniques will be used
to realize the envisioned system: (1) A fine-grained privacy control technique
with adaptive descriptive statistics, achieving a balance between the privacy
needs of data owners and application-driven usability. All other components will
have access to only the privacy-controlled data; (2) An automated metadata
generation method that exploits various kinds of information about AI models and
datasets (e.g., data values, model parameters, auxiliary descriptions) to
incorporate domain logic into semantics. This metadata, together with the models
and datasets, will be organized as a text-rich network; (3) A representation
learning method that transforms information in the text-rich network into a
latent space, where datasets/models with similar semantics would be close to
each other. This learning over multimodal data will enable comprehensive
understandings about models and datasets; (4) A learning-to-match model with
constraints will be built to bridge datasets and models. The constraints are
mainly induced from schema alignment between models and datasets, which can also
filter out obvious non-compatible model and dataset choices, significantly
expediting the search and matching process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.