* 2040714
* EAGER: Identifying and Capitalizing on Schools of Thought as a Basis for Virtual Communities in Computer Science and Engineering Research
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Marianne Winslett, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 02/29/2024
* USD 205,984.00

As the computer science and engineering research community continues its
unbroken half-century streak of exponential growth, the community's old ways of
finding community and collaboration are falling apart. Research results are
generated and shared at a much faster rate than in the past, but relationship-
building opportunities are lower than ever â€“ and human relationships are an
essential component of the research enterprise. Already data-oriented research
conferences have grown too large to be effective for many of their original
purposes, such as fostering community and shared purpose; meeting new potential
peer collaborators and building relationships with them in person; providing an
opportunity for junior researchers to connect to senior researchers and build
the loose ties that are so important for careers; and providing an occasion to
not only learn about the latest research results (which are now instantly
available on the internet) but also to interact with the researchers who
produced those results and probe beyond the surface of publications. COVID-19 is
accelerating that trend. Most conferences have chosen to become virtual, which
makes them more accessible to all, often at no cost; but the chance to interact
one-on-one is greatly reduced or even absent, as are networking opportunities
and community-building. To address these problems, this exploratory data science
project will analyze the extensive data available about existing research
collaborations and create methods to identify specific potential new
relationships and collaborations that have the potential to enhance the pace and
trustworthiness of scientific innovation, while encouraging cross-fertilization
of ideas, methods, and techniques. As an integral part of the project, the
investigator will train two undergraduates in data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on techniques from social network
community detection and characterization, recommender systems, and social
network visualization, the project will produce new methods to identify and
characterize existing small close-knit research communities, or "schools of
thought" based on publicly available information about collaborations and other
relationships between researchers. The project will propose methods to bring
together complementary schools of thought, based on an analysis of the
characterization of past highly successful collaborations. The resulting new
virtual communities will still be small enough for extensive one-on-one
interaction, which will support both the promotion of existing bonds and the
formation of new ones. The project's methods will be pilot tested at a major
computer science conference, and the project's code will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.