* 2040549
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track C: A Toolkit for Solving Practical Materials Science Problems on Near-Term
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Garnet Chan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 05/31/2022
* USD 999,087.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. This project
seeks to address the gap between the theoretical advantages of quantum
simulations and the capabilities of existing quantum hardware. By bringing
together a cross-sector team, the project will develop quantum tensor network
simulation techniques for materials and chemistry problems. The project aims to
deploy and demonstrate these techniques on trapped ion quantum computing systems
being developed at Honeywell Quantum Solutions. Deliverables include a
comprehensive software development toolkit that will enable its use by a multi-
disciplinary and cross-sector user base. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team
includes academic researchers in quantum information theory computational
materials and chemistry techniques along with industry scientists at Honeywell
Quantum Solutions who are developing large-scale high-performance trapped-ion
quantum computing systems. The cross-sector team will aim to pioneer a new suite
of quantum algorithm methods and software tools for “holographic” quantum-
algorithms. These tools will exploit efficient compression of physically
important states afforded by tensor-network state representations. Mid-circuit
measurement and reset (MCMR) of selected qubits will be enabled by Honeywell’s
trapped ion quantum computers in order to apply qubits as efficiently as
possible towards the classically hard aspect of materials simulation:
representing electronic correlations and entanglement. These techniques aim to
reduce the number of qubits and accuracy of gates required to tackle large-scale
realistic materials and chemistry simulations. This project seeks to narrow the
gap between real-world problems and the capabilities of near-term quantum
hardware. Deliverables include a comprehensive MCMR algorithm development
toolkit that is tightly integrated with existing material science, chemistry
simulation packages, and quantum programming frameworks. This toolkit will
engage a broad user- and researcher- base to aid in the further development of
techniques and innovations in quantum computing. In-person workshops and
conferences, and online education and training materials will be developed to
disseminate this work to a broad audience of industry and academic engineers,
chemists, materials scientists, and software
developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.