* 2040921
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Broadening Participation of Rural K-12 Girls in Mathematics Intensive STEM Fields
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Rhonda Tate, Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2022
* USD 99,982.00

This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S.
leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion,
and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The goal of this planning grant
is to bring together key stakeholders in a Research-to-Practice Partnership
(RPP) to broaden participation of rural K-12 girls in mathematics intensive STEM
fields. Over the past 20 years, there has been a great deal of research
identifying the barriers and potential pathways to STEM careers experienced by
young women, but only for the general population or specific subpopulations.
This project focuses on a population that has gone unnoticed and
underrepresented in STEM education research - young women from rural areas of
the United States. The planning grant will lay the groundwork to build a large-
scale partnership and network from the ground up by combining the forces of the
Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance (MMSA) and the National Girls
Collaborative Project (NGCP) with rural educators, young women across the
Nation, 100kin10 partners, and key STEM organizations such as the Roux
Institute. The RPP approach to this research will amplify the voices and
experiences of rural young women, the communities they live in, the STEM
business sectors they could work in, and the educators they work with, to build
lasting partnerships, pathways forward, focused research questions, and a
strategic plan to address this overall agenda. This planning grant will build
the solid foundation needed to advance knowledge and inclusion practices across
the Nation, to build a more inclusive environment, and help close the ever-
widening gender gap for rural young women in mathematics intensive STEM fields.
Additionally, the use of an RPP to advance this research with rural communities
provides a unique model that could be scaled and replicated to address
additional research questions in partnership with members of rural communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing Expectancy-Value Theory as a framework, the PIs
will initially focus their efforts on exploring the motivational beliefs of
young women from rural areas across the K-12 continuum. By assembling a diverse
and passionate team of researchers, practitioners, and young women, the research
team will push beyond understanding the structure of the problem to identifying
ways to solve the problem. The RPP activities will develop a shared vision of
reform to broaden participation of rural young women in mathematics intensive
career paths by collaboratively: 1) Unpacking and developing a common
understanding of the problem, including identifying the specific problems of
practice that construct barriers that keep young women from choosing a
mathematics intensive STEM field; 2) Designing evidence-based solutions to those
problems of practice that inform common goals and metrics; 3) Generating
research questions related to supporting young women from rural regions in
pursuing opportunities in mathematics intensive careers; and 4) Designing a
coordinated strategic plan that increases the networks’ technical, programmatic,
and research infrastructure to address the problems of practice. This project
will create evidence-based solutions that will significantly increase rural
young women’s participation in mathematics intensive STEM careers, a critically
underrepresented group. The development of a rural RPP of this scale focused on
gender equity will offer a model for building inclusive coalitions that are
based on the assets and experiences of underrepresented populations. The lessons
learned through this planning grant will address the gender inequities in
mathematics intensive STEM careers by designing initiatives that build inclusive
environments for rural young women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.