* 2040458
* CAREER: Development of Force-Activated Materials for the Release of Small Organic Molecules
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Andrew Boydston, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2021
* USD 110,229.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large, observable changes in a
material environment can be translated into molecular-scale events, giving rise
to chemical reactions at the smallest length scales. A particularly powerful
method for communicating between macroscopic and molecular-level events is the
development of chemical reactions that can be driven by mechanical force. Toward
this end, the PI seeks to develop materials capable of converting mechanical
stress, such as compression and elongation, into chemical outputs including the
release of small molecule agents. The small molecules that are released may be
applicable to therapeutics, catalysts, or reagents, providing advancements in
diverse areas such as drug delivery, self-reinforcing materials, and sensors.
Undergraduates and graduate students in the Department of Chemistry will be
mentored in this program, and will have opportunities to collaborate with
experts from chemistry, engineering, and physics disciplines. The PI will also
integrate an education plan that incorporates the discoveries and challenges
from the research component of the program. This will be achieved through
partnership with a local area high school to develop a model for collaboration
between university researchers and high school students. The process will
include redesigning high school science curricula to include problem-based
learning activities that mimic the experiences of undergraduate and graduate
researchers at the university level. Anticipated outcomes include increased
recruitment and retention of students from underrepresented minority groups in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program aims to develop materials capable of
releasing small organic molecules via mechanochemical transduction. In this way,
macroscopic forces will be translated into molecular-level chemical reactions
resulting in triggered covalent bond scission. Toward this end, the PI will
investigate and compare complementary isomeric designs for mechanoresponsive
functional groups (i.e., mechanophores) that are activated by either bond
bending or stretching distortions. A central hypothesis is that these two modes
of activation will manifest different efficiencies of energy transduction.
Additionally, the solid-state mechanical properties best suited for activation
of each mechanophore type will be explored. This information will be useful in
guiding future designs of mechanophores, particularly those capable of releasing
small molecule agents without incurring bond scission within the polymer main
chains. The PI also seeks to develop materials capable of amplifying the
response of a single, site-specific mechanochemical event into a cascade release
of multiple small molecules. This will be achieved through the development of
mechanophores capable of triggering head-to-tail depolymerization of self-
immolative polymers. The outcomes of this research will be a deeper
understanding of how specific activation mechanisms influence mechanophore
efficiency, and the ability to amplify the output from single mechanophore
activation. These research efforts will be directly integrated with an education
plan for collaboration between high school science students and university
researchers. Specifically, the PI will work with members of a local area high
school to design a science curriculum centered on problem-based learning.
Members of the PI's research team will help design and implement coursework and
lab experiences that mimic the experiences of undergraduate and graduate
researchers in chemistry.