* 2040404
* Collaborative Research: GeoGaze: Gaze-Driven Adaptive Multimedia to Augment Geoscience Learning for Neurodiverse Learners
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Marc Pomplun, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 12/31/2024
* USD 31,172.00

Much of learning occurs today in multimedia environments. This project will
design and test GeoGaze, a novel technology that uses eye tracking to augment
learning with multimedia in real time. GeoGaze analyzes and predicts effective
strategies for students based on differences in working memory capacity and
changes the presentation of learning materials to help everyone view and learn
information. Investigators will first study what visual attention strategies
work best for learners with different levels of working memory capacity. This
information will be used to build a gaze-driven technology to help each learner
use the most effective strategies by adapting the learning materials in real
time and for each learner. Examples of this include predicting where learners
will look on the screen, what order they will explore the content, and then
highlighting the most important elements in the sequence to be viewed or
blurring the less relevant content before revealing when appropriate. The
results of this project will help us understand how individual differences in
visual attention and working memory capacity influence multimedia learning and
how to adapt learning materials to improve learning in real time. This project
seeks to engage more students in learning geoscience, a field not well
represented by a diversity of students and
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of multimedia learning traditionally
focus on final learning outcomes but what happens during the learning process
(e.g., visual attention strategies to integrate multimedia) is often unexplored.
This project addresses these shortcomings to gain a robust perspective of how
students with different working memory capacities learn authentic STEM content
(geoscience) in multimedia environments, and how their cognition can be enhanced
using gaze-driven adaptive learning technology, GeoGaze. This approach is based
on a novel integration of behavioral and psychophysiological data as well as
multi-layer backpropagation neural network analysis to predict media integration
strategies. GeoGaze represents a novel gaze-driven technology for adapting
multimedia learning in real time based on effective media integration strategies
for each learner. This research will generate new empirical evidence for using
real-time gaze-driven adaptation of learning materials to augment cognition and
improve learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.