* 2040599
* NSF Convergence Accelerator-Track D: AI-Enabled Provably Resilient Networked Microgrids
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,09/30/2022
* Scott Smolka, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. The broader
impact and potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I
project is to develop coordinated networked microgrids (NMs) that have the
potential to help restore neighboring distribution grids after a major blackout.
These NMs also hold promise to significantly enhance the day-to day reliability
of the powergrid. Many organizations (including the US Department of Energy)
believe that, ultimately, NM R&amp;D will lead to the next wave of smart-grid
technology, which has the potential to achieve the vision of a highly resilient
grid. Specifically, this project aims to develop and demonstrate Artificial
Intelligence (AI) enabled, provably resilient networked microgrids (AI-grid).
AI-Grid has the potential to transform today’s community power infrastructures
into tomorrow’s autonomic microgrids and flexible services immune to cyber-
attacks, high levels of renewable energy penetration, faults, and disastrous
events, which have the potential to benefit various commercial sectors as well
as the military.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key innovation proposed in this
project is a programmable platform that integrates continuous-depth deep neural
networks, reachability analysis, formal control, and cybersecurity technologies
to enable scalable, self-protecting, autonomic and ultra-resilient microgrids
and NMs capable of coordinating ultra-scale distributed energy systems and
cultivating America’s smart communities and cities. For example, the Grid at the
Energy &amp; Innovation Park (EIP), a $1 billion microgrid project aimed at
transforming “Hardware City” — New Britain, CT— from a traditional manufacturing
Center into the new Center for Connecticut’s digital economy. This project will
share with the relevant communities the resultant learning and control models,
as well as the monitoring data from test beds and operational microgrids run by
their collaborators. The adoption of AI-Grid in the EIP data center microgrid
will demonstrate the tremendous potential in empowering our nation’s digital
economic engine – the swiftly growing array of Data Centers. This project will
provide a powerful living laboratory/classroom and big data sets to stimulate
innovations towards smart, replicable, sustainable, and connected communities
and infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.