* 2040076
* I-Corps:  A Novel Injectable Bone Healing Gel Device
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,09/30/2022
* Dong-Shik Kim, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to define the
requirements for the development of natural polysaccharide (sugar)-based gel
devices for bone healing. There has been a recent, sharp increase in the number
of orthopedic surgeries worldwide; This is due to the increased aging population
with orthopedic diseases and the rising incidence of road accidents. In
addition, the increased number of obesity and osteoporosis patients are
accompanied with high incidence of bone fracture. Currently available treatments
including autografts, allografts, bone graft substitutes (BGSs), and bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) suffer from many drawbacks. The proposed gel
consists of a natural polysaccharide that as been shown to promote rapid bone
growth through osteoconductive and vascularizing effects. In addition, an
associated anti-bacterial property is considered an important advantage as more
than 70% of patients with fractures in distal extremities suffer from infection
that requires treatment. The translation of the proposed gel device is expected
to help the patients recover faster without infection. In addition, the
treatment may be more cost-effective than the BGSs and BMPs available in the
market. The global market is estimated to be the $3.25 billion for treating
fractures in distal extremities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the translation of developments for natural polysaccharide gel devices
for bone healing. The device consists of gellan gum and FDA-approved components
that demonstrate strong osteoconductive and angiogenetic activities for rapid
bone healing with anti-bacterial effects. The current treatments for bone
defects are autografts, allografts, bone graft substitutes (BGSs), and bone
morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2). These methods often suffer from problems such
as immuno-rejection, disease transmission, weak bone-forming potency, abnormal
bone outgrowth, inflammation, and tumorigenesis. In a recent animal study with
the proposed gel, it was found that the gel induced significant cortical bone
ingrowth and thickened cortical bones at the injection sites. In addition, there
was a significant increase in neovascularization within the cortical bones. Two
major advantages of the device over the current bone healing devices available
in the market are its ability to induce bone growth inwardly and suppress
tumorous cell growth. Additionally, the anti-bacterial activity of the device is
an improvement because bone fracture-related infection delays healing and
increases complications and medical costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.