* 2040094
* 4th International Conference on Epigenetics and Bioengineering (EpiBio)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Nathaniel Hathaway, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 22,455.00

The 4th International Conference on Epigenetics and Bioengineering (EpiBio),
will be held on October 9-11, 2020 on a virtual platform. This conference will
bring together biologists, chemists, and engineers to discuss ways in which
their disciplines can collaborate to find novel solutions to problems that are
limiting the development of epigenetic modeling. EpiBio 2020 will focus on
connecting professionals from academia and industry for the purpose of sharing
newly uncovered fundamental knowledge in the field, as well as novel
technologies that can ultimately be used to create effective, personalized
treatments for a variety of diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EpiBio 2020
conference will focus on discoveries in biochemical systems, as well as
emphasize bioengineering and engineering healthcare. The scientific program will
address six topics, presented over two days in a single-track format. Sensing
Epigenetic Modifications will focus on new advances in sensing of methylation
and histone modification. Writing Epigenetic Modifications will focus on writing
epigenetic modifications and the relevant toolset. Nuclear Organization will
focus on expanding knowledge of epigenetic modifications and developing methods
of treating diseases effectively. Single Cell Epigenetics will focus on
developments in the study of epigenetics at the single-cell level. Emerging
Technologies will focus on technologies such as acetylases, DNA ligases,
methyltransferase, RNA ligases, reverse transcriptase, and others that can be
used to make experimental epigenetic modifications. Epigenetics in Human Health
&amp; Disease will address how epigenetic modifications can lead to disease and
how bioengineering tools can be utilized to develop novel therapeutics. Peer-
reviewed conference proceedings will be published on the AIChE website, and the
International Journal of Molecular Sciences may publish a special issue around
the themes of the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.