* 2040665
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track D: Intelligent Surveillance Platform for Damage Detection and Localization of Civil Infrastructure
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Qiang (Shawn) Cheng, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 05/31/2023
* USD 914,467.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. The broader
impact and potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I
project is to reduce the societal and economic impact of aging, deterioration,
and extreme events on civil infrastructure by facilitating widespread monitoring
and condition assessment of constructed structures. Reliable structural health
monitoring tools are necessary for prioritizing maintenance and repair decisions
regarding the nation’s aging infrastructure. Development of accurate, field-
calibrated damage detection tools is needed to reduce the theory-to-practice
gap. In turn, this project will promote the wellbeing of the community by
reducing the societal and economic impact of aging, deterioration, and extreme
events on civil infrastructure. The envisioned work requires diverse
perspectives from multiple disciplines, and partnerships crossing
organizational, institutional, and disciplinary
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to creatively integrate
advances in Machine Learning (ML) and pattern recognition disciplines with
physics-based reasoning to develop a novel, accurate, field-calibrated, and
verified computational platform for in-situ monitoring of civil infrastructure.
The main deliverable of this two-phased project is an intelligent computational
platform consisting of data and algorithms for video-based damage detection and
monitoring of civil engineering structures. Phase I will focus on the selection
of the&lt;br/&gt;benchmark structures, collection of data, and the development
of a prototype of the platform, which will be field calibrated in Phase II. By
the end of Phase II, the project team intend to have further developed and
field-calibrated the computational platform integrating the ML model with a
video analytics module, which will be implemented on selected benchmark
structures, and have prepared user manuals and educational materials for end-
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.