* 2040702
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track C: Cloud-Accessible Integrated Quantum Simulator Based on Programmable Atom Arrays
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Sebastian Will, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 05/31/2022
* USD 981,636.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. The project
aims to develop a quantum simulation platform based on programmable atom arrays.
Utilizing recent advances in nanophotonics, the arrays will enable controlling
individual atoms with greater precision and flexibility. By being cloud-
accessible, the platform will be available to a broad user-base. The platform
aims to be a testbed for developing and implementing quantum algorithms with
real-world relevance in materials science, quantum chemistry, and
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop a novel
integrated atomic quantum simulator that will combine features of analog quantum
simulation and digital quantum computing in the same device. The project will
perform proof-of-concept studies in these focus areas: (1) atomic platform that
is based on neutral strontium atoms in ground and Ryderg states; (2) lasers and
photonics that feature holographic atom traps and compact, chip-based laser
systems; (3) timing and control system that includes a quantum sequencer with
nanosecond-resolution; (4) user interface that will be built by professional
software engineers to allow secure and easy cloud-access; and (5) quantum
algorithms and applications to inform the design of the hardware to realize a
system that can provide quantum advantage for applications in materials
research, chemistry, logistics and finance. The project team includes
physicists, engineers, computer scientists, mathematicians, and educators from
academia, national labs and industry. Deliverables include (1) demonstration of
a compact source of ultracold strontium atoms; (2) demonstration of laser
cooling of strontium via a chip-based integrated laser; (3) concept for a
professionally designed timing and quantum sequencer system; (4) definition and
implementation of a proof-of-concept professional user interface; and (5)
identification of relevant quantum algorithms that can run on the hardware to be
developed. The project aims to advance quantum simulation and quantum
computation and will provide opportunities for students and other researchers to
engage in quantum information research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.