* 2040984
* Examining the Inter- and Intra-Personal Dynamics of Detachment and Recovery After a Relationship Ends
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Stephanie Spielmann, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,053.00

At some point nearly everyone experiences having a relationship end. The
dissolution of a relationship can cause pain, disrupt aspects of a person's
life, and undermine emotional, psychological, and physical health. Existing
research adequately predicts relationship dissolution but stops there without
revealing exactly when and how people recover and come to let go of strong
feelings for ex-partners. Some of the features of moving on involve intra-
personal dynamics that reside within a person, such as longing and depression or
renewal and relief. Other aspects of the recovery process involve interpersonal
dynamics that occur between former partners who may continue to influence one
another or instead end their mutual influence. Little is known about the
specific intra- and interpersonal dynamics that occur when a relationship ceases
to exist as it has. People who experience the dissolution of a relationship bond
seek insight into how to cope and recover. More broadly, social connections are
critically important in daily life; understanding how people react when an
important relationship ends may provide insight into what people experience at a
smaller scale when friend or work relationships are disrupted. The research also
provides training opportunities for individuals who have been underrepresented
in science and promotes open and transparent research practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To fully examine the dynamics following the dissolution of
a relationship bond, this research tracks both partners to capture processes
beyond only one partnerâ€™s vantage point. The project adopts an innovative study
design that examines changes in relational dynamics pre-to-post dissolution and
enables the documentation of complex and time-sensitive recovery processes.
Partners complete weekly surveys up to a six-month period and daily surveys over
a one-month period immediately after their current relationship ends. Specific
measures assess individual processes (i.e., how I think, feel, and behave) as
well as dyadic processes (i.e., how my ex-partner thinks, feels, and behaves,
and how we interact together once our relationship ends). The project thus
reveals consequential aspects of the recovery process, such as whether and how
ex-partners contact and influence each other, whether ex-partners adopt biased
perceptions that downplay the desirability of their former partner to facilitate
recovery, and specific individual propensities to experience insecurities,
negative emotions, and distress that impede recovery. Understanding the specific
processes that affect recovery will provide information that people can adopt to
promote effective coping when an important relationship ceases to
exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.