* 2040870
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Inclusive STEM Workforce Development Program
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Sheryl Sorby, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 05/31/2022
* USD 99,963.00

NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Inclusive STEM Workforce Development
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is funded by NSF
Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented
Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national
initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing
on diversity, inclusion and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The goal
of this planning grant is broadening participation in STEM workplaces and
increasing the ability of employers to hire and retain well qualified employees
with intellectual and developmental disabilities. The current work will
investigate the workplace training and mentoring within the Cincinnati STEM
Accessibility Alliance to support the recruitment, selection, and retention of
individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities in the STEM
workplace. This project will build upon the collaborative infrastructure
previously established by the Cincinnati STEM Accessibility Alliance to develop
a leadership and communication plan across a broad network of universities and
local and national STEM companies. This network of national partners will
collaboratively develop a shared vision to address a significant issue to the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant project will enable
the collaborative design and development of a workplace support model that will
have the potential to shift the traditional job coaching programs that most
often place employees with autism in secluded workplace environments, and move
STEM industries towards a fully integrated and innovative workforce inclusive of
neurodiverse perspectives. Future activities beyond the scope of this current
planning grant project have the potential to lead to further evaluation,
development, and implementation of workplace training programs across a wide
range of STEM-industries and environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.