* 2040542
* NSF Convergence Accelerator - Track D: Hidden Water and Hydrologic Extremes: A Groundwater Data Platform for Machine Learning and  Water Management
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Nirav Merchant, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. The broader
impact and potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I
project is to utilize artificial intelligence methods such as machine learning
(ML) to achieve better water management outcomes that directly benefit society
by developing the ability to better plan for and manage extreme events through
improved hydrologic forecasting. HydroFrame-ML is motivated by, and structured
around, applied solutions for water management planning and decision making.
Extreme events like drought and floods have far-reaching societal impacts. They
are common, costly and likely to get worse in the future. The project team is
partnered with the Bureau of Reclamation, which is the largest wholesale water
provider in the country, providing water to more than 31 million people and 10
million acres of farmland. The Bureau of Reclamation will drive use case design
and the metrics used to evaluate success in Phase 1, as well as partner in the
expansion of the project team for Phase 2. Additionally, the project team will
develop hands-on activities and challenges designed to give undergraduates
experience in machine learning and data science, in the context of pressing
real-world challenges. Aided by the planned addition of a STEM mentorship
program partner in Phase 2, the team will build content with the vision of
helping to broaden participation of underrepresented students well beyond the
timeframe of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project brings
together the most physically rigorous national scale groundwater simulations
developed through HydroFrame with national leaders in Earth Systems Modeling and
water management. By providing end-to-end workflows combining state of
groundwater science with operational management tools, HydroFrame-ML will
advance both large-scale water management as well as our understanding of how
human operations and groundwater interact in extreme events. Their products will
provide innovative ways to improve forecasts and in the process will expand our
knowledge about the (1) contributions of groundwater to extreme events in
managed systems; (2) biases in our current risk-assessment approaches which do
not consider groundwater; and (3) potential to improve long-term sustainability
by more actively managing groundwater and accounting for groundwater surface
water interactions in projections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.