* 2040013
* Creating rapid, transparent, and updateable material flow analyses
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Xun Huan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2024
* USD 375,380.00

2040013 (Cooper). The goal of this project is to improve the speed at which
material flow analysis (MFA) is performed and to transparently communicate and
reduce the uncertainty in the results, thus enabling a routine and updatable
process to make MFAs at any scale (from factories to supply chains). The
objective is to quantify the uncertainty of MFA parameters and network
structures, and to conceive intelligent data collection strategies early in the
MFA, thus decreasing the cost for high-confidence MFA results. MFAs are critical
tools in the transition towards a circular economy. They reveal opportunities
for material efficiency and symbiosis, as well as the system-level impacts of
localized changes to the supply chain (e.g., the effect of increased electric
vehicle deployment on lithium extraction and manufacturing emissions). Detailed
MFA is currently a costly, time-intensive data collection process followed by a
typically manual reconciliation of conflicting and missing data. Attendant
uncertainties are typically invisible to the end-user. This research will
develop an approach where computational methods are used to reduce data
collection costs, improve output data, and better manage uncertainty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, Bayesian inference will be used to update
uncertainty as new data is collected. This approach will be integrated with the
principles of optimal experimental design (OED) to identify the next data
records to collect that can lead to the largest uncertainty reduction, measured
as the Shannon information gain. Second, the project will study the network
structure uncertainty in MFAs by proposing a set of candidate network structures
followed by Bayesian model selection to identify the most suitable structure.
OED will also be adopted to plan data acquisition that reveals the best network
structure. Third, the developed techniques will used to generate MFAs for
historical years, and use error propagation to compute in-use stock levels and
recycling rates in creating a time-dependent dynamic MFA. These contributions
will be accessible through open-source code and demonstrated by studying U.S.
steel flows and global polymer flows. The work will result in a guide for
eliciting probability distributions for MFA variables from experts, moving the
field away from the arbitrary allocation of probability distributions. The costs
of improving MFA confidence will be reduced by performing targeted data
collection using the principles of OED. Furthermore, network structure
uncertainty (i.e., the existence or absence of nodes or flows between two nodes
in an MFA) is pervasive and can severely undermine the reliability of the
reconciled flow predictions, but has yet to be rigorously studied. This research
will investigate network structure uncertainty by forming an ensemble of network
structure candidates using both expert advice and randomized network structure
generation. OED will also be developed to plan data acquisition that reveals the
best MFA network structure while minimizing data collection costs. Through this
work, new computational algorithms will be created, for example, an efficient
categorical stochastic optimization procedure that incorporates domain knowledge
about the MFA network structures, and an information-theoretic OED criterion for
model-selection entailing a triple-nested Monte Carlo estimator. This research
aims to enable companies, universities, and governments to use an inexpensive
but statistically rigorous analysis of physical flows to inform policy,
practice, and investment decisions that will increase resource efficiency.
Reduced MFA costs and uncertainties will open the door to more powerful
forecasting. For example, detailed annual MFAs across time can reveal the
dynamics between industries (e.g., steel, aluminum, and cement nexuses) and
policies (e.g., tariffs) that are needed for more reliable integrated assessment
models. To promote impact, methods and findings will be presented at the
Conference of the International Society of Industrial Ecology, produced codes
and datasets will be deposited in the Industrial Ecology GitHub repository, and
learning tools (e.g., on static and dynamic MFAs) posted to the online learning
C-SED website. The project will build a sustained, cross-unit and multi-
university Midwest collaboration infrastructure focusing on the topic of data
science for sustainability decisions. An outreach program at Ypsilanti STEMM
Middle College will integrate key lessons on sustainable materials with FIRST
Robotics design principles, helping to empower URM students with the skills to
pursue sustainable engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.