* 2040620
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track C: Synergistic Thrusts Towards Practical Topological Quantum Computing
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,09/30/2021
* Peng Wei, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 09/30/2021
* USD 785,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. This project
seeks to develop approaches that address issues of decoherence and crosstalk by
scalable topological superconductors (TSC). Investigation for achieving
realistic large-scale quantum computers is required to advance the field of
quantum information science. This project will integrate Majorana zero modes
(MZMs) into conventional superconducting qubit architectures to advance their
application to quantum computing. By having outreach programs towards K-12
students and research experiences for undergraduates, this project will broaden
participation in quantum with a focus on underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will build and establish a cross-sector team that will
develop advances in controlling the topological nature of materials to advance
quantum computing to deliver fault-tolerant qubits and their quantum
interconnects. This project seeks (1) to understand and demonstrate the non-
local topological nature of the MZMs by detecting the electron teleportation
through a pair of MZMs; (2) to establish the basic elements for measuring the
parity state in a teleportation-based T-qubit; (3) to explore flux quantization
caused by a supercurrent loop that is mediated by the MZMs and set up the basic
flux (or pseudo-spin) measurements of a T-qubit; (4) to identify and plan the
Phase II research program, and (5) to build a strong team of academic,
governmental lab, and industrial partners. Building on recent developments of a
new TSC material platform, this project aims to demonstrate the quantum nature
and the non-local topological protection of MZMs in the platform as well as
build topological qubits that can be integrated into existing quantum computing
circuitry. This may lead to greater functionality in superconducting circuits
which can significantly advance topological quantum computing. The project
deliverable includes a platform supporting topological qubit that is more robust
and more scalable. By establishing a nationwide student exchange program and
outreach activities to K-12 students, this project seeks to engage students in
quantum research and training to broaden
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.