* 2040735
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track D: Rapid Development of Intelligent, Built Environment Geo-Databases Using AI and Data-Driven Models
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Yong Cho, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 05/31/2022
* USD 920,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. The broader
impact and potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I
project is to achieve what is seen as the Holy Grail by the Built Environment
research community and industry. Infrastructure designers and planners
increasingly require detailed three dimensional (3D) geospatial databases of the
Built Environment, in order to consider human scale perceptions, which today are
often overlooked but critical to improving cities in order to better meet the
needs of its citizens and other emerging technologies, such as autonomous
vehicles. The impact on society of applying Artificial Intelligence (AI) to
rapidly create secure and intelligent 3D models of the Built Environment,
including horizontal (e.g., highway, bridges) and vertical (e.g., buildings,
plants) facilities, by turning raw data into actionable information cannot be
overstated. However, to-date, assembling and maintaining those databases has
been too expensive for even the most progressive cities due in large part to the
cost of manual feature extraction. Built Environment data that is accurate and
reliable is critical for the well-being of communities as such data is used for
a variety of purposes including emergency preparedness, asset operations,
maintenance, public safety, and more. A convergent, innovative team will be
formed with industry partners to ensure that the knowledge developed through
this research effectively transitions into many aspects of practice. From the
outset, and through both phases of the project, the team is taking steps through
team building and intentional engagement with a variety of stakeholders to
broaden the scope of potential impacts of the proposed innovation. Specifically,
the research and implementation activities will be designed to consistently
include dialogue and invite input from a broad range of interests, intentionally
seeking involvement with segments of the public that are traditionally left out
or neglected in technology implementation endeavors. This research also
implements activities for workforce development in computer vision and
geomatics, which currently has a large gap between employment needs and a
workforce of appropriately skilled personnel, particularly from underrepresented
backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current workflows and procedures
to develop 3D models of the Built Environment require substantial manual effort.
Those processes that are automated are limited to small datasets that are not
representative of the current point clouds and other data being acquired or
needed for Building Information Modeling (BIM). They are also limited in the
types of objects that can be modeled. To this end, the interdisciplinary
research team will work with stakeholders to develop a more holistic Scan-to-BIM
process. Phase I of this project has two primary goals: (1) provide a scan-to-
BIM validation tool by compiling a sizable collection of benchmark datasets with
annotated point cloud scans and corresponding BIM models, creating a prototype
validation server with metrics related to parameters of interest to stakeholders
(e.g., evaluate the accuracy of modeled door widths, which are important to ADA
compliance assessment, or evaluate these models for urban renewal, redevelopment
projects), and create and host a Scan-to-BIM challenge for researchers all over
the world to participate, and (2) develop a prototype tool to implement a
holistic Scan-to-BIM framework to rapidly and reliably generate BIM models from
scan data that can be used not only to facilitate the development of the
benchmark datasets but also used by stakeholders. Based on the research
resulting from these challenges, the project team plans to build a comprehensive
cloud-based service for Scan-to-BIM, which will be deployed to serve the
Architectural/Engineering/Construction (AEC) community, and ultimately the
public in general as these models can decrease construction or renovation
project costs of public infrastructure funded with taxpayer’s money. Users would
be able to select desired algorithms for key stages of the Scan-to-BIM framework
based on their performance for specific applications and use
cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.