* 2040113
* EAGER: Microstructure-Preserving Joints Between Nano-Layered Metal Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Michael Demkowicz, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2023
* USD 273,994.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will lay the
scientific foundation for welding together—i.e., joining—of nanostructured
materials. Traditional joining methods cannot be used because they destroy the
desirable properties of these materials. Robust and scalable joining methods
promise to accelerate the transition of nanostructured materials from the lab to
engineering applications, thereby advancing the national interest. The approach
to be explored relies on the self-organization of material structure into a
strong and stable joint. This project will advance scientific understanding of
the self-organization process. It will mentor one full-time postdoctoral
researcher as well as provide research opportunities to undergraduates. Every
effort will be made to recruit women and individuals from underrepresented
minorities to the team. Furthermore, the PI will build up international research
opportunities for students by developing a collaboration with a university in
Mexico via the TAMU-CONACyT collaborative research grant
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to determine whether
two adjacent nano-layered metal composites (NMCs) may be joined though the
guided self-organization of an initially uniform filler material into a
microstructure that interpolates the layered morphologies of two adjacent NMCs,
connecting all the individual layers in them. Nano-layered metal composites
(NMCs) possess numerous exceptional properties, such as high hardness, fatigue
and radiation resistance, and excellent thermal stability. However, lack of
joining methods that preserve the layered microstructure of NMCs impedes the
technological use of these materials. Conventional joining methods—such as
welding—disrupt the layered morphology of NMCs, thereby destroying their
attractive properties. The novel joining process to be investigated here stands
to create joints that preserve NMC properties by connecting the layers in them
continuously, in effect interpolating their microstructures. The work combines
experimental investigations with phase field modeling. Experiments will focus on
small-scale testing of thin film materials synthesized using physical vapor
deposition. The project will rely on lithographic techniques for creating well-
defined gaps between NMCs and for plugging these gaps with customized filler
materials. To guide the experimental effort, a phase field model will be
developed to simulate both phase separation of the filler material as well as
the subsequent evolution of the morphology of interpolating microstructures.
This model will be used to pre-screen a range of processing conditions, focusing
experimental effort on high-value regions of the processing parameter
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.