* 2040020
* NSFGEO-NERC: Wider Impacts of Subpolar nortH atlantic decadal variaBility on the OceaN and atmospherE (WISHBONE)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Stephen Yeager, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,859.00

This project is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation's Directorate
of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research Council (NERC) of
the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency Agreement. This
Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted and peer-reviewed
by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of the budget. Upon
successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds the proportion of
the budget and the investigators associated with their own country.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Subpolar North Atlantic (SNA), which is the region of
the Atlantic Ocean between 45N - 65N latitude, is a highly variable region.
Surface temperatures and surface salinity here have varied on a range of
timescales with those on decadal or longer being the dominant ones. This decadal
timescale variability appears to form a key component of a larger climate mode,
the Atlantic Multidecadal Variability, which has been linked to a broad range of
important climate impacts, including rainfall in the North African and south
Asian monsoons, floods and droughts over Europe and North America, and the
number of hurricane formations. The SNA is also one of the most predictable
places on Earth at decadal timescales, which suggests there is potential for
improved predictions of regional climate and high-impact weather years ahead.
However, the origins of this variability, and the processes controlling its
impacts, are far from fully understood. There is significant evidence to suggest
that anomalous heat loss from the subpolar North Atlantic Ocean to the
atmosphere can instigate a cascade of changes across the North Atlantic basin in
both the ocean and atmosphere. For example, changes in the SNA can change the
strength of the ocean circulation to the south, affect the northward transport
of heat and freshwater in the North Atlantic, and subsequently affect the upper
ocean temperatures and salinity across the whole North Atlantic basin, and into
the Arctic. Changes in the subpolar North Atlantic surface temperature are also
thought to affect the atmospheric circulation (i.e., wind patterns) in both
summer and winter. However, observational records are very short, and so there
are significant problems with understanding causality, and considerable
uncertainty about how well many of the important processes are represented in
current climate models. This project (WISHBONE) will make use of new advanced
climate simulations and forecast systems to improve our understanding of the
impact of the subpolar North Atlantic on the wider North Atlantic basin. It will
also test specific hypotheses related to understanding the specific role of heat
loss over the subpolar North Atlantic in driving changes throughout the basin
including the role of surface anomalies in driving wind patterns. The project
will enhance international collaboration with the UK and science results would
be of interest to the public in the US and the UK, as both regions are impacted
by SNA variability. NCAR will engage in outreach activities to communicate key
findings through public lectures, press releases, and university lectures
amongst others. It is anticipated that this work will inform ongoing and future
decadal prediction activities, such as those led by NCAR and the UK Met Office.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of WISHBONE is to characterize
the linkages between anomalous buoyancy forcing of the SNA and impacts on the
wider North Atlantic coupled system on decadal timescales, and to determine the
oceanic and atmospheric processes that control these impacts. WISHBONE will do
this by focusing on the specific linkages and underlying processes. Hence, the
specific objectives of the project are: 1) to determine and evaluate the oceanic
pathways through which changes in the SNA impact on lower latitudes in the
Atlantic basin; 2) to determine the impact of changes in the SNA on atmospheric
circulation over the North Atlantic on a range of timescales, and to deduce the
important processes involved; 3) to determine the oceanic and atmospheric
pathways through which changes in the SNA impact on higher latitudes and the
Arctic; 4) to assess how robust are the mechanisms and timescales in numerical
simulations at different resolutions, and their consistency with observations;
5)to explore how the influence of the SNA is modified by anthropogenic forcing.
The key time scale to be addressed is decadal, but in the context of
interannual-to-centennial changes in the SNA. The primary hypothesis is that
buoyancy forcing over the SNA is the primary controller of Atlantic Decadal-to-
Multidecadal coupled variability due to its key role in shaping the Thermohaline
Circulation (THC) across the North Atlantic basin and, subsequently, upper ocean
changes that result in an atmospheric response. Specific hypotheses include: 1)
subsurface density anomalies in the SNA propagate down the western boundary and
affect the AMOC at lower latitudes and the Gulf Stream Extension (GSE); 2) SNA
SSTs force changes in the speed and/or latitude of the atmospheric eddy-driven
jet in summer and winter, contributing to decadal jet variability; 3) subsurface
density anomalies in the SNA are a key ingredient for successful predictions of
major changes in the SNA (e.g. the mid-1990s warming), and associated changes in
phase of the AMV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.