* 2040249
* CAREER: FormalDP: Formally Verified, Private, Accurate and Efficient Data Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Marco Gaboardi, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 488,314.00

Data-driven technology is having an impressive impact on society but privacy
concerns restrict the way data can be used and released. Differential privacy
has emerged as a leading notion supporting efficient and accurate data analyses
that respect privacy. But designing and implementing efficient differentially
private data analyses with high utility can be challenging and error prone. Even
privacy experts have released code with bugs or designed incorrect algorithms.
Programming platforms and formal verification tools can assist data analysts in
designing differentially private data analyses without bugs. However, the
current approaches have two limitations: first, they support reasoning about
privacy but not about accuracy and efficiency which are two other important
aspects of data analyses; second, they support reasoning about idealized data
analyses but not about their implementations on finite computers. The goal of
this project is to overcome these two limitations by developing novel formal
verification techniques and tools supporting formal reasoning combining privacy,
accuracy, and efficiency guarantees for both data analyses, and their
implementations. The results of this project will contribute to develop
foundational methods for privacy-preserving technology which can benefit society
by improving and promoting safer practices in handling private or sensitive
data. Moreover, the project will support educational activities aimed at
training students with a global view on data privacy and its practices, and
outreach activities aimed at investigating ways in which privacy policies and
standards can be impacted by the results of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this proposal is the
theoretical and technological development of verification techniques and tools
that can enable the design of data analyses that are private, accurate,
efficient, and with verified implementations. To achieve this goal the project
will focus on three concrete directions: first, it will develop formal
verification techniques to reason in a formal way about the accuracy of
differentially private data analyses; second, it will develop resource analysis
techniques to reason about the efficiency of a data analysis in terms of
computing time and space, and in terms of the number of needed data samples;
third, it will develop reasoning techniques to verify the privacy, accuracy and
efficiency of implementations of differentially private algorithms on finite
computers. These techniques will be implement as a type-based verification
framework, named FormalDP, which will thus support type-based formal reasoning
combining privacy, accuracy and efficiency for data analyses and their
implementations. The effectiveness of this approach will be assessed through
experimental studies about the level of accuracy and efficiency that verified
differentially private implementations can achieve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.