* 2040749
* Rapid purification of recombinant proteins by protein nanoparticle crosslinking and light-responsive nanobodies
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Abraham Lenhoff, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2024
* USD 369,639.00

The increasing demand for new protein-based drugs has accelerated the need for
more effective processes for their large-scale production. Access to cost-
effective and highly efficient protein purification processes is among the most
pressing challenges. This project will address the persistent challenges in
protein purification by developing an innovative strategy based on reversible,
light-responsive protein capture. Blue and red light can be used to control
protein binding, precipitation, and recovery of the required nanoscaffold
molecules. This strategy has many operational advantages over purification by
conventional chromatographic methods as well as other affinity-based methods.
The light-responsive purification platform can also be tailored to capture
virtually any native protein of interest. The outcomes of this project have the
potential to transform industrial protein purification processes by eliminating
the need for chromatography, the cost of which often exceeds 50% of the overall
protein production costs. The efficiency gains are expected to substantially
reduce the cost of therapeutic proteins and positively impact the health and
wellbeing of the nation. Engagement of high school students in summer research
opportunities, combined with extended research opportunities for undergraduate
students, will provide valuable training opportunities and help develop the
future STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the proposal is
to develop a new affinity precipitation platform for recombinant protein
purification by combining state-of-the-art optogenetic tools with nanoscaffold-
based affinity precipitation into a new transformative framework for native
protein purification. Conditional nanobodies will be optogenetically activated
by blue light to create switchable target protein binding properties. A red
light-responsive domain will be inserted in the optobody-modified nanoscaffold
to enable its recovery. The project objectives include (i) design optimal
optobodies for blue-light switchable antigen binding, (ii) decorate the
nanocages with different capturing optobody motifs for target protein capture
and release, (iii) co-decorate the nanocages for red light-activated
aggregation, and (iv) evaluate the target protein purification and nanocage
regeneration efficiency. The protein purification platform is operationally
simple since protein capture/release and nanoscaffold recovery can be
independently controlled using two orthogonal blue and red light triggers. Both
the nanobody motif and the light-responsive protein elements are highly modular,
enabling this purification strategy to be used to target many native proteins of
interest. This platform can be adapted into a high-throughput format owing to
the ease of operation, compatibility for miniaturization, elimination of
chromatography, and the flexibility and largely target-independent
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.