* 2040118
* EAGER: Nonlinear label-free microscopy for evaluation of MSC osteogenic potency in 3D culture systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Luke Mortensen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,625.00

Cell therapeutics could become a $200+ billion global market in the next ten
years. Much of the current research focuses on mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs).
Current best practice in evaluating MSC culture activity requires staining the
cells to detect the presence of certain cell components. However, this approach
has shortcomings and may not represent the true state of the cells. The ideal
monitoring technique would allow evaluation of the entire cell culture without
stains or labels. This project will develop imaging techniques to monitor the
culture without stains. This technology could be used in cell manufacturing
processes. The project will also provide students at K-12 through graduate
school training in cell manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will
use a multiphoton imaging approach. It will investigate and synthesize
parameters to create simultaneous imaging of multiple cell features associated
with osteogenic differentiation. These include cell metabolism using redox ratio
and NAD/FAD lifetime, cell shape and organelle content, and collagen production.
Validation of imaging of 2-D cultures will use multivariate techniques. These
techniques will extract the shape of cells and subcellular organelle
organization, metabolic activity, and extracellular matrix production. These
techniques will also create a 3-D reconstruction of small-scale cultures on 3-D
osteogenic microbeads and hydrogel microcarriers. Experiments will explore MSC
differentiation response and outcomes to osteogenic media formulations as a
function of cell age and expansion media. Finally, this project will evaluate
these label-free multiphoton imaging strategies to detect differences in MSC
differentiation. The proposed approach has the potential to significantly
transform the current practice of imaging and sorting stained or re-plated MSC
samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.