* 2040425
* Insights into Episodic Caldera Collapse and Magmatic Systems from the 2018 Eruption of Kilauea Volcano
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Paul Segall, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 04/30/2024
* USD 470,000.00

Volcanic caldera collapse occurs when large volumes of magma erupt rapidly,
causing the overlying the crust to founder into the subterranean magma chamber.
Caldera collapse occurs during both explosive and lava flow forming eruptions;
both are fortunately relatively rare. The 2018 eruption of Kīlauea volcano in
Hawai‘i destroyed 700 homes and led to $800 million in damage. The associated
caldera collapse was by far the best monitored in history. In 2.5 months, the
floor of the centuries-old caldera, within Hawai‘i Volcanoes National Park,
dropped up to 500 meters and increased in volume by 0.8 km3. It is crucial to
understand the collapse process because the weight of the overlying crust acts
to sustain these eruptions. While the basics of caldera collapse are understood,
the unprecedented data collected in 2018 will allow us to address first order
questions, including: What are the crustal stress and magma pressure conditions
necessary for collapse? What is the sub-surface geometry of the ring fault
system bounding the collapse? Why did collapse occur in discrete events, and
what physical properties controlled the character of these events? What is the
nature of sub-caldera magma storage systems and how do they connect to the
eruptive vents? Modeling of these unique data will lead to a quantitative leap
in our understanding of caldera collapse. The project will support a graduate
student to understand volcanic hazards in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2018
collapse of occurred in 62 discrete events in which the caldera dropped from
several to nearly 10 meters, accompanied by magnitude 5.2 to 5.4 earthquakes.
Collapses were accompanied by remarkable, inflationary deformation offsets
followed by decelerating deflations, similar to behavior at other basaltic
caldera collapses. There has been considerable debate as to whether caldera
ring-faults are inward or outward dipping. This project will use finite element
(FEM) modeling combined with inversion of high-rate GPS data to constrain the
ring-fault dip and the compressibility, and hence vesicularity, of the
underlying magma. The research will further use pre- co-, and in particular
post-collapse GPS and InSAR data to constrain the geometry, size and
connectivity of the enigmatic summit magma system. The dynamics of collapse are
analyzed with a model in which the weight of the caldera block is balanced by
magma pressure at its base and rate-and-state dependent friction on its sides.
Flow of magma is driven by the pressure difference between the magma chamber and
the eruption site. Model predictions of repeated collapse events are compared to
the time between events, their duration, displacement, and magma chamber
pressure increase. The model elucidates the conditions for caldera collapse, and
how collapse sustains eruptions that would otherwise cease. The measured surges
in eruptive flux will be used to further constrain pressures within the magma
system. Our analysis of co-collapse deformation leads naturally to a model for
the VLP earthquakes. Synthetic waveforms will be computed that can be compared
to low-pass filtered seismic observations. A striking correlation of cumulative
VT seismicity with inter-collapse subsidence strongly suggests fault creep on
the ring-fault prior to collapse, providing insights into fault development and
chamber pressure history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.