* 2040626
* Understanding the Mesoscale Response to Climate Change Using a Regional Climate Model Ensemble
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Eric Salathe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2024
* USD 689,979.00

As the name suggests, global warming is a planet-wide response to the energy
imbalance caused by increases in greenhouse gases, which spread out and mix to a
uniform concentration around the globe. But despite its global nature the
effects of global warming can vary even within small regions, depending on local
contrasts in topography, ground cover, wind direction, and other factors. Such
local effects can be be studied with global climate models (GCMs), but global
models have limited ability to represent small-scale effects. Even when GCM
results are robust and physically reasonable they can still be misleading if
physical mechanisms occurring on scales too small to be adequately represented
by GCMs turn out to be more influential than the larger-scale effects that they
do capture. An alternative strategy is to use a regional climate model (RCM),
which simulates weather and climate over a limited area using information from
the global model to connect that region to the rest of the world. The RCM can
represent processes on smaller scales than the GCM, and a mismatch between GCM
and RCM results can indicate a "mesoscale surprise", in which a local climate
change expected from large-scale considerations is upstaged by smaller-scale
processes (mesoscale is a technical term referring to spatial scales which are
smaller than frontal weather systems but larger than individual cumulus
clouds).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to understand the role of
mesoscale physical processes in shaping climate change in the Pacific Northwest
(PNW), where the combination of mountainous terrain, proximity to the coast, and
alternation of onshore and offshore wind patterns creates an ideal natural
laboratory for studying mesoscale surprises. As one example, GCMs suggest that
the greatest increase in flooding will occur in river basins in which runoff
comes from a mix of rain and snow-melt, since warming reduces snowpack and
snowpack has a moderating effect on streamflow. But in RCM simulations, which
are better suited to representing precipitation in mountainous regions, the
greatest increase in flood risk happens in low-elevation, rain-dominated river
basins. These basins are more exposed to heavy rain, thus they are more
susceptible to the increase in precipitation intensity that occurs as climate
warms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work performed here uses an ensemble of RCM
simulations, each one performed using output from a different GCM simulation, to
examine the effects of global warming on the weather and climate of the PNW. The
RCM used in the study is the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, and
GCM simulations are taken from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP).
The use of an ensemble allows an assessment of the sensitivity of results to
differences in model formulation, and ensures that the research focuses on the
robust model behaviors which are most likely to have simple physical
explanations. A key concern in the research is the effect of biases on GCM
projections for future climate change. For instance the loss of snowpack has
strong implications for local climate and hydrology, thus a model which
incorrectly simulates snowpack in a region which is not typically snow covered
will likely overestimate sensitivity to warming in that region. The project also
uses the RCM ensemble to look at the likelihood that climate change will
increase the risk of wildfires in the PNW.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of
societal as well as scientific interest as much of the effort in responding to
climate change occurs at the local level. The Principal Investigators are
engaged with a number of local organizations involved in planning for climate
change, including the King County Department of Natural Resources, the US Forest
Service, and Seattle City Light. The project involves undergraduate students
through the Bothell campus of the University of Washington, which is a primarily
undergraduate institution. It also supports a postdoctoral associate, thereby
providing for the future scientific workforce in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.