* 2040375
* Collaborative Research: Developing high-resolution records of storminess from the southern Bering Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Jeffrey Donnelly, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 04/30/2024
* USD 731,410.00

Recent storminess combined with decreasing extent and duration of sea ice in the
Bering Sea has significantly affected Alaska’s Arctic coastline, substantially
disrupting communities, threatening commerce including commercial fishing, and
posing new challenges to our military and vital marine transportation systems.
Unfortunately, our knowledge of past storminess is limited to the last few
decades, so we know little about past variability in extreme storms. This
hinders our ability to diagnose the causes of changes in storminess and to plan
for and address future storm impacts. With this project we will provide
comprehensive storm data sets for the central Aleutian Islands that span the
last two millennia, providing important context to current and future storm
climates. A research cruise along Alaska’s Aleutian Islands will allow us to
access remote fjords and collect a series of sediment cores and environmental
measurements that have the potential to decipher the history of ancient storm
events impacting the area. These storm reconstructions will improve our
understanding of how intense storminess has changed in the Bering Sea and allow
examination of the regional environmental factors that enhance or inhibit storm
activity. The lessons learned from this research will be useful to the
scientific community, planners, and local decision makers and will improve
preparedness and resilience to future storm activity and coastal
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the modern instrumental record of
storminess in the Bering Sea is limited, we know little about the variability of
intense storminess prior to the last few decades. To address this gap in
knowledge we will develop reconstructions of extreme storms over the last few
millennia from coarse-grained event beds in deep coastal basins along the north
coast of the Aleutians. Using sedimentological, geophysical and numerical
modeling techniques, coupled with local instrumentation (wave, current, pressure
sensors), and the collection of local oral and written storm narratives we will;
1) develop reconstructions of coarse-grained event beds over several millennia,
2) measure real-time storm-related coastal processes to determine thresholds for
event bed deposition and provide National Weather Service data for real-time
storm and flood impact forecasting, 3) engage with local communities to develop
a chronology of historical storm affects, and 4) differentiate other mechanisms
of event bed deposition and develop a record of relative sea-level change and
potentially great earthquakes and tsunamis. This research is tightly coupled
with a field- and lab-based education plan focused on building coastal science
literacy to support informed decision-making. Extreme storms endanger Alaskan
Native coastal communities already at risk from increased flooding and erosion
and threaten critical infrastructure and access to subsistence resources. A
collaboration with the Qawalangin Tribe of Unalaska will serve to build synergy
between scientists, local stakeholders, and community residents. Tribal
participation in the planning and carrying out of research activities, the
production of a professional outreach video/photo blog, and design of a portable
educational exhibit and accompanying curriculum materials will provide many
opportunities for meaningful engagement and the promotion of STEM fields to
under-represented groups. The research will also incorporate undergraduate and
graduate students with targeted efforts to increase the representation of Alaska
Natives, women, minorities, and people with disabilities in STEM fields. We will
widely present to the public and scientific audiences through multiple media and
at professional conferences and publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.