* 2040422
* i-learn: empowering engineering learners using visualizations in mixed reality and machine learning ecosystems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Gady Agam, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2024
* USD 377,349.00

In the field of engineering education, significant research on learning with
technologies has focused on either the learner’s interaction with the
technology, on technology-enabled learning material, or on final learning
outcomes. Research on learning with technologies involving the influence of
individual cognitive function (perceptual, attentional, and cognitive skills) is
relatively unexplored. There remains a gap in knowledge on how or why learners
arrive at different results in the learning process. The i-learn research
project bridges that divide by considering the learner’s individual
characteristics as they execute problem-solving tasks while interacting with the
advanced technology-enabled environments – a machine-learning (ML) and mixed-
reality (MX) technology. The i-learn research project’s theoretical and
empirical methods will provide fundamental knowledge about how learners’
cognitive function can be augmented through the advancements of these
technologies, closing the gap in understanding the diversity of individuals’
perceptual and cognitive abilities in engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The perspective of tailoring MX with ML technologies to predict
individual problem-solving harnesses opportunities to research whether learners’
interactions with these technologies leads to improved task performance. i-learn
creates MX-based environments with features informed by ML models not merely as
interactive features but as a medium of communication for perceptive-action. By
focusing on components of learning cognition (e.g., working memory and sustained
attention) as well as mental simulation and situational awareness, this project
(1) uses ML predictive modelling to explore the effects of individual
differences on learners’ performance in problem-solving tasks modelling, (2)
studies learners’ moments of impasse in problem-solving tasks that demand
spatial and cognitive ability, and (3) develops and assesses the effectiveness
of an interactive and adaptive MX platform for learning when used by students
with different cognitive and attentional abilities. This project will improve
the fundamental understanding of how technologies should be designed to enhance
technology-enabled learning. It promotes embodied cognition, pioneers
individualized learning using ML, and advances insights on the effect of motor
activity on operations linked to visuo-spatial abilities. Research outcomes will
inform the design of adaptive learning technologies and the customization of
instruction in engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.