* 2040489
* EAGER: Home-based DIY Interactive Information Physicalization for Young Children and their Parents
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Yi-Luen Do, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Public discourse during the COVID-19 pandemic surfaced the central role data
serves in shaping individual and community action. Data literacy is the ability
to constructively reason with data. Fostering data literacy has largely been the
domain of formal educational systems and expert tools. Informal educational
approaches have the potential to overcome barriers to interacting with data by
fostering data literacy through casual engagement. This research explores how
informal learning, through creation and interaction with physical data
representations (physicalizations), may foster increased data literacy and
engagement. The project team will design a series of do-it-yourself (DIY)
activities for young children to construct physicalizations from household
materials. These activities will enable children to explore COVID-19 and other
data in familial contexts. They are expected to help them reason about the
pandemic and everyday information through embodied data sensemaking and creative
processes of physical construction. This project serves the national interest by
promoting universal data understanding to advance national data literacy,
health, and welfare. It will directly support education and foster diversity by
disseminating information physicalization kits to families across the nation.
Resulting tools will be released as open source so that other researchers,
designers, and developers can use them for diverse information physicalization
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance the field of information
visualization with new physical and tangible representations and techniques.
Through an iterative design methodology of participatory workshops and
interviews, involving families, the project will: (1) develop a novel toolkit
and instructions for families to build interactive information physicalizations,
using common household materials and mobile computers; (2) connect the toolkit
to COVID-19 and environmental citizen science data; (3) understand emergent
phenomena involving how kids and families engage with information
physicalizations, through grounded theory analysis of video and interview data;
(4) assess effects of the information physicalizations on data literacy; and (5)
develop implications for the design and crafting of tangible interfaces, using
everyday materials, which facilitate sensemaking and learning in informal
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.