* 2040812
* Doctoral Dissertation: Does Speaking Improve Comprehension and Processing of a Foreign Language? A Computer-Assisted Language Learning and ERP Study
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Maya Rose, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 06/30/2024
* USD 15,120.00

Adult language learners, including college students, find learning new languages
to be difficult, yet many are remarkably successful. While previous work has
focused on cognitive abilities (e.g. fluid intelligence, phonological short-term
memory, declarative memory) as indicators of language learning aptitude, less
attention has been given to how specific learning tasks might promote language
learning in adults. Using a computer-assisted language learning (CALL) protocol,
this project introduces an unfamiliar language to college students while varying
learning tasks across participant groups. After listening to question-answer
dialogues in the novel language, learners are prompted either to generate
answers to the questions (i.e. brief phrases in the language), repeat answers to
the questions, or answer forced-choice comprehension questions. The impacts on
the learning outcomes of the different tasks are measured and assessed. Sessions
are conducted remotely and recorded using web-based tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on work in cognitive psychology demonstrating
benefits of retrieval practice for learning, this project hypothesizes that
adults who generate answers will outperform the other groups on tests assessing
their comprehension of specific grammatical features of the new language, after
controlling for individual differences in aptitude. Researchers hypothesize that
after only two CALL sessions, adult learners will show neural markers associated
with processing the grammatical structures (i.e. event-related potentials time-
locked to errors) that will correlate with comprehension accuracy.
Identification of the benefits of retrieval practice for comprehension will
inform language learning instruction and aid in the development of effective web
and mobile applications. The research will be conducted at a large urban public
university with women and members of underrepresented groups involved as key
personnel and participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.