* 2040319
* Collaborative Research: Substorm Particle Injection into the Ring Current--MagnetoHydroDynamic (MHD) with Embedded Particle-In-Cell (PIC) Simulation Approach
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Raymond Walker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 11/30/2023
* USD 417,305.00

Magnetic storms generate energetic particles and strong wave activity in the
magnetosphere. Modeling this system is of critical importance both for its
societal and scientific relevance. This work will use a combined fluid-particle
modeling approach to understand the role of kinetic processes in the inner
magnetosphere. A graduate student will be trained and a new more realistic model
of the storm time inner magnetosphere magnetic field, including the ring
current, will be made publicly available to the space weather
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study the process of particle
injection from the magnetotail by developing, validating, and using a self-
consistent particle-in-cell (PIC) simulation embedded in a global
magetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulation of the solar wind-magnetosphere-ionosphere
system. By using the multi-scale particle-in-cell (MSPIC) approach featuring an
implicit PIC system that encompasses a large fraction of the inner
magnetosphere, they will investigate ring current injection and acceleration
during magnetic storm related substorms. This will enable the study of wave-
particle interactions missing from other large-scale ring current simulation
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.