* 2040634
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Developing and Strengthening Partnerships to Better Support Women of Color in the Engineering Workforce
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Dora Renaud, Society of Women Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S.
leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion
and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The goals of this planning grant
are to: 1) establish the Women of Color in Engineering Collaborative (WCEC), a
partnership network of professional engineering associations and STEM-based
companies dedicated to addressing systemic barriers that prohibit equitable work
environments for women engineers of color; 2) create a shared vision focused on
dismantling systemic barriers that impede the retention and advancement of women
engineers of color; and 3) develop a strategic plan to guide WCEC activities.
Reaching parity in engineering cannot be accomplished by approaches that solely
focus on the recruitment or “fixing” of underrepresented groups; rather, efforts
that connect and energize people, cross divides, and drive systemic change
toward equity are needed. To date, many NSF INCLUDES projects have focused on
the recruitment and retention of students into STEM education programs, but the
WCEC will focus on the often cited, yet understudied, challenge of retaining
women in the engineering workforce. Through the WCEC, partner organizations will
better leverage their resources to promote systemic change while working
collectively to decrease the barriers that lead to the attrition of women
engineers of color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To reach the goals stated above, this
project includes two convenings and monthly workgroup meetings. The first two-
day virtual convening will include representatives from thirty organizations,
including professional engineering associations and STEM-based companies.
Participants will develop a shared vision, identify barriers that exist in the
workplace for women engineers of color, and determine which of these barriers
the WCEC is best positioned to address. Workgroups will be established around
specific supports aimed at addressing those barriers. Over the course of the
next six months, WCEC partners will work within their workgroups to develop a
strategy to facilitate collaborative activities for their specific support. A
second virtual convening will be held to consolidate the workgroup strategies
and develop an integrated strategic plan to support the continuation of WCEC
activities. The WCEC will develop a final report that includes the integrated
strategic plan that includes a Shared Vision statement, a detailed master list
of resources to support women of color in the engineering workforce, potential
collaborative activities, and an outlined infrastructure to facilitate these
activities moving forward. We aim to create an engaged stakeholder community and
develop a Shared Vision and Partnerships to support a collaborative
infrastructure that encourages an alignment of efforts, removal of resource
barriers, reduction of duplication, increased leveraging of resources, and
greater reach to women engineers of color in the workforce. The work of the WCEC
will add to the STEM equity knowledge base, with outcomes shared through the NSF
INCLUDES National Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.