* 2040784
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Building Networks and Enhancing Diversity in the K-12 STEM Teaching Workforce
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Hyunju Lee, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Adrienne Dixson
* 11/30/2021
* USD 100,000.00

This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S.
leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion
and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The goal of this planning grant
is to explicitly focus on broadening participation in the K-12 STEM teaching
workforce, with the theory of action that diversifying the K-12 STEM teaching
workforce would in the long term help more students see STEM as accessible to
them and then be more likely to choose a STEM degree or career. Currently there
is a large demographic discrepancy between students and teachers in K-12
schools. Studies have highlighted that the diverse teaching workforce benefits
not only students of color but all students. Since 2017, the Smithsonian Science
Education Center has conducted an annual STEM Diversity Summit, with the goal of
building a coalition (built on collective impact) for attracting and retaining a
diverse K-12 STEM teaching workforce, in which teams of teachers and
administrators representing 83 school districts, schools, and states across the
country shared their problems and developed a logic model to attract and retain
a diverse K-12 STEM teaching workforce in their region with annual support from
a matched mentor. This planning grant supports revisiting those former teams to
better understand the dynamics of systems change through close examination of
the successes and challenges outlined in their logic models with the perspective
of the Cultural-Historical Activity Theory (CHAT). Under the collaborative
infrastructure elements of shared vision and partnerships, this planning grant
will inform and lay the foundation for a future alliance focused on diversifying
the K-12 STEM teaching workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this planning grant,
the Smithsonian in collaboration with Howard University, as well as in
partnership with other experts in STEM teacher education, professional
development, and diversity - including from Harvard University, Rutgers
University, 100kin10, National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, MA
Department of Higher Education, STEM Equity Alliance, National Science Teaching
Association, and private industry - will work on four primary activities. First,
a survey will be developed and conducted with faculty members of Institutions of
Higher Education (IHEs), including approximately 100 Minority Serving
Institutions, which serve diverse populations in K-12 teacher preparation
programs and STEM education across the country. The goal of the survey is to
understand what roles IHEs play in organizational change management and
strategic planning to diversify the K-12 STEM teaching workforce. Second, a
virtual workshop will be convened to bring former STEM Diversity Summit
attendees and their extended networks to reflect on their progress and
activities in past years and discuss strategic long-term plans. Third, a survey
with the virtual workshop participants will be conducted to better understand
their practices, attitudes, and perceptions about their roles to create
culturally diverse ecosystems in K-12 STEM education. Finally, all the collected
information from the above activities will be used to investigate strategies and
evidence-based practices of enhancing diversity in the K-12 STEM teaching
workforce, and an iterative source book will be developed based on those
findings as an initial resource to ground future work. Over a 12 month period,
this planning grant will build a network between the former teams and with the
extended partners, including the NSF INCLUDES National Network, and help them to
grow as regional hubs within a Future NSF INCLUDES Alliance focused on
diversifying the K-12 STEM teacher workforce, with the Smithsonian as the
backbone organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant is also
supported by the NSF Discovery Research preK-12 Program, which seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering, mathematics and computer science (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers through research and development of STEM education innovations and
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.