* 2040695
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track C: Interconnecting Quantum Computers for the Next-Generation Internet
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Edo Waks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 05/31/2022
* USD 930,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. Just as the
internet has transformed virtually every aspect of our lives by enabling
connectivity amongst a myriad of users in different geographical locations, a
quantum internet could have a similar impact. A quantum internet would
distribute quantum computing capabilities securely and broadly to a broad user
base (academic and nonacademic). Those capabilities could enable advances in
various applications from cybersecurity, to data analytics, to medicine. This
program seeks to merge quantum computers over a quantum internet, whilst
leveraging the current internet infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of this program is to enable trapped ion quantum computers to
communicate over the internet. The main technical thrusts include: i) developing
a high efficiency qubit interface, ii) developing a chip scale quantum
reconfigurable add-drop multiplexer, and iii) devising protocols to leverage the
hardware to realize a full-scale quantum network. The network will use Ytterbium
ions for memory (data) qubits and Barium ions for the optical (interconnect)
qubit. This project is focused on developing long range (kilometer distance)
quantum interconnects between remote quantum computing sites. As such, the Mid-
Atlantic Regional Quantum Internet (MARQI) network, will be formed. This
demonstration will show secure and anonymous communication beyond the current
state of the art. The ability to connect quantum computers over the internet
will provide a major technological advancement. Outreach efforts to develop
educational modules for the general public and industry that will educate them
on the current state and future potential of quantum technology is
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.