* 2040095
* Engineering is Not Neutral: Transforming Instruction via Collaboration and Engagement (ENNTICE)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* David Mays, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 05/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

It has never been clearer that engineering colleges need strengthened diversity,
equity, and inclusion (DEI), but progress has been distressfully slow. Multiple
lines of evidence indicate that engineering faculty themselves may be key
inhibitors to this need. Why? Because without training, the way faculty teach
may, unintentionally, exclude various students and student groups. In order to
create organizational culture that supports all students, this project will
administer a three-year faculty learning community (FLC) with participants from
all five departments in the College of Engineering, Design and Computing at the
University of Colorado Denver (CU Denver). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this FLC is to discover how to nudge engineering faculty to adopt known
best practices for DEI. The three specific goals are: (1) to develop mindfulness
among engineering faculty and deploy best practices known to be especially
beneficial for minoritized students; (2) to cultivate inclusive engineering
culture into every aspect of teaching, research, and service; and the bottom
line: (3) to foster student belonging and success. Taken together, these goals
will allow the investigators to discover how to nudge faculty at research
institutions to adopt known best practices for DEI, specifically self-inquiry,
course design, creating community, advising, mentoring, and collegiality. The
theoretical framework for this work is adapted from two recent Nobel-prize
winning ideas from behavioral economics. The first idea is that people are more
intuitive than rational, which points to a change model called communities of
transformation. The second idea is that people respond to nudging, which points
to the change model layering. The FLC will provide a framework to test these
ideas using a longitudinal study in which the FLC faculty are the test group and
the remainder of the engineering faculty are the comparison group. The proposed
research promotes (1) full participation of women, persons with disabilities,
and underrepresented minorities in STEM; (2) development of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce; and (3) improved STEM education and educator
development by guiding engineering faculty to mindfully develop their capacity
to implement known best practices for DEI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.