* 2040144
* EAGER: An AI-driven Paradigm for Collective and Collaborative Community Resilience in the COVID-19 Era and Beyond
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Yanfang Ye, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 01/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exposed a critical set of
vulnerabilities that have impacted community resilience in responding to
escalating societal, economic, and behavioral issues. Unfortunately, there are
no established solutions or proven models for us to depend on to tackle the
complex challenges with significant uncertainties and unknowns. This project
engages novel disciplinary perspectives to help address the devastating effects
caused by COVID-19, i.e., leveraging the extracted information of experiences,
ideas and support from positive-energy communities who are successfully
navigating threats that can be transformed and transferred into actionable
information to assist vulnerable communities to cope, progress and move forward.
More specifically, by advancing artificial intelligence (AI) innovations, the
goal of this project is to design and develop an AI-driven paradigm for
collective and collaborative community resilience in responses to a variety of
crises and exposed vulnerabilities in the COVID-19 era and beyond. With
additional validation, this research will provide foundation to assist the
federal and state governments, corporations, societal leaders to develop and
implement strategies that will guide local and regional communities, and the
nation into a successful new normal future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
exploratory yet transformative high risk-high payoff work that involves
radically different approaches will have three main research components. First,
the research team will construct a novel attributed heterogeneous information
network (AHIN) to comprehensively model the up-to-date multi-source pandemic
related data for abstract representation. Second, to understand how users
interact and how information are propagated within and cross-community in social
media, the team will develop an innovative nonnegative matrix factorization
regularized deep graph learning model for community detection in the AHIN by
considering the heterogeneity of the network. Third, the team will propose an
integrated adversarial disentangler to separate the distinct, informative
factors of variations hidden in the milieu to learn post embeddings for emotion
and topic analysis for community classification and framing, and thus to derive
supportive and constructive information for community resilience improvement.
The developed AI-driven paradigm in this project will provide in-depth insights
and customized guidance that can help public health experts, social workers, law
enforcement, economists, and policy makers in decision-making and also enable a
conceptual framework for the development of resilient community engagement
strategies in responses to a variety of crises created by COVID-19 and future
natural or health-related disasters. The research will be beneficial to
multidisciplinary areas, including data mining, machine learning, epidemiology,
economics, social and behavioral sciences. The outcomes of this project will be
made publicly accessible and broadly distributed. The project will integrate
research with education through curriculum development, the participation of
underrepresented groups, and student mentoring
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.