* 2040883
* NSFDEB-NERC: Interspecific interference, character displacement and range expansion
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2025
* Gregory Grether, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2025
* USD 856,588.00

Why are some species so widespread while others are restricted to small areas?
Negative interactions, such as aggression, with closely-related species could
prevent a species from expanding its range. If so, traits that enable a species
to avoid negative interactions should be associated with range expansion. This
prediction will be tested, for the first time, using a widespread species of
dragonfly that shows extraordinary variation in wing coloration – so much so
that it was once thought to be multiple species. Dark-winged individuals
experience much lower levels of interference from closely-related species than
do light-winged individuals. This system provides an unparalleled opportunity to
advance understanding of how negative interactions between species affect
species distributions. As species’ ranges shift in response to climate change,
some species will interact with close relatives that they have not encountered
previously. The results of this project could help predict the outcome of those
interactions and, therefore, species distributions in the future. The project
includes collaborations with researchers in the U.K. and Latin America and will
provide field, lab and computational research training for students. A Spanish-
language version of an existing citizen science initiative will be launched to
expand engagement with the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on well over a
decade of research on the evolutionary causes and consequences of reproductive
and aggressive interference in rubyspot damselflies (Hetaerina spp.), this
project tackles the question of how adaptations that reduce interspecific
interference affect range expansion. The focal species, H. titia, varies in wing
coloration both seasonally and geographically. To understand why this species’
wing coloration changes seasonally, a series of field experiments will be
carried out to distinguish among alternative evolutionary trade-off hypotheses.
To distinguish among alternative scenarios for the origin and loss of the
seasonal color change, phylogenetic relationships among populations throughout
the species’ range will be reconstructed using whole-genome data. To further
clarify how the seasonal color change evolved, multivariate phylogenetic trait
evolution models will be fit to a range-wide phenotypic dataset. Finally, to
test the range expansion prediction, coalescence models will be used to compare
rates of diversification and historical demography among H. titia populations
and between H. titia and four congeners. This project will also produce the
first range-wide intraspecific phylogenetic analysis of the evolution of a
polyphenic trait, and new genomic resources for rubyspot
damselflies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.