* 2040462
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track D: Scalable, TRaceable Ai for Imaging Translation: Innovation to Implementation for Accelerated Impact (STRAIT I3)
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Steve Langer, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 05/31/2023
* USD 999,461.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, Convergence Accelerator Track D: Scalable,
TRaceable Ai for Imaging Translation: Innovation to Implementation for
accelerated Impact (STRAIT I3), addresses fundamental gaps between the science
and the engineering that is preventing the effective use of AI models with
medical imaging data. The project will leverage the large number of open dataset
efforts available for medical imaging, including imaging resources for COVID-19.
Thousands of AI models are also published in the scientific literature each year
for such data. Yet, these resources are not consistently accessible at scale nor
are they able to be validated for clinical application. This project includes
three thrust areas to address this problem. Thrust Area 1 democratizes access to
data sets through traceable data annotation. Thrust Area 2 transforms the
assessment and peer review process for data, to ensure fair and consistent
evaluation of technologies. Thrust Area 3 targets reproducible execution and
comparison of models to facilitate translation to practice. In Phase I, this
Convergence Accelerator project will create direct public health and technology
benefits by enhancing the radiological assessment of COVID-19 pneumonia. In
Phase II, it will extend these benefits into a medical imaging ecosystem
spanning multiple medical imaging domains. Broader impacts will be achieved by
engaging various identified communities through professionally led studios,
consented A/B testing studies, and structured outreach. All project thrusts
utilized open software and commodity hardware, wherever possible, so that the
innovations from this project on scalable image data validation will enhance
other related efforts in open source software, open science, reproducible
science, and findable science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project works towards
achieving a fundamental rethinking in how model-centric AI could be validated
and translated in medical imaging, algorithm design, and medical science. The
intellectual activities are organized around three research thrusts, each
addressing an essential challenge that currently confronts the development and
translation of AI-based medical imaging tools. One research thrust is on
creating a lightweight data provenance and annotation interface compatible with
both clinical imaging and research studies. The second is on facilitating rapid
innovation in AI architectures while creating an enhanced validation/peer review
process to avoid irreproducible implementations and overtraining of models. The
third thrust is the integration of these efforts into a novel Model Zoo to
provide robust capabilities for validation, assessment, and translation. This
research effort will utilize core scientific innovations from the collaborative
team consisting of members from a university (Vanderbilt), a medical center
(Vanderbilt Medical Center), two industry partners (MD.ai, Kaggle), and a
professional society (SIIM), alongside widely used, open source platforms. In
Phase 1 of the Convergence Accelerator, the project will focus on newly created
public and private datasets for COVID-19. Phase II will scale this approach to
different medical imaging modalities, including dermatology and
ophthalmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.