* 2040488
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: An Integrated Scenario-based Hurricane Evacuation Management Tool to Support Community Preparedness
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2021,12/31/2021
* Tricia Wachtendorf, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

As a hurricane approaches, emergency managers must determine when and where to
issue official evacuation orders. It requires integrating large amounts of
uncertain, changing information to make consequential decisions in a short time
frame under pressure, and the stakes are high. An opportunity exists to leverage
recent research—in particular, the Integrated Scenario-based Evacuation (ISE)
tool—to help meet that challenge. This team designed the ISE tool to be run for
a particular hurricane as it approaches the U.S. When run at a point in time, it
generates a set of contingency plans and defines the circumstances under which
to implement each, depending on how the hurricane evolves. Each plan includes
recommendations about whether or not to issue an evacuation order for each
geographic evacuation zone, and if so, when.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the new
technology has promise, moving from research to practice brings its own
challenges. The objectives of Stage 1, therefore, are to: (1) Determine how the
new tool and its output can support emergency managers’ natural decision-making
process; (2) Conduct a needs assessment for the tool; and (3) Advance
understanding of community innovation in disaster management. The Stage 2
objective is to implement an operational prototype of the ISE-based decision
support tool for North Carolina. The emergency manager partners will ensure the
tool is of practical use; the researchers will ensure it reflects the best
science; and the industry partner will ensure its impact is sustainable by
hosting it on their platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ISE tool uses a multi-
stage stochastic programming model to provide a tree of recommended evacuation
orders and a performance evaluation for that set of recommendations. Benefits of
the tool are that it provides an integrated hazard assessment with uncertainty
that includes the effects of storm surge, wind waves, tides, river discharge,
inland flooding, and wind; it explicitly balances competing objectives of
minimizing risk and travel time; it offers a well-hedged solution robust under
the range of hurricane evolutions; and it is adaptive, leveraging the value of
decreasing uncertainty during an event. Stage 1 will include focus groups of key
stakeholders to determine the process of innovation; a needs assessment; and
analysis and planning for the next stage. In Stage 2, we will (1) make the tool
faster and easier to run by moving it to a GPU platform and exploiting
opportunities for parallelization; (2) develop an interactive graphical user
interface; and (3) improve the modeling by adding treatment of institutionalized
vulnerable populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.