* 2040493
* AGEP 2022 National Research Conference
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Scott King, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 02/29/2024
* USD 568,772.00

The AGEP National Research Conference 2022 was created in response to the NSF's
Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program
solicitation (NSF 16-552). The goal of the AGEP program is to increase the
number of historically underrepresented minority faculty in STEM. The use of the
term "historically underrepresented minority" reflects language from Congress,
and in the context of the AGEP program, the AGEP populations are defined as STEM
doctoral candidates, postdoctoral scholars and faculty, who are African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The AGEP program seeks to advance
knowledge about models to improve pathways to the professoriate and the
successes of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty, who are
members of racial and ethnic groups that are underrepresented in STEM. AGEP
awardees develop, implement, study, evaluate and disseminate AGEP Alliance
Models to transform the dissertation phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral
training and/or faculty advancement, and the transitions within and across the
pathway levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation addresses STEM achievement
gaps in postsecondary education, our universities and colleges struggle to
recruit, retain and promote STEM faculty who are members of AGEP populations and
who serve as role models and academic leaders for students to learn from, work
with and emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate that STEM associate and full
professors, who are members of racial and ethnic groups, occupy 8% of senior
faculty positions at all 4-year colleges and universities, and about 6% of
faculty positions at the nation's most research-intensive institutions. This
AGEP National Research Conference will advance knowledge about initiatives that
can be institutionalized, sustained, and strengthened to increase the number of
historically underrepresented minority faculty in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference convening will bring together
hundreds of AGEP and non-AGEP awardees to advance knowledge and broader impacts
about academic STEM career pathways. The goals of the conference are: 1) To
provide a venue for AGEP Alliances to gain knowledge and share best practices on
methods to strengthen, institutionalize, expand, and sustain their Alliances and
communicate project findings; 2) To provide a venue for AGEP Alliance teams to
share best practices and methods about interacting with and supporting their
project participants; and 3) To provide NSF with a platform to garner
stakeholder input from the AGEP awardees and to share new funding opportunities,
policy changes and program updates with the awardees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
two and half-day conference is scheduled for November of 2022, in Corpus
Christi, TX. In addition to plenary and keynote sessions, research presentations
and a poster session, there will be round-table and small group discussions, and
other interactive sessions to increase conference engagement. The proposed work
includes evaluation components and a dissemination plan to publish peer-reviewed
conference proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.