* 2040500
* Collaborative Research: Real-Time Data-Driven Anomaly Detection for Complex Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Xiaodong Wang, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 225,000.00

Anomaly detection is an important problem dealing with the detection of abnormal
data patterns. Importance of anomaly detection lies in the fact that an anomaly
in the observed data may be a sign of an unwanted and often actionable event
such as failure, malicious activity, etc. in the underlying system. In many
real-time systems, timely and accurate detection of abnormal data patterns is
crucial, and will allow proper countermeasures to be taken in a timely manner,
to counteract any possible harm. Although anomaly detection has long been
studied, today's complex networks exhibit new challenges, such as: low latency
requirements, data size, system dynamics, unknown distributions, distributed
nature, and privacy. The objective of this proposal is to investigate effective
and scalable approaches for real-time data-driven anomaly detection in complex
systems with these challenges. The main themes of this proposal address multiple
important problems in the early detection of anomalies and attacks in a general
complex network setting. Considering the importance of cybersecurity in today's
world, methodologies to understand and forewarn changes in the organizational
dynamics of such complicated networks is of immense significance. This proposal
directly addresses these issues by bringing a fresh and novel set of engineering
tools and ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following a systematic approach, this
project first considers (1) how to timely detect anomalies in centralized high-
dimensional systems with dynamicity and hidden anomaly challenges; (ii) how to
deal with resource constraints in monitoring distributed systems; and (iii) how
to enable privacy-preserving solutions for real-time anomaly detection in
distributed systems. These challenges and the solution methods presented in this
project are generally applicable to a variety of complex systems. To be
specific, this project focuses on two challenging IoT networks: surveillance
camera network and smart home network. The proposed approaches exploit an array
of advanced techniques including sequential change detection, deep reinforcement
learning, event-triggered processing, and differential privacy, and will bring
significant innovations to the theory and applications of anomaly detection. In
particular, the practical use of proposed algorithms will be demonstrated and
their performance will be evaluated with respect to the state of the art using
hardware implementations of two IoT networks - a surveillance camera network and
a smart home network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.