* 2040636
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track D: A Community Resource for Innovation in Polymer Materials
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,11/30/2021
* Kenneth Kroenlein, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 11/30/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project, NSF Convergence Accelerator Track D: A Community Resource for
Innovation in Polymer Materials, will develop a data-centric infrastructure for
findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR) data that will be
usable by a wide variety of stakeholders to accelerate the pace of materials
innovation. The field is currently hampered by small, disparate data sets and
there is clear need for a community-wide database effort. This project brings
together a team with members from industry (Dow, Citrine), academia (MIT), and
government laboratories (NIST) to directly address the issue of building a data
and modeling infrastructure to serve as a community resource for polymeric
material design. The project focuses on a sharing infrastructure for polymers
and other soft materials addressing the current inability to deal with molecular
distributions and stochastic reaction networks; characterization/data generation
challenges for stochastic chemistry; challenges with nomenclature and molecular
representation, and polymer properties determined on multiple scales from the
chemical bond to the molecule to collective molecular interactions. The approach
will utilize novel graph-based representations that can be widely adopted for
the storage and exchange of data by all stakeholders in the polymer field. It
will also explore how widely such data could be shared by different
stakeholders, including paradigms that mix embargoed and open data as well as
exploring models for ownership and credit that enable wider sharing of data
across the community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach will employ natural
language processing (NLP) and computer vision techniques for automated
information extraction from the polymer literature to generate a large, public
structure- property database. The text-based extraction schemes will exploit
chemical rationales and specific shared synthesis techniques for more efficient
data extraction; extraction of polymer chemical structures from images using an
optical chemical structure recognition system; and development of new machine
learning methods of data curation in order to integrate a wider range of data
and overcome data sparsity and diversity. Together, these elements will yield a
populated data structure by the end of Phase I that will form a foundation for
further efforts by the community. Although the techniques employed will
generalize to all synthetic polymers, the initial testbed for these developments
will be polyurethanes—a large polymer market with diverse chemistry, substantial
data availability in the patent and journal literature, and structure-
processing-property relationships that are a playground for continued material
innovation. Community-wide engagement will be sought via a digital symposium to
assist in identifying additional interests and partners that need to be
represented and included; disseminating information about this effort; and
receiving inputs on how deliverables should be planned and designed during Phase
II execution. An educational planning exercise in Phase I will identify
educational partners and educational needs in this space and develop both
pedagogical and assessment plans that can be acted upon in Phase II such that
the tools that are built are available freely to the community via wide
dissemination of knowledge and training. All of the tools and standards will be
made publicly available using open-source development
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.