* 2040898
* FAI: End-To-End Fairness for Algorithm-in-the-Loop Decision Making in the Public Sector
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2025
* Edward McFowland, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 01/31/2025
* USD 625,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop methods and tools that assist public
sector organizations with fair and equitable policy interventions. In areas such
as housing and criminal justice, critical decisions that impact lives, families,
and communities are made by a variety of actors, including city officials,
police, and court judges. In these high-stakes contexts, human decision makers’
implicit biases can lead to disparities in outcomes across racial, gender, and
socioeconomic lines. While artificial intelligence (AI) offers great promise for
identifying and potentially correcting these sorts of biases, a rapidly growing
literature has shown that automated decision tools can also worsen existing
disparities or create new biases. To help bridge this gap between the promise
and practice of AI, the interdisciplinary team of investigators will develop an
integrated framework and new methodological approaches to support fair and
equitable decision-making. This framework is motivated by three main ideas: (1)
identifying and mitigating the impacts of biases on downstream decisions and
their impacts, instead of simply measuring biases in data and in predictive
models; (2) enabling the combination of an algorithmic decision support tool and
a human decision-maker to make fairer and more equitable decisions than either
human or algorithm alone; and (3) developing operational definitions of fairness
and quantitative assessments of bias, guided by stakeholder discussions, that
are directly relevant and applicable to the housing and criminal justice
domains. The ultimate impact of this work is to advance social justice for those
who live in cities, and who rely on city services or are involved with the
justice system, by assessing and mitigating biases in decision-making processes
and reducing disparities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will address
both the risks and the benefits of algorithmic decision-making through
transformative technical contributions. First, they will develop a new,
pipelined conceptualization of fairness consisting of seven distinct stages:
data, models, predictions, recommendations, decisions, impacts, and outcomes.
This end-to-end fairness pipeline will account for multiple sources of bias,
model how biases propagate through the pipeline to result in inequitable
outcomes and assess sensitivity to unmeasured biases. Second, they will build a
general methodological framework for identifying and correcting biases at each
stage of this pipeline, assessing intersectional and contextual biases across
multiple data dimensions, and incorporating new ideas for model assessment and
analysis of heterogeneous treatment effects. This generalized bias scan will
provide essential information throughout the end-to-end fairness pipeline,
informing not only what human and algorithmic biases exist, but what
interventions are likely to mitigate these biases. Third, the project addresses
algorithm-in-the-loop decision processes, in which an algorithmic decision
support tool provides recommendations to a human decision-maker. The
investigators will develop approaches for modeling systematic biases in human
decisions, identifying possible explanatory factors for those biases, and
optimizing individualized algorithmic "nudges" to guide human decisions toward
fairness. Finally, the project team will create new metrics for measuring the
presence and extent of bias. The outputs of the project will be designed for
integration into the operational decision-making of city agencies responsible
for making fair and equitable decisions in the criminal justice and housing
domains. The investigators will assess the fairness of existing practices and
create open-source tools for assessing and correcting biases, for users in each
domain. They will develop tools which can be used to (a) reduce incarceration by
equitably providing supportive interventions to justice-involved populations;
(b) prioritize housing inspections and repairs; (c) assess and improve the
fairness of civil and criminal court proceedings; and (d) analyze the disparate
health impacts of adverse environmental exposures, including poor-quality
housing and aggressive, unfair policing practices. Operational deployments of
the developed tools will be regularly and comprehensively evaluated to assess
impacts and to avoid unintended consequences, both maximizing the benefits and
minimizing potential harms from both algorithmic and human
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.