* 2040086
* I-Corps: A Hybrid Photo-Magnetic Field Generator for Assessment of Nanoscale Materials and Therapeutic Molecules
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Santaneel Ghosh, Southeast Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 45,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a novel device for simultaneous optical and oscillating magnetic
field irradiation of a target. This device has potential applications in broad
areas of basic, translational, and clinical research as well as biomedical and
pharmaceutical industrial applications, which involve the unique nanoplatform
characterization and efficacy assessment of next generation small molecule drugs
and biologics toward the development of novel therapeutic approaches. The
success of this project will enable advanced therapies to induce ultimate
combined tumor cell destruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
advances translation of a photo-magnetic hybrid field-generating device for
simultaneous optical and oscillating magnetic field irradiation of a target to
address the synergistic effects of photothermal, magnetothermal, and
photodynamic activations. Using this device, a multimodal comprehensive strategy
called “hybrid photo-magnetic stimulation” that has been unexplored previously
is implemented with various materials and biological systems. This device
permits simultaneous optical and (low/high frequency) AC magnetic field
exposure, and thereby generates cumulative or synergetic effects depending on
the target’s composition and characteristics. This novel technology permits the
use of a less intense AC magnetic field in combination with optical stimulation
during the irradiation process, thus removing the safety concerns associated
with the AC magnetic field-assisted therapies. Using this device, it has been
observed that smart nanostructure-based photo-magnetic hybrid irradiation is a
viable approach to remotely guide tumor cell destruction, which may be adopted
in clinical management to treat aggressive cancers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.