* 2040698
* RAPID: Eco-epidemiological, population, and community ecology implications of RHDV2 emergence in New World lagomorphs (rabbits and close relatives)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Matthew Gompper, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 08/31/2022
* USD 199,940.00

Beginning in early 2020, populations of multiple species of wild rabbits in the
southwestern US have had mass mortality events due to the introduction of a
novel pathogen: rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus 2 (RHDV2). This virus likely
arrived in North America via the trade in non-native domestic European rabbits.
The virus is spreading rapidly. Less than four months after RHDV2 was identified
in dead wild rabbits in southeastern New Mexico and southwestern Texas, it has
spread to seven US states and multiple Mexican municipalities, and has affected
six rabbit species. The epidemic has also received extensive press coverage,
much of it emphasizing how little is understood about impacts of RHDV2, and how
changes in rabbit populations might in turn influence plant and animal
communities. This work will provide detailed information on how RHDV2 influences
rabbit populations and their associated ecosystems, and also information on the
potential for rabbits to recover from infection. The study will also allow
insights into the extent to which a novel pathogen might influence the abundance
of herbivores and their predators, and thus play a significant role in the
structure and function of arid-land ecosystems. This information will be
provided to partnering state, federal and tribal wildlife and agricultural
agencies who are tasked with managing native and domestic
rabbits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide insights into whether and
how this emerging virus is able to persist in an animal community comprised of
multiple host species, and whether it is spreading via a patchwork of smaller
outbreaks versus a contiguous viral wave. This research will address these
issues by (1) conducting occupancy and abundance surveys of rabbit populations
for which pre-outbreak data are available to determine how the populations have
changed numerically following RHDV2 exposure, and (2) serological assessments of
rabbit populations to understand whether some individuals survive exposure to
RHDV2. This information in turn will be used to (3) develop epidemiologic models
to understand how the virus may affect rabbit populations, and how it may
persist in ecosystems that include multiple rabbit host species. The information
will also permit (4) predictions of whether and how RHDV2 is likely to spread in
regions where it has yet to occur. Finally, this project will also allow for
data collection to (5) understand how RHDV2, and the associated declines in
rabbit abundance, may influence the predator community that depends on rabbits
for food.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.