* 2040558
* I-Corps:  Artificial intelligence-based image processing to automate fashion e-commerce
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,11/30/2022
* Deanna Meador, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of software tools to automate several essential tasks for internet-
based commerce (e-commerce). E-commerce is a rapidly growing market segment,
predicted to reach $6.5 trillion in sales by 2023. Consequent to such rapid
growth are the resultant challenges in product discovery. Rich product
attributes/product tagging makes products easily discoverable. However,
populating product attributes/tags is a time-consuming, mostly manual task. By
leveraging artificial intelligence (AI)-based image processing, these tasks may
be automated, saving time, effort, and expense for e-commerce stores. In
addition, accurate tags may be used to generate several useful functionalities
to improve user experience as well as increase sales and revenue for e-commerce
stores. AI-based automation tools may provide e-commerce store owners with
access to advanced technologies and empower small and mid-sized businesses to
stay viable in the highly competitive fashion e-commerce market
segment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of image processing technology that uses machine learning and artificial
intelligence (AI) to accurately recognize multiple (50+) attributes associated
with an image. These attributes are used to automatically and accurately tag
products in the store at a fraction of a cost and time compared to manual
tagging. Accurate tagging of products results in making products easily
discoverable online. The AI-algorithm generated tags also are used to provide
several additional functionalities such as complete-the-look and product
bundling. Such functionalities significantly improve the user experience for
shoppers and lead to increased sales and revenue for store owners. The proposed
technology also includes resource optimization to make AI-powered processing
commercially viable. Such resource optimization ensures that advanced AI-based
technologies are available for dynamic environments such as fashion e-commerce
at reasonable costs. In addition, the process flow between the AI-algorithm,
machine learning-based decision tree, and the output ensures that the results
are displayed at the storefront almost
instantaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.