* 2040582
* REGULATORY NETWORKS THAT CONTROL AUTOPHAGY TO ENABLE ENVIRONMENTAL STRESS RESILIENCE IN PLANTS
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Diane Bassham, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 01/31/2024
* USD 796,021.00

This research will identify cellular mechanisms by which plants respond to and
survive adverse environmental conditions; these mechanisms are key to their
survival and productivity. Plants frequently encounter environmental stresses,
such as drought, heat and flooding, both in their natural environment and in the
field in agricultural settings. A major pathway for cell survival during stress
is called autophagy, in which damaged cell components are digested and recycled,
preventing their toxic accumulation. Substantial information about the autophagy
process itself is available, but how autophagy is activated by environmental
stress in plants is not yet clear. This research will address this problem by
identifying factors that control autophagy and determining their function in
stress tolerance. This potentially will lead to new approaches to improve stress
tolerance in crop plants, thus enhancing their growth and yield. The project
will train a postdoctoral scientist, a graduate student, and undergraduate
students in research skills and scientific communication. It will also increase
the accessibility of the cell biology scientific literature to undergraduates by
annotation of research papers, which can be used in cell biology classes and
will be shared broadly online with the scientific community. The effectiveness
of this annotation will be assessed using validated pre- and post-intervention
surveys to measure student increases in self-efficacy, competence and
motivational beliefs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activation of autophagy is a key
component of plant responses to environmental stress, and is thought to be
regulated via complex pathways that are coordinated with other stress responses
to optimize plant growth and survival. Despite this critical role, very few
regulatory factors for autophagy have yet been identified and characterized in
plants. The goal of this project is to identify previously undescribed pathways
for the regulation of autophagy in plants that act both transcriptionally and
post-translationally. We will assess the mechanisms by which phosphorylation
cascades involving the protein kinase SnRK1 control autophagy under different
conditions, and determine the function of a suite of transcription factors that
control autophagy gene expression, some of which are potentially regulated by
SnRK1. This will be accomplished by genetic approaches to assess function in
autophagy and epistasis among factors under different stress conditions,
mutation of potential phosphorylation sites, phosphoproteomic analysis, and
finally the construction of regulatory networks that integrate both
phosphorylation and transcriptional activation events. The regulatory network
analysis will in turn allow us to begin addressing how these pathways integrate
and cooperate with other stress signaling pathways to enable plant resilience
and survival in the face of adverse and changing
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.