* 2040520
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track C: High-Throughput Proteomics Technology Based on Quantum Sensing
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Ania Bleszynski Jayich, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. The research
outcomes from this project will pave the way to establish quantum technology as
a critical tool in biomedicine, and specifically for proteomic devices.
Proteomic devices are used to map the protein profile of a given cell, tissue,
and or/organism. The information can be used in turn to develop treatment for
disease. This project will show how novel discoveries in quantum sensing can
impact and alter diagnostics and biomedical research. This will be accomplished
by simplifying the purification process and enabling high throughput screening
at reduced cost. The core concept is focused on the discovery of exceptional
sensitivity of nitrogen vacancy (NV) color centers in
diamond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will bring together quantum
physicists, engineers, and experts in life sciences to work on a real world
application of quantum sensing. This project will demonstrate scaled up
profiling of 7000+ proteins. There are three main thrusts, which include: i) the
development of an aptamer binding assay on a diamond surface, ii) identification
for optically stable reporter spins, and iii) site-specific conjugation of spin
labels for sensing protein binding events. If successful, this will lead to a
new generation of proteomic devices. Opportunities for training and workforce
development include: industry and National Lab experience for PhD students, ii)
workshops and certificate programs for industry researchers and engineers, and
iii) outreach programs for K-12 students to learn about quantum technology and
its potential impact on daily life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.