* 2040081
* Collaborative Research: Modeling the Origin and Evolution of Hawaiian Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Felipe Zapata, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 12/31/2023
* USD 373,019.00

Where we find species living today reflects not only how and when their direct
ancestors evolved, but also where they evolved. The inseparable relationship
between geological and evolutionary history is especially pronounced in volcanic
island systems, where the formation, erosion, and subsidence of islands are
expected to drive the origin of new species. Within the Hawaiian Islands, such
processes have occurred dozens of times and given rise to over 1,000 flowering
plant species found nowhere else in the world. Understanding how the Hawaiian
flora originated and diversified can help direct conservation efforts,
particularly for rare plants. This research will develop a suite of new
statistical modeling software to reconstruct how, when, and where groups of
closely related species originate, disperse, and go extinct among regions with
complex geological histories. The project will integrate existing museum
collections and newly collected plant specimens to generate a large genomic
dataset for nearly 400 understudied Hawaiian plant populations, then infer how
this diversity originated with the newly developed software. In addition to
training numerous undergraduate, graduate, postdoctoral, and garden-affiliated
researchers through the research project itself, two computational biogeography
workshops to train early career researchers will be offered, and a series of
publicly available teaching modules on the biogeography of Hawaiian plants will
be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two overarching objectives.
The first objective will develop stochastic models and inference methods to
jointly model speciation, extinction, and dispersal processes in the context of
a spatiotemporally variable geography. These modeling tools will be made freely
available through the open source Bayesian phylogenetics software, RevBayes, to
enable other researchers to repurpose the new methods for systems apart from
Hawaiian plant biogeography. The second objective will reconstruct the
biogeographical histories of 12 understudied, but ecologically diverse, Hawaiian
plant radiations. For this, the researchers will collect new plants and tissues
to complete several genus-level collections managed by the National Tropical
Botanical Garden. The researchers will then generate standardized phylogenomic
datasets, using the Angiosperm-353 protocol, for two purposes. First, by
evaluating the new phylogenomic data in concert with morphological, ecological,
and biogeographical data, the researchers will resolve long-standing puzzles
regarding the taxonomy of the 12 plant radiations, including ecologically and
morphologically distinctive genera. Second, the new phylogenetic software will
be used to infer evolutionary relationships, origination times, and
biogeographical histories for the flora, to gain new insights into the
biogeographical drivers of island plant radiations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.