* 2040609
* I-Corps: Single-domain antibody platform to develop cancer immunotherapies for the treatment of both canine and human cancers
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Christopher Cebra, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercialization potential of this I-Corps project is the
development and translation of a drug discovery platform for the treatment of
both canine and human cancers. The proposed technology defines the requirements
for harnessing the ability of immune-based cancer therapies to target and
eradicate cancer with a drug platform that may be manipulated to create new and
powerful therapies. Developing immune-based cancer therapies may result in the
production of a number of cost effective and safe treatments that may be easily
administered to patients, potentially making a significant commercial impact.
The proposed technology is expected to translate the understanding of cancer
progression using the dog as an animal model for clinical investigations. This
approach would be a first for canine therapies and is expected to impact
development of human cancer therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a single-domain antibody platform to
develop cancer immunotherapies for the treatment of both canine and human
cancers. Cancer immunotherapies based on a single-domain antibody platform have
yet to be approved for human use and the development of the proposed canine
agents may provide valuable insight into the pharmacologic behavior of this type
of agent in the appropriate disease setting. In addition, physically combining
single-domain antibodies with other cancer treatment agents, may add a novel way
immune molecules may be used to fight cancer growth. The proposed technology has
the potential to result in tailored cancer therapies for patients of all types.
Thus, this advancement of the state-of-the-art has the potential to quickly
bring novel, effective products to all cancer-patients, with marked potential
for high commercial and societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.