* 2040836
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: A Collaboration of Hispanic Serving Institutions and Organizations to Strengthen Pathways to STEM Graduate Education for Latinx Students
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Barbara Walker, Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 10/31/2022
* USD 99,996.00

The growth of the United States STEM workforce is important to economic and
global competitiveness. Developing STEM talent among all sectors of society is
needed in order to grow the workforce. This planning grant project includes a
leadership team of experts from the Hispanic Association of Colleges and
Universities (HACU) and two Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs): The University
of California, Santa Barbara and the University of Arizona. The project leaders
will engage dozens of HSIs and organization to build a collaborative
infrastructure. Together, the partners will pursue a consensus vision to address
the broadening participation challenge of strengthening pathways to increase
master’s and doctoral degree attainment in STEM fields for Latinx students
attending HSIs. The outcomes of this planning grant are expected to lay the
foundation for a future alliance, center or network to address the identified
broadening participation challenge in STEM at a national
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning grant leadership team will engage
dozens of HSI stakeholders, including administrative leaders, practitioners and
faculty, and representatives from national organizations. The project leaders
will convene three regional meetings, one involving participants from the US
South West, one engaging individuals on the US West Coast and another including
representatives on the US East Coast. The regional convenings will provide a
forum for partnering organizations to build a robust collaborative
infrastructure: To develop a shared vision; to expand the partnerships to
include a broad community of organizations and institutions; to establish shared
goals and metrics; to solidify the leadership structure; to establish and
improve communication across the partners; and to scale or expand the
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is funded by the
NSF’s Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented
Discoverers in Engineering and Science program (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive
national initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and innovations by
focusing on diversity, inclusion and broadening participation in STEM at scale.
The planning grant is also funded by the NSF’s Hispanic Serving Institutions
program (HSI); and the HSI program provides support to enhance the quality of
undergraduate STEM education and to increase the recruitment, retention, and
graduation rates of students pursuing associates or baccalaureate degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.