* 2040463
* CAREER: Associative In-Memory Graph Processing Paradigm: Towards Tera-TEPS Graph Traversal In a Box
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Jing Li, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2024
* USD 448,256.00

Large-scale graph analytics, the class of big data analytics that essentially
explores the relationship among a vast collection of interconnected entities
(e.g., "friends" in a social network), is becoming increasingly important due to
its broad applicability, from machine learning to web search, precision
medicine, and social sciences. However, the performance of graph processing
systems is severely limited by the irregular data access patterns in graph
computations. The existing solutions that have been developed for mainstream
parallel computing are generally ineffective for massive, sparse real-world
graphs due to the conventional computer architecture (i.e., von Neumann
architecture) itself. In this project, new, fundamental methods will be explored
in both theoretical and practical implementations to address this problem. It
uniquely advances multiple fundamental cross-disciplinary areas in device,
circuit, computer-aided design, and computer architecture and can be applied to
address some of the most challenging "big data" problems ranging from
fundamental research to everyday life. The research framework will be extended
into an educational platform, providing a user-friendly framework for a
laboratory-based curriculum and will serve the educational objectives for K-12
students, undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
research, a new computing paradigm will be developed to fundamentally address
the challenge in processing large-scale graphs and to achieve ultra-high
computing efficiency, orders of magnitude higher in performance per watt than
state-of-art mainstream computer. To this end, a holistic co-design and
optimization of algorithm, software and hardware will be developed to leverage
the great potential of emerging nonvolatile memory technology. A new computing
model will be proposed and theoretically proven to be more efficient in
runtime/area/energy than traditional von Neumann architecture in performing
graph computation. Detailed micro-architectures and circuits will be designed
and evaluated to best implement the proposed computing model for concept proof.