* 2040459
* EAGER: Spatiotemporal Big Data Analysis to Understand COVID-19 Effects
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Shashi Shekhar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,996.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted public health with a large number of
mortalities and ravaged the economy by increasing unemployment to a historically
high level. The goal of this project is to investigate the potential for novel
spatiotemporal big data to assist in identifying COVID-19 related geographic
patterns, such as locations where groups of people visit for long, overlapping
times, and travel to and from hotspots. Such patterns are of great interest to
policy-makers and public health researchers, but are difficult to find in
traditional mobility datasets such as infrequent travel surveys and urban
highway traffic data. Example spatiotemporal big data include privacy-protected
aggregated location traces of mobile devices that have recently been opened for
COVID-19 research. If successful, the results will inform disease spread models
and policy-interventions to save lives and reopen the economy
safely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to result in multiple data
science and computer science innovations. First, it will define and quantify
hangout-venues, a novel spatiotemporal pattern family modeling the places with
many overlapping long visits. Examples include full-service dine-in restaurants
which have many long visits, but not limited-service restaurants which mostly
have short visits. Second, it will probe new interest measures to not only
distinguish between patterns (e.g., full-service restaurants) and non-patterns
(e.g., limited-service restaurants) but also support the design of
computationally efficient algorithms based on properties such as anti-monotone.
Third, it will design novel and scalable algorithms for analyzing the large
(tens of terabytes) dataset for hangout-venues. Fourth, it will investigate the
impact of selection bias and noise from differential privacy schemes. The
results have the potential to transform data science knowledge with novel
pattern families (e.g., hangout-venue) and improve the understanding of the
impact of selection bias and noise added by differential privacy schemes on
pattern mining methods and their results. Furthermore, the project will co-
produce knowledge in close collaboration with public health researchers and
policymakers. The results have the potential to transform the understanding of
the public mobility for modeling disease transmission dynamics by leveraging the
emerging spatiotemporal big data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.