* 2040991
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant:Transcending Barriers for Success
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Amy Shachter, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 04/30/2024
* USD 99,786.00

This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S.
leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion
and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The goal of this planning grant
is to produce a strategic plan for building a collaborative infrastructure to
address participation challenges for Native American, Alaska Native, Native
Hawaiian, and Native Pacific Islander (NAAN-NHPI) students. Recent studies
estimate that the percentage of students that complete a degree in a STEM major
remains low. For STEM students from minoritized groups, the identification of
relationships between STEM curriculum and students’ personal and cultural
values, communal benefits, altruistic goals (e.g. social and environmental
justice issues), and diverse cultural perspectives, cultivate the motivation and
scientific identity linked to STEM persistence. Importantly, connecting
Indigenous knowledges with western knowledge systems as the basis for
transforming curricular and co-curricular programs and supports can improve STEM
success, particularly for NAAN-NHPI students. The project provides the planning
groundwork for a nodal network through local/institutional, local/multi-
institutional, and regional nodes. This large-scale planning network is needed
to ensure systemic, durable engagement of the NAAN-NHPI community and, thereby,
develop a more diverse workforce to ensure our competitive and prosperous
national future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning project focuses primarily
on the element of shared vision and includes specific outcomes related to the
four other elements of the collaborative infrastructure. The main product of
this planning process is a strategic plan for developing the network with a
common agenda that articulates a collective understanding of the participation
challenge within a place-based framework. The strategic plan includes the
identification and listing of primary network partners as well as a description
of how SENCER (Science Education for New Civic Engagements and Responsibilities)
and the National Center for Science and Civic Engagement provide the “backbone”
or support organization to help coordinate and facilitate the network. The
team's strategic planning approach employs four dialogic elements 1) talking
circles, 2) listening circles, 3) convenings, and 4) gatherings with “4” (a
sacred number of four directions, seasons, daily stages, life stages) as a
basis. All planning is virtual with culturally-grounded communication
strategies. The project is anchored with four institutions (Humboldt State
University, University of Utah, Texas Woman’s University, and University of
Arkansas) and experienced guiding communities (University of Hawai‘i, the
Confederated Salish Kootenai Tribes, and Alaskan Native communities) with
contributions from both two- and four-year institutions. Over 50 institutions,
including the California State University system, will be engaged in Alaska,
Arkansas, California, Hawaii, Idaho, Mississippi, Montana, New Mexico, Oklahoma,
Texas, and Utah. INCLUDES Network Alliances and projects representatives will be
invited to participate in the convenings and gatherings. This project expands
the scope of the current INCLUDES portfolio by focused support for NAAN-NHPI
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.