* 2040073
* NSFGEO-NERC: Large-Scale Atmospheric Circulation Response to Oyashio Extension Frontal Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Clara Deser, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2024
* USD 860,285.00

Winter over the North Pacific features an endless parade of frontal storms,
forming near Japan and building as they cross the ocean to reach North America.
Model simulations can produce realistic North Pacific storms even if the sea
surface temperatures (SSTs) are held fixed, indicating that the storms owe their
existence to the strong upper-level jet stream and accompanying north-south
atmopsheric temperature contrast rather than air-sea interactions. Nevertheless
there are intriguing hints that storm behavior can be influenced by variations
in the underlying SSTs, and some indications that slowly varying SSTs may change
storm paths and behavior in ways that could prove useful for making long-range
weather predictions. The SST variations of interest occur as a result of the
meandering of the Kuroshio-Oyashio Extension (KOE), a narrow ocean current that
extends into the Pacific from the coast of Japan. The KOE is a warm current and
the sharp temperature contrast between the current and the cold water north of
it produces relatively strong SST variations when the KOE shifts to the north or
south.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attempts to identify and analyze the influence of
KOE-related SST variations on storms and atmospheric circulation have had mixed
results. But recent work by the Principal Investigators (PIs) and others
suggests that the key to capturing the atmospheric response is to dramatically
increase the resolution of atmospheric models used for this purpose. In
particular the PIs have developed a variable resolution version of the Community
Atmosphere Model version 6 (VR-CAM6) which takes advantage of the spectral
element dynamical core to increase resolution over the North Pacific (a box from
20N to 60N and 130E to 110W). The lower resolution outside the North Pacific
allows the model to be run cheaply enough to allow large ensembles of
simulations, with 60 or more separate simulations for each imposed SST anomaly
pattern, so that even weak atmospheric responses can be captured and
analyzed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A further asset in identifying the atmospheric
response to KOE-related SST variations is a simplified ocean model which allows
the near-surface ocean to respond to changes in surface winds and other
atmospheric forcing. The model is referred to as a "pencil" ocean model, or
PenOM, because it represents the up and down transfer of heat in a column of the
ocean below each grid box of the surface atmosphere. PenOM does not simulate the
lateral movement of water in ocean currents, but work under this award adds the
capability to represent changes in SST due to Ekman transport, meaning the
sideways drift caused by the Coriolis force acting on water pushed along by the
surface wind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of societal as well as scientific
interest due to its relevance to long-term weather prediction as noted above.
Also, the PenOM configuration with Ekman transport will be made available to the
worldwide research community through the Community Earth System Model as part of
its suite of simpler model configurations. The work promotes international
collaboration in atmospheric research through its collaboration with Dr. Arnaud
Czaja at Imperial College London, through the arrangement noted below. Also, the
project supports several outreach activities including the production of a short
educational video featuring model simulations and research results. The project
also provides support and training to a postdoctoral research
associate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the National
Science Foundationâ€™s Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National
Environment Research Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-
NERC Lead Agency Agreement. The Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal
to be submitted and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the
largest proportion of the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an
award, each Agency funds the proportion of the budget and the investigators
associated with its own country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.