* 2040421
* Collaborative Research: Using AI-enabled Smart Objects to Understand and Support Spatial Reasoning and Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* David Uttal, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2024
* USD 325,391.00

Spatial thinking is the ability to understand and use information about
locations to solve problems. Spatial thinking is critically important to
achievement in STEM disciplines. Fortunately, spatial thinking is malleable, it
responds to training and to life experiences that require people to use their
spatial skills. This research will develop and assess an AI system that will
facilitate young children’s spatial thinking. The system relies on a time-tested
method for improving children’s spatial skills: block play. The major
advancement is that the blocks will be “smart”, in that they can detect child-
interactions by tracking movement, acceleration, rotation, and how different
objects are placed and handled with respect to each other. By analyzing
children’s building patterns, the researchers will use machine learning to
highlight patterns of block building and to suggest strategies to children as
they build that may result in higher levels of spatial thinking. The results may
support a transformative change in how we support spatial thinking, and
ultimately STEM learning, in young children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
develops a transformative engineering concept of endowing smartness and internet
connectivity to children’s toys and everyday classroom/playroom objects.
Examples of such objects include playing blocks, toys, jigsaw puzzle pieces,
etc. The objective is for those toys and objects to precisely record how a child
interacts with them individually and in a group as parts of their play and
learning process. Such data is recorded and collected wirelessly at very high
temporal and spatial resolutions. The project also develops a family of emerging
Artificial Intelligence based algorithms to analyze the smart object-generated
data to find out specific patterns in children’s handling of those objects. Such
patterns are then analyzed for evaluating spatial thinking and spatial
intelligence, and how they evolve over time under different training regimens.
The investigators will develop embedded computing tools, both hardware and
software, as well as low power wireless communication mechanisms for realizing
this transforming engineering concept of smart objects. For the long term, they
envision introducing ubiquitous smartness into many everyday objects so that
tracking and analysis of spatial intelligence can be seamless and highly
scalable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.