* 2040804
* FAI: causal and semi-parametric inference for explanations of disparities and disparity-correcting modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ilya Shpitser, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,923.00

As learning algorithms become ubiquitous in our lives, many have expressed
concerns about the potentially harmful biases and disparities that may arise
when these algorithms use sensitive features in the data --- such as race, age,
gender, or health --- inappropriately. This project aims to understand and
correct for these disparities using causal inference, which aims to use data to
quantify cause--effect relationships. Such relationships can be uncovered by
trying to predict the change in an effect when a cause variable takes on a
different value than one it usually attains. For example, ethnic disparities in
health outcomes may arise from different rates of pre-existing comorbidities in
different ethnic groups, or from differences in care arising from implicit
biases, or from some other mechanisms unmeasured in the data. The indirect
effect on health outcome of group-dependent rates of comorbidities can be
conceptualized as follows. Measure the health outcomes in patients from ethnic
Group A, then use a reliable model to predict outcomes for the same patients
with comorbidity rates artificially set to that of ethnic Group B, while leaving
everything else the same, and compare the two. Disparity between the measured
and predicted health outcomes point to differing comorbidity rates as the cause.
Similarly, a direct effect could be revealed by comparing health outcomes in
patients from ethnic Group A with predicted health outcomes in that same group
with all variables participating in known indirect mechanisms giving rise to
disparities left intact, but the variable indicating ethnicity changed to that
for Group B. Such a direct effect may be viewed as the proportion of the overall
effect of ethnicity on the outcome not explained by indirect effects. This
project aims to develop methods that use data to predict how such hypothetical
comparisons would turn out, use the results to better understand mechanisms of
disparities in healthcare, and build predictive models that are aware, and can
correct for undesirable mechanisms of disparity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the investigator aims to address conceptual, methodological, and
practical gaps in explaining disparities via their causal mechanisms and
building models and tools that can correct for mechanisms deemed impermissible.
An example of such a mechanism is a direct dependence of a decision or outcome
on perceived race or gender. The investigator will develop methods that can
assess the extent to which disparities in outcomes with respect to a sensitive
feature can be attributed to distinct causal pathways. To address challenges
causal inference faces in complex high-dimensional settings, the investigator
will adopt modern semi-parametric methods that are able to use machine learning
models while retaining desirable properties of robustness and rapids rates of
convergence. In addition, the investigator will develop a novel combination of
methods from causal and semi-parametric inference, and constrained optimization
to create predictive models and decision support tools that use data efficiently
while preventing impermissible mechanisms of disparity from operating, for
instance by ensuring that perceived ethnicity has no direct effect on outcomes
or decisions made. The approach will be applied to quantifying disparities and
building decision support tools using a complex data set obtained from
electronic health records at Johns Hopkins University. All methods will be
implemented in an open-source software package Ananke.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.