* 2040544
* Cross-disciplinary innovations in organismal biology through mathematical and physical modeling
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Monica Daley, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 01/31/2024
* USD 99,999.00

It remains a Grand Challenge in biology to understand the integrated function of
living physical systems and the dynamic interactions between organisms and their
environments. Understanding the physical function of organisms forms a critical
link in the ‘Rules of Life’— essential for integrating across scales from
molecules to biospheres. However, a gap exists between ‘top-down’ approaches
that focus on whole-organism behavior but lack insight into underlying
mechanisms and ‘bottom-up’ approaches that characterize molecular and
biophysical mechanisms but lack insight into their contributions to whole-
organism behavior. We propose a 2.5-day workshop to bring together diverse
scientists at the intersection of organismal biology and physics. A key focus
will be integrative perspectives that enable scientists to understand how
organisms robustly sense and respond to their environment. The workshop will
generate important opportunities for communication and collaboration between
distinct scientific fields at the interface of physics and organismal biology.
The workshop will emphasize organismal function and biological diversity in an
ecological and evolutionary context. A hybrid in-person and virtual format will
be used to facilitate inclusive participation of underrepresented groups. The
physics of living systems is a highly visual and engaging field of study that
can inspire a new generation of scientists. Public online activities (YouTube
live streaming, social media posts, web site) will provide opportunities for
general audiences to engage with organismal biology as well as accessible
resources for education and outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organisms are
complex systems of interconnected elements that must achieve coordinated
function and environmental responses across spatial and temporal scales.
Modeling tools from mathematics, physics and engineering are becoming
increasingly important for hypothesis driven research in organismal function and
organism-environment interactions. Cross-disciplinary dialogue and collaboration
are required to make effective use of these tools. Yet, a disconnect often
exists between the use of models in the physical sciences and the effective
translation and use of these models in biology. This workshop will bring
together scientists at the intersection of organismal biology and physics with
shared interests in using model-based approaches to address fundamental
questions about organismal structure and function in comparative, ecological and
evolutionary contexts. We will bring together scientists from diverse
backgrounds to discuss recent innovations, challenges and community needs for
transformative advances in organismal biomechanics. The workshop will use a
hybrid in-person and virtual format, making use of synchronous and asynchronous
online tools to facilitate communication, collaboration and dissemination of
outcomes. Activities will include keynote and invited speakers, group
discussions and small-group brainstorming sessions. Early career researchers
including postdoctoral scientists and advanced graduate students will be
recruited to act as discussion facilitators in virtual breakout sessions,
providing an opportunity to develop and demonstrate communication skills and
make important scientific network connections. Online elements will be used to
develop an ongoing international community and collaborative research network,
with sharing of open access resources to help facilitate broader public
engagement with the physics of living systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.