* 2040950
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Substructure-aware Spatiotemporal Representation Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Yanjie Fu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 91,000.00

Spatiotemporal networked data are an essential representation of information
about critical infrastructures such as transportation networks, power grids, and
social networks. The evolving vehicle mobility of a transportation network can
locate the source of traffic jams. The dynamic retweet keywords of a social
network may inform a novel disease outbreak. This project will develop novel
techniques to equip machines with automated and precision characterization with
spatiotemporal networks. The main novelty of this project will be in its ability
to preserve substructure patterns in characterization of spatiotemporal
networked data. By recognizing and characterizing these substructure patterns
such as a subnetwork of traffic jam, a subnetwork of overload or outage,
computers can better extract semantics, forecast trends, and detect anomalies,
which are important for operations, management, and defense of critical
infrastructures. In transportation operations, the developed techniques have the
potential to change how civil engineers identify the behavioral factors and
surrounding features of precursor to crashes, fatalities, and accidents. For the
researchers of power grid management, the automated and precision
characterization approaches can help to inform the counter measures and
characteristics of outrage events, such as generation loss, large load, series
capacitor fault, and line trip. In public health and pandemics, the substructure
awareness will enable the fast and early detection of novel diseases from subtle
natural language patterns in social networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop novel machine learning technologies for learning substructure-aware
representations of spatiotemporal networked data. The research methodology will
be motivated by long-stand and active research of deep representation learning
and model regularization in optimization. The project will introduce the concept
of substructure awareness which is a dynamic regularization mechanism to enforce
representation learning models to pay attention to substructure patterns. This
project will address two fundamental research challenges: 1) How can we model
substructure knowledge in representation learning? 2) How can temporal
dependencies improve substructure-aware representation learning? The research
aims will be complemented by a comprehensive evaluation plan with transportation
networks, social networks, and power grid data. This research effort will
provide preliminary exploration and insights into dynamic graph regularization
and knowledge-guided machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.