* 2040670
* Local Polymer Interfacial Mechanics: Effect of Topological and Chemical NanoPatterning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Stefan Zauscher, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 645,597.00

This grant will answer open questions about the dynamic-mechanical properties of
polymers in close proximity to surfaces (within tens to hundreds of nanometers)
with varying geometric confinement and chemical functionalities. Small scale,
local polymer behavior near surfaces dramatically affects the mechanical
behavior of polymers in thin films, nanoscale structures in microelectronics,
drug delivery devices, and nanocomposites, not only locally, but also at the
bulk scale. Mechanistic understanding of, and control over, these local
interphase properties is a crucial factor for the design and manufacture of
economically and technologically important products and processes, from aircraft
structural composite components to zero-emission vehicle power sources. This
project will use small scale experimental methods in conjunction with
computational modeling to develop a deep understanding of the local polymer
interfacial mechanics to advance optimal material design. As such, the project
will provide cross-disciplinary training to a diverse group of postdoctoral,
graduate, and undergraduate trainees, enable community outreach by engaging with
local K-12 science events, and contribute to digital data curation and
distribution platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
characterize the local mechanical gradients in confined polymers by applying
advanced atomic force microscopy nanoindentation experiments coupled with
targeted finite element analysis simulations to novel polymer-substrate
interface model systems. Due to the generally complex configuration of polymers
in various applications, model substrate systems will be designed to study
multi-body compound effects arising from simultaneous interactions of local
polymer domains with multiple functional interfaces. A suite of polymer-
substrate interface samples containing topological and chemical patterns will be
fabricated using lithography techniques. Local elastic modulus gradients will be
mapped at high resolution using a coupled experimental and simulated approach
such that data analysis will enable deconvolution of complex experimental
artifacts. Advanced dynamic atomic force microscopy modes will also be employed
to assess local changes in polymer dynamics. The model systems are fabricated as
well-defined mimics of confined polymers in actual materials applications and
provide an avenue for increased characterization efficiency by leveraging a
combinatorial approach. To accelerate data collection and analysis, substrate
samples will be designed such that many interphase conditions can be probed
within one single sample. Overall, the investigations will provide key
fundamental insights into the nature and impact of confined polymers and enable
the rational design of multifunctional and robust systems using polymers and
composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.