* 2040581
* NSF Convergence Accelerator- Track C: QuSTEAM: Convergent Undergraduate Education in Quantum Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2022
* David Awschalom, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 05/31/2022
* USD 709,707.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. This project
aims to develop an undergraduate curriculum that combines Quantum Information
Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts and Mathematics (QuSTEAM) to build a
quantum smart workforce. The QuSTEAM curriculum will have a modular format with
in-person, online, and hybrid delivery modalities. The modules will provide
educational opportunities for a variety of stakeholders including members of the
workforce, 2-year institutions, 4-year institutions, and minority-serving
institutions. The project will leverage partnerships with industry and national
labs to both identify critical skills and modes of thought, and to directly
participate in education and pedagogy, ensuring that the curriculum will develop
a diverse quantum smart workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The QuSTEAM curriculum
will rely on research-based educational best practices to provide a convergent
and inclusive curriculum to develop a diverse quantum smart workforce. This
curricular structure will be designed from the ground up to address structural
barriers that have to date limited the diversity and inclusiveness of STEM
training, and will include concurrent training in the societal impact of QIS
technologies by incorporating content beyond traditional STEM disciplines. The
project will engage with those conducting quantum research as well as STEAM
education research to create a multi-tiered curriculum at the major, minor, and
certificate level. Deliverables include (1) a schematic of interdisciplinary
modules that details how the building blocks of QIS competency can be organized
for different educational targets (BS, AD, certificate); (2) a map of steps
taken to actively promote equity and inclusivity in the curriculum that will
serve as a model for curricular development beyond QuSTEAM; and (3) individual
course curricula that demonstrate the implementation of QuSTEAM. This curriculum
will provide a framework for quantum information sciences (QIS) education that
can be implemented at a national scale to develop a diverse quantum smart
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.