* 2040819
* CAREER: Next generation mixed membership models for highly multivariate biodiversity data
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Denis Valle, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2026
* USD 467,581.00

Understanding and predicting how human activities impact biodiversity is
challenging given the often large number of species in any given location.
Importantly, despite the increasing amount of data generated by the remote-
sensing revolution currently underway in Ecology (e.g., photos from satellites
and camera traps), the use and integration of this information with field data
on biodiversity is limited by the absence of modeling methods that can integrate
multiple data streams and that can properly account for the characteristics of
the data generated by these sensors. The long-term goal of this project is to
advance cyberinfrastructure by creating broadly applicable methods for
biodiversity datasets and by training the next generation of quantitative
environmental scientists. This project will focus on substantially improving
Mixed Membership (MM) models. These models were originally developed for text-
mining purposes but have been widely used for biodiversity research in a wide
range of ecosystems. Unfortunately, the current formulation of these models
still has important limitations. This project will develop improved MM models
that can account for the characteristics of the data generated by these sensors,
can integrate multiple sources of data, and enable biodiversity predictions to
be made. Ultimately, these improved MM models will be critical to enhance our
ability to quantify and predict impacts on biodiversity. This project will also
increase the awareness of the impact of climate change on biodiversity among
high-school teachers and students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluating and
forecasting how species composition has been and will be altered by
anthropogenic stressors is key to sustaining biodiversity and ecosystem
functioning, but existing methods to quantify biodiversity change have important
limitations. Biodiversity data are highly multivariate (e.g., an assemblage can
contain hundreds of species in tropical forests) but many of the dimension-
reduction methods typically used to interpret these data often generate results
that are not easily interpretable (e.g., nonmetric multidimensional scaling axis
scores), rely on unrealistic assumptions (e.g., hard clustering of sites), and
are ill suited for wildlife studies because they do not account for imperfect
detection. Critically, many of these methods do not allow for formal inference
and/or predictions to be made and these methods do not leverage multiple data
streams. To circumvent these limitations, this project will develop methods to
generate new insights on the drivers of spatial and temporal variation of
biodiversity. The overall objective of this project is to significantly improve
MM models for biodiversity research. The specific objectives of this project
consist of a) creating MM models that can generate reliable inference and
predictions, integrate disparate data streams, and account for detection issues;
and b) disseminate and train scientists on the developed models; and increase
awareness of the impact of climate change on biodiversity among high-school
students while addressing important science, math, and statistics standards. The
results of this project will be stored in the stable URL
https://denisvalle.weebly.com/mm-models.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.