* 2040614
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track C: National Quantum Literacy Workforce Curriculum and Training Network
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Denise Baken, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 05/31/2022
* USD 911,483.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. This project
seeks to develop a national quantum literacy workforce network to broaden and
increase participation. By applying fairness, ethics, accountability and
transparency (FEAT) to develop quantum literacy frameworks, this project aims to
engage diverse communities in quantum science. Partners include those from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), Minority Business
Enterprises (MBEs), national laboratories, industry, and nonprofits who will
develop a taxonomy, curriculum, training and national network to enhance quantum
literacy at a national scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to increase
the participation of historically underrepresented groups in quantum science
through its diverse network as well as through its curriculum and training. The
building of a national quantum literacy workforce ecosystem includes four
pathways: (1) identifying quantum literacy taxonomic nomenclature utilized in
industry settings; (2) conceptualizing a quantum literacy curriculum design
informed by industry; (3) designing training modalities that are adaptable to
various industries; and (4) building a national network of academics,
businesses, nonprofits, government and national laboratories. The curriculum
aims to be widely accessible and used by those in industry, students, academics
as well as government and nonprofits. By assisting end-users to gain an
understanding of the quantum concepts, this project will enhance a quantum
literate communities. With a focus on building the network with those from
HBCUs, MBEs, governments labs, industry, and nonprofits, this project aims to
transform and strengthen the quantum workforce and will be a resource for those
engaging in diversity efforts in quantum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.