* 2040684
* A Signal Detection Approach to Understanding Susceptibility to Misinformation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Bertram Gawronski, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 423,866.00

One of the greatest challenges for the functioning of societies in the
information age is the prevalence and impact of misinformation. Concerns over
the impact of misinformation have grown considerably as the internet and social
media provide a conduit for spreading information widely and rapidly, regardless
of its veracity. The current project aims to investigate how people determine
whether new information they encounter is correct or incorrect, and how people
decide whether to share this information on social media. Using a formal
modeling approach called Signal Detection Theory, the research focuses on three
aspects of such judgments: (a) the ability to distinguish between correct and
incorrect information, (b) general tendencies to treat information as correct
vs. incorrect regardless of veracity, and (c) partisan bias involving a tendency
to accept information that is consistent with one's personal beliefs and dismiss
information that is inconsistent with one's personal beliefs. The findings are
expected to provide valuable insights into why people might be susceptible to
misinformation and how it might be possible to reduce the spread of
misinformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toward this end, the current project
investigates how cognitive and motivational factors jointly influence responses
to correct and incorrect information. Across a series of 16 studies, the project
addresses the following questions: How well can people distinguish between
correct and incorrect information? When are decisions to share information on
social media influenced by people's perceptions of accuracy? Does more elaborate
thinking increase people's ability to distinguish between correct and incorrect
information? How does elaborate thinking influence partisan bias in responses to
belief-congruent and belief-incongruent information? How does greater confidence
about one's personal values influence accuracy and partisan bias? How do echo
chambers and prior exposure to information influence people's susceptibility to
misinformation? How effective is debunking in reducing susceptibility to
misinformation? How does the source of information influence responses to
correct and incorrect information? How can partisan bias in responses to correct
and incorrect information be reduced? Project activities also involve training
students on using signal detection methods to investigate how people judge
information. The project helps to address societal problems that stem from
misinformation by investigating the psychological processes that make people
susceptible to misinformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.