* 2040381
* ML Basis for Intelligence Augmentation:Toward Personalized Modeling, Reasoning under Data-Knowledge Symbiosis, and Interpretable Interaction for AI-assisted Human Decision-making
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Eric Xing, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2024
* USD 738,927.00

Much of the work people do today—in healthcare, business, scientific
enterprises, and military operations—is performed in teams. Collaborative
decision-making effort within a team is a complex and challenging process of
integrating, understanding, and acting upon different types of information. This
project aims to advance the use of artificial intelligence and machine learning
as intelligence augmentation (IA) tools for facilitating and improving
collaborative decision making in clinical teams, focusing on AI-assisted
diagnosis and treatment. The focus of the investigators reflects the practical
importance and impact of IA in healthcare, especially in the on-going fight with
the pandemic where efficiency, validity, and cost-effectiveness of medical
decision-making is critical. However, the proposed methods will apply to other
forms and use-cases of IA, such as policy making, public health responses,
intelligence and business operations, ultimately advancing national health,
prosperity, and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although modern machine learning
research has been widely involved in solving various pattern discovery and
recognition tasks based on a wide spectrum of data—either in a fully autonomous
fashion or in rudimentary human-AI collaborative settings such as
crowdsourcing—effectively augmenting and assisting complex collaborative human
decision-making efforts in the space of diagnosis, treatment, planning,
logistics remains to be an open challenge. In clinical decision- making,
understanding and treating the disease must rely on the vast knowledge and
expertise and be based on evidence coming from heterogeneous sources of
information, ranging from text (medical history), to imagery (radiograms), to
time series data (vitals). Making sense of such multimodal information requires
effective communication and collaboration within clinical teams. The
investigators propose to study some of the key technical challenges in machine
learning for IA: (1) modeling human decision-making processes; (2) incorporating
background knowledge into data-driven systems; and (3) building human-AI
interface for productive inter- and intra-team collaboration. To that end, the
investigators will: (1) develop a machine learning framework based on modeling
individual decision-makers that enables accurate detection of errors in medical
diagnosis and can be used as a recommendation engine in collaborative decision-
making settings; (2) develop principled strategies for integrating objective
medical knowledge (e.g., automatically extracted from rapidly growing medical
literature) with the clinical experience and expertise of a team of health
professionals; (3) design human-interpretable interfaces that enable efficient
communication in decision making within and across teams, including new tools
for interpreting how the models arrived at each recommended decision and natural
language interfaces that can facilitate human-AI
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.