* 2040887
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Planning for an Inclusive Makerspace Alliance for Rural Students with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Gina Oswald, University of Maine Farmington
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2022
* USD 96,377.00

This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S.
leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion
and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The goal of this planning grant
is to develop a shared vision for an Inclusive Makerspace Alliance that equips
and empowers the STEM education community with the knowledge, support and
resources necessary to effectively engage students with disabilities in STEM
learning through accessible STEM focused makerspaces. The shortage of readily
available, evidence-based inclusive STEM curriculum and technologies that
capitalize on rural educational opportunities for students with disabilities is
a major obstacle for utilizing accessible makerspaces, especially in rural
areas. Unfortunately, promising practices are often not well documented, or
broadly implemented, as K-12 STEM teachers often implement STEM-rich makerspace
experiences in silos, unaware of relevant research and practices around the
country. This planning effort will address this broadening participation
challenge by centering accessible STEM education within the context of
makerspace practices in diverse rural localities. It will build a network of
partners committed to all aspects of makerspaces, from design-thinking and
curricula to STEM career pathways, that present barriers and opportunities to
rural students with disabilities. By engaging with and supporting the NSF
INCLUDES National Network, this planning grant effort will leverage diverse
partnerships and existing infrastructure to scale up to a national alliance
advocating for the meaningful inclusion of individuals with disabilities in STEM
education and careers through makerspaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a sixteen-
month period, the University of Maine Farmington and its partners will focus its
work on the development and actualization of a shared vision, one of the NSF
INCLUDES design elements for collaborative infrastructure. The shared vision
will be supported by a range of catalytic activities including: (1) surveying
K-12 schools in the State of Maine on their STEM makerspaces, relevant
supportive technologies, and accessibilities measures, (2) conducting site
visits to investigate strengths for, and barriers to, STEM curriculum
implementation, and impact in makerspaces, (3) assessing common needs and
working collaboratively to determine next steps, (4) establishing a National
Consortium for accessible rural STEM makerspaces, (5) providing technical advice
related to inclusion through universal design and common accommodations, and (6)
developing, piloting, and testing the feasibility of a publicly available,
searchable, and accessible virtual repository of rural-focused curricular
resources related to accessible STEM makerspaces. To ground this work, an
Inclusive Makerspace Summit will be held for partner organizations to promote
shared understanding and collective impact. In addition, intentional connections
will be made to the NSF INCLUDES National Network through knowledge, data, and
resource sharing, networking, and participation in the online community. If
successful, this planning grant has the potential to lay a strong foundation for
a future national alliance centered on inclusive STEM makerspaces for all
students, especially rural students with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.