* 2040351
* CAREER: Uncovering the wake dynamics of high-frequency, asymmetric swimming and flying
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Daniel Quinn, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Fish and birds use complex high-speed maneuvers when chasing prey or escaping
predators. How water and air flow around these animals during maneuvers is
mostly unknown. Mapping out these flows will help biologists better understand
the relationship between fish, birds, and their environment. Mapping out these
flows will help bio-inspired roboticists, who currently rely on models of low-
speed, symmetric gaits when designing and testing robots. Understanding the
flows that govern rapid maneuvers will enable a new generation of fast,
flexible, ultra-maneuverable bio-inspired robots. The principal goal of this
project is therefore to discover the fluid dynamics that govern high-speed,
asymmetric swimming/flying gaits. The project integrates educational activities,
including virtual tours where students from rural high schools teleconference
into the lab and remotely control a robotic swimming
rig.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is made possible by a unique rig that
creates high-frequency, asymmetric flapping motions in a water channel. The rig
uses a scotch-yoke mechanism to double the frequencies traditionally available
to studies of swimming and flying, and it floats on air bushings in order to
simulate autonomous maneuvers. The performance of fish- and bird-inspired
propulsion strategies are then quantified by a combination of Particle Image
Velocimetry and dynamic force measurements. These experiments will inform
adaptations to models of unsteady aerodynamics as they pertain to swimming and
flying animals and robots. The experimental-theoretical campaign will focus on
three specific research goals: (i) Determine what three-dimensional flow
features govern the thrust and efficiency of high-frequency bio-inspired gaits,
(ii) Determine what three-dimensional flow features govern the maneuverability
of asymmetric bio-inspired gaits, and (iii) Determine what wake-driven models
predict the performance of high-frequency, asymmetric, tunable-stiffness fins
and wings. More generally, the project’s overarching goal is for the unique
semiautonomous rig and the associated modeling to create new precedents and
templates for those integrating fluid dynamics into the next generation of
intelligent machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.