* 2040209
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: TTP: Small: DeFake: Deploying a Tool for Robust Deepfake Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Matthew Wright, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2024
* USD 417,764.00

Deepfakes – videos that are generated or manipulated by artificial intelligence
– pose a major threat for spreading disinformation, threatening blackmail, and
new forms of phishing. They are already widely used in creating non-consensual
pornography, and have begun to be used to undermine governments and elections.
Even the threat of deepfakes has cast doubts on the authenticity of videos in
the news. Journalists, who have a key role in verifying information, especially
need help to deal with ever-improving deepfake technology. Recent results on
detecting deepfakes are promising, with close to 100% accuracy in lab tests, but
few systems are available for real-world use. It is critical to move beyond
accuracy on curated datasets and address the needs of journalists who could
benefit from these advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
transition-to-practice project is to develop the DeFake tool, a system that
utilizes advanced machine learning to help journalists detect deepfakes in a way
that is robust, intuitive, and provides results that are explainable to the
general public. To meet this objective, the project team is engaged in four main
tasks: (1) Making the tool robust to new types of deepfakes, and having it show
users why a video is fake; (2) Protecting the tool from adversarial examples –
small perturbations to a video that are specially crafted to fool detection
systems; (3) Working with journalists to understand what they need from the
tool, and building an online community to discuss deepfakes and their detection;
and (4) Integrating advances from the other tasks into a stable, efficient, and
useful tool, and actively disseminating this tool to journalists. The project
team is also leveraging visually interesting deepfakes to develop engaging
education and outreach efforts, such as a museum-style exhibit on deepfake
detection meant for broad audiences of all ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.