* 2040718
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track D: The Data Hypervisor: Orchestrating Data and Models
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Michael Franklin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 05/31/2023
* USD 954,640.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, NSF Convergence Accelerator–Track D: The
Data Hypervisor: Orchestrating Data and Models, will design and implement the
Data Station—a new architecture where both data and derived data products are
sealed and cannot be directly seen or downloaded by anyone. In the Data Station
architecture, computation is brought to the data, rather than data being brought
to users, as is common in traditional data lakes and warehouses. Sharing data
and models has had a transformative impact on scientific problems from medical
imaging to natural language understanding. Despite the potential upside, many
researchers in both academia and industry are reluctant to centralize and share
data to both internal and external researchers. Organizations today have to
navigate complex regulatory considerations and protect intellectual property
while incurring a significant technical investment in documenting and
maintaining data. The Data Station will ease access to sensitive data, assist
with data discovery and integration, and facilitate enforcement of arbitrary
data access and governance policies. The project will work with partners in
biomedicine, materials science, and enterprise data management to establish the
capabilities and prove the concepts of the Data Station
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While building upon prior research in data
systems, Data Station will introduce novel data-unaware task capsules that
enable users to specify data-driven tasks such as traditional data queries and
machine learning model training without the user requiring direct access to the
data itself. The programming interfaces convey sufficient information for the
Data Station to trigger the discovery of potentially relevant datasets;
integrate and prune those datasets for computation; and compute the results by
executing the task. In effect, Data Station inverts the traditional data
querying modeling by bringing computations to the data. Task capsules also
include a user-defined metric for determining what results are useful from the
user’s perspective as well as which trust constraints need to be met to validate
the provenance of input datasets. The Data Station captures metadata every time
a derived data product is created and provides a set of primitives to implement
various data governance and data access policies necessary to address data
contributor use cases. Only authorized users are able to access the data based
on a novel access-token model implemented by Data Station that permits fine-
grained yet scalable access control. Users must explicitly be authorized to
access results via tokens obtained from data contributors. The Data Station
project will engage a diverse set of partners in materials science, biomedicine,
and enterprise scenarios to help design and apply the Data Station to various
use cases. An education program will engage high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students in researching, developing, and evaluating the Data
Station.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.