* 2040204
* EAGER: Enhancing the executive functions of neurodiverse children through technology-mediated sociodramatic play
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Kyle Rector, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 133,737.00

Executive functions (EF) are cognitive processes needed for goal-oriented
behaviors such as attentional control, information processing, and goal setting.
They are critical for success in school and throughout life, but neurodiverse
children have difficulty with EF. Tools of the Mind (ToM) style sociodramatic
play (in which groups of children engage in make-believe with common goals for
planning, role playing, interactive social dialogue and negotiation,
improvisation, and use of generic props) has been shown to be a successful
approach to developing EF with neurodiverse children, but implementation can be
challenging due to the substantial training required for adult facilitators. The
goal of this exploratory research is to invent technologies to lower this
barrier. Project outcomes will yield artifact, empirical, and methodological
contributions to equally serve children diagnosed with autism and intellectual
disabilities and who display a range of complementary strengths and weaknesses
in their EF skills, thereby providing teachers and therapists with the
customizable tools necessary to support each child so as to improve their
learning outcomes and enhance their quality of life. Software and hardware
instructions will be published online, and the findings will be presented both
at Computer Science venues and Down Syndrome and Autism conventions so different
audiences are aware of them. Additional broad impacts will derive from the
inclusion of neurodiverse children in participatory design sessions with one
female Ph.D. student and four undergraduate students, as well as summer
undergraduate researchers who are female and/or with disabilities through CRA-W
DREU or AccessComputing programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will
leverage the team's prior work on StoryCarnival, a system designed to lower
barriers to ToM for typically developing 3-4-year old children, which includes
interactive visual stories to promote sociodramatic play, a play planner app to
help children transition from experiencing a story to role playing, and tangible
voice agents controlled by adult facilitators to keep children engaged.
StoryCarnivalU will expand the reach of StoryCarnival to a universal set of
children (with intellectual disabilities and autism), increasing our
understanding of how quality content, interactive media scaffolds, and voice
agents support collaborative activities in physical spaces for the target
community and thereby lower barriers to evidence-based activities to promote EF
skills. StoryCarnivalU will be developed iteratively through a series of 18
design sessions with families having at least one child diagnosed with autism or
an intellectual disability along with siblings. Novel approaches to
customization will enable the target populations to receive help from ToM-style
play, with special emphasis on story content, play planning, and voice agent
design and control, with additional focus on the ecology surrounding technology
use including optimal group sizes, incorporating behavioral goals and
expectations, and providing support for the symbolic use of props during
play.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.