* 2040917
* RUI: Investigating Structure and Dynamic Properties of the Potassium Channel Accessory Protein, KCNE3
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Indra Sahu, Campbellsville University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 02/29/2024
* USD 297,000.00

Membrane proteins are responsible for many important functions in biological
systems including the transport of ions and molecules across cellular membranes.
Structural dynamics studies of membrane proteins represent one of the final
frontiers in biophysics and structural biology and are essential for
understanding membrane protein function. This research project will seek an
understanding of the structural and dynamical properties of the potassium
channel accessory protein KCNE3, a protein that modulates the function of
voltage gated potassium channels that play a role in cardiac, nervous and
auditory systems. In addition, the work will promote undergraduate and high-
school student teaching and training. Young scientists will be involved in both
the experimental and computational aspects of the project and hence be trained
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) research for the
preparation of a world class work force in this field within the country. This
research will increase the participation of under-represented and women students
including first generation college students in STEM research. Undergraduate and
high-school students will present their research results at national or
international scientific conferences. A teaching-level modern biophysics course
will be designed to complement and enhance educational facilities at
Campbellsville University. A science workshop and outreach program developed
under this project and aimed at local high school students and parents will help
spread scientific awareness and promote informal discussions of this scientific
work and STEM education and training within the local community. The
infrastructure, including a research-level spectrometer established under this
project, will expand the undergraduate research facilities at the PI’s
institution and also provide access to nearby colleges and universities in
Central Kentucky. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;KCNE3 is a single transmembrane protein
of the KCNE family that modulates the function and trafficking of voltage gated
potassium channels including KCNQ1. Information on the structure and dynamics of
KCNE3 is very important in understanding the interaction of KCNE3 with the
potassium channel protein and its function during channel gating. Despite the
clear importance of KCNE3, very little information about this system exists. The
objective of this research is to investigate structural and dynamical properties
of KCNE3 embedded in a membrane utilizing electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
spectroscopic techniques and molecular dynamics modeling. This research fills a
current gap in the field and will lead to a fundamental understanding of the
structure and function of the potassium channels. The double electron-electron
resonance (DEER) EPR spectroscopy will be used to measure long-range distances
(25 to 80 Å) between spin labels located on KCNE3 in order to observe structural
conformational changes of KCNE3 in micelle and lipid bilayers. A structural
model of KCNE3 in lipid bilayers will be developed based on EPR data. This study
will focus on answering the following important biologically significant
questions: What is the structure and topology of KCNE3 in membrane bilayers?
What is the conformational state of KCNE3 in membrane bilayers when compared to
that in micelles? How is the molecular motion of KCNE3 and KCNE3/KCNQ1 altered
in different membrane environments? Undergraduate and high-school students will
be trained in cutting-edge molecular biological scientific techniques and the
results will be presented at national/international conferences and published in
peer-reviewed scientific journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) Division and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.