* 2040747
* Enhancing Science Education through Virtual Reality: A Conference to Design Simulations that Enhance the Clinical Preparation of Secondary Science Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Jacqueline Rodriguez, American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 05/31/2022
* USD 99,997.00

This conference proposal focuses on the use of virtual/mixed reality simulation
in the preparation of secondary science teachers. Educator preparation programs
(EPPs) face significant challenges in providing science teacher candidates with
quality clinical placements in high school science classrooms. Placements
typically do not include the variety of science subject areas that teacher
candidates are likely to teach (e.g., biology, chemistry, geoscience, physics)
and the classes may not include important student populations such as English
language learners or students who receive special education services. The use of
virtual and/or mixed reality teaching simulations can address these needs by
providing teacher candidates with opportunities to teach a wide range of science
content and a diverse set of science learners. This conference brings together
stakeholders in science teacher education to develop prototype simulation
environments to address these gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference convenes
experts in simulation in teacher preparation, practicing high school teachers,
and teacher candidates to engage in a design process related to mixed reality
simulations. Conference attendees will identify important gaps in science
teacher preparation and design prototype simulation environments for addressing
those gaps. Mursion, a leader in mixed-reality teaching simulations, will
provide the platform and resources to rapidly design and test prototypes that
build on their current simulation deployment and provide these prototypes to
conference attendees and members of the American Association of Colleges of
Teacher Education (AACTE) to use and test in their EPP settings. Another key
outcome of the convening is the development of a networked improvement community
that would develop guidance for the effective use of simulations in science
teacher preparation. This work will have a broad impact as the networked
improvement community will continue to iterate and advance the use of the
simulations in high school science teacher preparation
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.