* 2040335
* Time-Invariant, Multi-Objective Extremum Seeking Control for Model-Free Auto-Tuning of Powered Prosthetic Legs
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Nicholas Gans, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2022
* USD 111,579.00

This research project seeks fundamental knowledge and understanding of
versatile, adaptive optimization methods to enable real-time auto-tuning of
powered prosthetic legs. Even with the help of modern prosthetic legs, lower-
limb amputees often experience reduced mobility, leading to reduced quality of
life and additional health problems. Recently developed powered prosthetic legs
have the potential to improve outcomes, but these devices have not been
clinically adopted because of the technical expertise and excessive time and
effort required to configure their control systems for each patient. These
control systems involve dozens of non-intuitive parameters that are specific to
each user's physiology, how they walk, and environmental conditions, which also
prevents these devices from adapting to the changing rhythms of daily life.
Powered prostheses that automatically adjust to changing user activity and
environmental conditions could significantly improve mobility for over a million
lower-limb amputees in the United States alone. Furthermore, self-tuning could
help powered prosthetic legs to adapt to natural changes in the patient perhaps,
for example, due to fatigue. The self-tuning algorithms would have applications
in control of other repetitive processes, such as powered orthoses for stroke
patients, energy-harvesting turbines, HVAC systems, and biological processes. To
promote knowledge transfer, the PIs will sponsor senior design projects for
undergraduate student teams to design and build new experimental test beds for
the developed control systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major objective of this
research concerns novel methods of model-free adaptive optimization for systems
with varying time-scales and competing objectives. Extremum seeking control
(ESC) is a powerful approach to model-free adaptive optimization that requires
the plant and ESC dynamics to have separated, fixed time-scales in order to
optimize a single objective function. However, human locomotion exhibits varying
time-scales based on activity (e.g., walking speed) and involves optimization of
multiple competing objectives (e.g., energetic efficiency vs. stability). A
time-invariant, multi-objective ESC framework is therefore needed to auto-tune
powered prosthetic legs, which currently require several hours of customization
by an expert, just for baseline operation. The overall goals of this project are
to first to understand how to perform ESC of rhythmic processes with varying
time-scales for real-time, model-free adaptation, next to understand how to
automatically optimize multiple competing objectives using ESC, and, finally, to
understand how to auto-tune a powered prosthetic leg for patient-specific
behavior without a model of the human user.