* 2040682
* NSF Convergence Accelerator - Track D: A Standardized Model Description Format for Accelerating Convergence in Neuroscience, Cognitive Science, Machine Learning and Beyond
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,11/30/2021
* Abhishek Bhattacharjee, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 11/30/2021
* USD 993,102.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. Accelerating
convergence in science and technology depends on the ability to represent and
share not only data, but also theories and models in the most objective,
transparent, and reproducible way possible. This project will develop a Model
Description Format (MDF) that can be used for computational models that span
from neuroscience and psychology to machine learning, and that can serve as the
foundation for extensions that serve an even broader scope of models in
population biology and the social sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such an MDF
would have numerous benefits, both scientific and technological, including:
dissemination and validation of model reproducibility; migration of models
across domains (e.g., use of models of brain function in machine learning
applications); integration of models at different levels of analysis (e.g.,
biophysically-realistic neural models into models of cognitive function,
cognitive models as agents in population level models); exploitation of
complementary strengths of existing packages (e.g., design in a familiar
environment but execute in one with better tools for parameter tuning and/or
data-fitting); and more efficient development of new tools, by providing
developers with a representative diversity of models, all in a common
format.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.