* 2040539
* 2021 Germination Investigator Workshop
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Marshall Poole, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 49,903.00

The EFMA Germination program seeks to promote the development and implementation
of novel approaches, platforms, and environments for training academics to
formulate societally impactful research questions. This award will provide
support for a two-day workshop to be held at the National Science Foundation,
which will convene teams funded through the Germination program together with
other academic stakeholders (including senior leadership and individual
researchers) to share the results obtained in their Germination-funded research.
The workshop builds upon prior Germination investigator meetings with the aim of
propelling information exchange and furthering community
building.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned workshop will bring together
Germination awardees and other stakeholders to reflect on how their projects
have facilitated the formulation of transformative research questions. Primary
objectives of the workshop include:&lt;br/&gt;1) Share the outcomes and positive
strategies of Germination projects.&lt;br/&gt;2) Compare the strategies taken by
different projects.&lt;br/&gt;3) Consider mechanisms and metrics for evaluating
outcomes of Germination approaches.&lt;br/&gt;4) Build community and support
collaboration among Germination awardees, with a specific emphasis on
identifying both knowledge gaps and collaboration
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assembling representatives from the
Germination projects offers a unique opportunity to synthesize their knowledge
of the multifaceted challenges inherent in current higher education and research
infrastructures. This workshop will assist in building a community of
practitioners committed to designing new learning frameworks, platforms, and/or
environments for training academics to formulate research questions with
substantive potential for societal impact. Importantly, participants will
represent both predominantly white institutions and minority-serving
institutions broadening the likely impact of discussions. Successful scaling and
implementation of Germination approaches offers significant opportunity for
broader impacts through catalysing research directions that address pressing
societal challenges and needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.