* 2040483
* SBIR Phase II:  A portable, powered lift to instantly increase independence of all manual wheelchair users
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Dave Preller, LEVATE LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Edward Chinchoy
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,935.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II is to improve the mobility of wheelchair users. There
are more than 2.5 M wheelchair users in the US. This project will develop an
electronic aftermarket add-on accessory to increase manual wheelchair users’
height up to 18 inches or more in 5 seconds. The new wheelchair lift (WL) will
increase their Quality of Life and their ability to independently perform
activities of daily living (feeding, bathing, dressing) and instrumental
activities of daily living (transportation, shopping, cooking, doing laundry,
and housework). The solution will replace expensive home retrofitting ($20 K)
and will reduce the need for help in outside settings, such as reaching for
items on shelves, empowering the users. The WL will bridge the gap between the
disabled and the able-bodied population, providing a means to increase
wheelchair users’ participation in the labor force (currently only 20%) and
enabling more employment options. Similarly, the WL will offer employers an
effective way to support workers with disabilities and reduce costs to adapt the
work environment to provide reasonable accommodations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project seeks to generate a final
functional prototype of the wheelchair lift (WL) ready for usability tests with
end-users. The Phase II project extends prior work on a prototype satisfying the
major design specifications of weight, lift maximum load, and time of ascension,
de-risking the most significant technological challenges associated with the
project. The proposed activities will enable systems engineering of hardware and
electronics development and the next generation prototype for testing and
regulatory clearance. The prototype will be produced under Quality Management
Systems and an industrial manufacturing process will be
established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.