* 2040464
* WRF/WERF: Functionalized nanofiber networks for nutrient removal and recovery: Integrated electrochemical controls for sustainable and autonomous treatment technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Nosang Myung, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2022
* USD 300,002.00

The nitrogen and phosphorous in agricultural runoff harms ecosystems,
contaminates drinking water, and poses a risk to human health. These pollutants
are not effectively removed by conventional treatment technologies. New
approaches that both treat the water and recover these valuable nutrients are
needed. This project will develop new integrated multi-functional materials that
have dual activity for simultaneous nitrogen and phosphorous removal, with
integrated electroactive substrates to facilitate nutrient release and sensing.
It is anticipated that the integrated material functionality will increase the
reliability and autonomy of drinking water treatment in off-grid rural areas or
small public water systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use
electrospinning to fabricate multifunctional, electrochemically active composite
nanofibers. The fibers will incorporate dual active sites, with quaternary
ammonium strong base anion exchange sites to target nitrogen, and iron oxides to
simultaneously target phosphorous. The electrospinning process will be optimized
to maximize surface availability of these active sites through interactions of
surfactants, metal oxides, and polymers. Electroactive substrates will be
incorporated to promote material regeneration, monitoring, and performance
cycling through the application of an electrical potential. The most promising
electroactive composites will be assessed for long-term, self-controlled
regeneration using representative model water sources. The project will support
interdisciplinary graduate student training, education, and outreach. The latter
will leverage ongoing activities associated with an NSF National Research
Training program at Iowa. Participation in a local STEM conference will engage
K-12 students and educators. Modules on sustainable technology development that
are targeted for undergraduate engineering students will be developed at both
participating institutions. Successful completion of the technical aspect of the
work will enable protection of public and ecosystem
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.