* 2040667
* NSF Convergence Accelerator - Track C: SQAI: Scalable Quantum Artificial Intelligence for Discovery
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2023
* Nitin Samarth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 05/31/2023
* USD 960,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. This grant
will benefit society by compressing the pharmaceutical discovery timeline and
reducing cost. This would have societal impacts both economically and in human
health. A new branch of artificial intelligence, Generative Adversarial Networks
(GAN), shows promise for exploring a large chemical space and generating novel
pharmaceutical candidates targeted for a certain disease. Quantum GAN (QGAN) has
emerged as a path to accelerate classical GANs. This project will create an
experimental quantum GAN framework to explore chemical compounds on Noisy
Intermediate Scale Quantum (NISQ) computers. This will yield a new discovery-
based framework, Scalable Quantum Artificial Intelligence (SQAI) which could be
employed for other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence
Accelerator team will answer fundamental questions in the context of drug
discovery such as: (i) How to exploit quantum advantage to the fullest for drug
discovery using NISQ-era computers? Should we use quantum resources for search,
discrimination and reinforcement of reward or allocate them fully for search and
rely on classical paradigm for regular tasks? (ii) Does a particular molecular
representation benefit NISQ-era computers? (iii) Can we enhance the quantum
ansatz in QGAN to explore pharmacologically relevant areas of chemical space?
(iv) What is the implication of noise on QGAN during training and generation?
(v) Are there other material systems that will provide noise immunity to the
existing noise-prone qubits? (vi) What kind of flexibility can we offer to the
users in exploring quantum computing for their discovery application? The main
tasks are focused on developing a software toolchain to bridge the gap between
quantum AI algorithms and hardware, exploring drug discovery using NISQ
computers, and preparing a quantum smart and diverse workforce. Outreach to K-12
teachers will include a professional development workshop and curricular
materials related to introductory quantum computing
content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.