* 2040594
* Multi-scale Interactions Influencing Lake-Effect Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Neil Laird, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 03/31/2024
* USD 514,733.00

Lake-effect snowstorms have large impacts on people and communities in the Great
Lakes region, as well as areas beyond the typical lake-effect snowbelts, and
there remain several unanswered scientific questions regarding multi-scale
interactions that regularly effect these storms. The interactions this research
investigates range from understanding how lake-effect storms are influenced by
varying jetstream wind patterns to the contribution lake-effect storms have to
winter snowfall totals. This research will give valuable insight into complex
lake-effect weather systems that are difficult to forecast, as well as the
snowfall produced by these storms. This project will benefit the next generation
of scientists through a wide range of educational and training activities. The
research results will be communicated to the scientific community and public, as
well as shared with the National Weather Service Forecast Offices in the Great
Lakes region through established connections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will provide new understanding of complex interactions that influence mesoscale
and convective boundary layer thermodynamics and dynamics in lake-effect system
(LES) environments. These interactions span across multiple spatiotemporal
scales, including interactions of synoptic-scale systems with mesoscale systems.
The scientific objectives of the research are to: (1) understand the interaction
of tropospheric short-wave troughs with LES and their impact on LES snowfall,
structure, and spatiotemporal evolution, (2) understand the variability in
structure and evolution of LES multi-lake connections (MLC) across areas of the
upstream lake and intervening land, as well as the influence that the MLC
upstream convective boundary layer has on LES over the downstream lake, (3)
understand the factors responsible for the development and maintenance of long-
distance, inland-extending LES snowbands, as well as their climatological
characteristics, and (4) understand the intraseasonal and interannual
variability of the LES contribution to total winter snowfall throughout the
Great Lakes region, as well as determine the influence that ice cover
distribution has on LES snowfall variability. Additionally, this research will
result in the most expansive and comprehensive LES database in existence for the
Great Lakes which will contain information of LES occurrences across 24 cold
seasons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.