* 2040121
* EAGER: RUI: The Physiology and Nitrogen Assimilatory Pathway of Spanish Moss (Tillandsia Usneoides) in Pesponse to Increased Nitrogen
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Douglas Van Hoewyk, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2023
* USD 154,089.00

Spanish moss (Tillandsia usneoides) is a slow-growing rootless plant in the
Southeastern United States that is often found on trees, such as live oak. Since
they don’t have roots in the soil, these “air plants” must acquire nutrients
from the atmosphere and from rainfall. Therefore, their environment is extremely
nutrient poor compared to other plants. This project investigates how Spanish
moss responds to increased amounts of nitrogen, the nutrient that most often
restricts plant growth. Nitrogen content in Spanish moss is remarkably lower
compared to other plants, which presents a botanical mystery: how does Spanish
moss survive in an environment where nitrogen is so scarce? Experiments are
designed to determine if Spanish moss is truly nitrogen-limited or rather if
these plants have evolved a unique ability to efficiently use limited nitrogen.
Understanding how Spanish moss survives despite limited nitrogen could provide
insight to plant breeders who seek to improve crop yield on marginalized soils.
Additionally, because climate change is predicted to increase atmospheric
deposition of nitrogen, these experiments might reveal future growth patterns of
Spanish moss. The study includes training of undergraduates from Coastal
Carolina University and the National Technical Institute for the Deaf in modern
scientific techniques, enhancing their education and the diversity of the future
scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this hypothesis-
driven project is to provide evidence if increased nitrogen availability
supports enhanced growth of the epiphyte Spanish moss by stimulating the
nitrogen assimilation pathway. Biochemical, metabolomic, and physiological
approaches will be used to answer two key questions: (i) does Spanish moss
display nitrogen luxury consumption and (ii) are these plants nitrogen limited
or rather do they display high nitrogen use efficiency? The project will
manipulate nitrate and ammonium inputs by both spiking and treating with a
physiologically relevant concentrations. The response of the nitrogen
assimilation pathway will be assessed by measuring nitrate reductase and
glutamine synthetase activity, amino acid and protein concentration, and amino
acid biosynthesis. Importantly it will determine if increased flux of inorganic
nitrogen into de novo amino acids is coupled with growth. Additionally,
experiments will measure the kinetics of nitrate reductase- a rate limiting
enzyme in plant nitrogen assimilation- and determine how it is regulated by
nitrate and ammonium availability. Spanish moss is tightly tied to southern
culture and identity, yet nothing is known about how they metabolize nitrogen.
This project will be the first to investigate nitrogen metabolism in these
plants, and to determine if increased nitrogen availability and assimilation is
coupled to growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.