* 2040146
* EAGER: Efficient Privacy-aware Document Search in the Cloud
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Tao Yang, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 01/31/2023
* USD 217,470.00

As sensitive information is increasingly stored in the cloud, privacy protection
is a critical factor for users to adopt cloud-based information services such as
document search. A cloud server can observe the client-initiated query
processing flow, extract statistical patterns, and reason about client's data.
As a result, the risk of leakage-abuse attacks exists when searching in the
cloud. The main challenge to perform privacy-preserving search is that index
visitation can reveal sensitive data patterns, and computation involved in
advanced ranking can further expose private feature information. On the other
hand, hiding index and feature information through full encryption prevents the
server from performing effective scoring and result comparison. This project
explores the challenging open problems in algorithmic indexing and ranking
solutions for privacy-aware cloud data search. The approach emphasizes an
evaluation-driven design where search performance is assessed in multiple
aspects of relevance, efficiency, and privacy for practical system deployment.
The project integrates the proposed research with an educational plan including
undergraduate and graduate students' involvement in the research project,
instructional material development, and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exploratory research addresses two
fundamental research challenges: (1) privacy-aware indexing and runtime support
in matching documents for a given query with an emphasis to curtail statistical
text information leakage while providing efficient and private access of ranking
features; (2) privacy-aware end-to-end top-K ranking with a multi-stage scheme
which seeks a combination of linear and nonlinear methods such as neural nets
and learning ensembles. The design goal is to minimize the leakage of document
features and characteristics while still accomplishing a reasonable response
time and competitive relevance. The evaluation process will use public datasets
to assess the effectiveness of the developed techniques for practical system
deployment. This research effort will open the door for bridging the gap between
privacy and advanced information retrieval in searching large encrypted
datasets. The developed research results will be made public for research and
industry communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.