* 2040588
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track D: A Trusted Integrative Model and Data Sharing Platform for Accelerating AI-Driven Health Innovation
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2022
* C. David Page, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 05/31/2022
* USD 966,067.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, NSF Convergence Accelerator Track D: A
Trusted Integrative Model and Data Sharing Platform for Accelerating AI-Driven
Health Innovation, will develop a novel health-related federated learning and
model-sharing platform, LEARNER, to enable collaborative big data mining for
biomedical applications by integrating cross-disciplinary expertise from machine
learning, trustworthy AI, and biomedical data science. LEARNER will incorporate
novel asynchronous federated learning algorithms based on rigorous theoretical
foundations using trustworthy AI techniques, fairness-aware and interpretable
machine learning models, large-scale computational strategies and effective
software tools to reveal the complex relationships among heterogeneous health
data. The project will address critical challenges in exploiting big data for
biomedical and health, which include access to large data collections,
computational intensity of AI/ML algorithms, complexity of hyperparameter
tuning, and the need for effective multidisciplinary expertise and
collaboration. Data privacy is another critical concern since health data is
intrinsically sensitive and could be exploited to reveal an individualâ€™s
identity even when the data are carefully anonymized. LEARNER will include a
suite of collaborative data analysis and privacy-preserving mechanisms and tools
that will securely support various types of health data analytics, including
mechanisms to detect potential data privacy leakages. Machine learning models
typically involve complex procedures for optimization and the induced results
can be difficult to interpret, and to replicate and reproduce. Novel methods
will be employed to improve the interpretability and reproducibility of complex
health data analytics models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team, with
individuals from academia and industry, will develop an interdisciplinary
program for training and education of graduate and undergraduate students. A
cross-disciplinary course will also be developed on Health Data Science for
beginning graduate students and senior undergraduate students from a variety of
programs, including Computer Science and Engineering, Informatics, Electrical
Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, Biology, and Statistics. The project will
put special emphasis on attracting female and under-represented minority
students to explore advanced computational technologies in the context of the
LEARNER platform. Interested senior undergraduate students will be able to work
on well-defined and well-scoped small projects, which will enable them to work
with graduate students and the PI team of the project. Such project could also
be undertaken as summer projects by undergraduate students in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.