* 2040713
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Planning for an Alliance on Social Justice, Science, and the Environment
* EDU,EES
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Anela Choy, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 10/31/2022
* USD 99,055.00

This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S.
leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion
and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The demographics of students in
graduate programs within the University of California system do not reflect the
overall population of California. The Program for Interdisciplinary
Environmental Research (PIER) at the University of California (UC) San Diego is
an exception to this overall pattern, with underrepresented minority (URM)
student participation in the program exceeding that of the parent departments.
The planning project activities enhance relationships between University of
California, San Diego and select California State University campuses, as well
as between departments participating in PIER. This work further develops
interdisciplinary research and the PIER program as mechanisms for broadening
participation in PhD STEM education. The activities also engage several junior
faculty in the PIER program, providing them an opportunity to develop their
roles within the national effort to increase participation in STEM education.
This planning project focuses on all five of the NSF INCLUDES elements of the
collaborative infrastructure: Shared vision, partnerships, goals and metrics,
leadership and communication, and expansion, sustainability, and scale. The
activities of the planning project establish new partnerships, and strengthen
existing partnerships, across programs at various California State University
campuses and the UC San Diego PIER program. The core activity is a workshop to
bring together these various groups. This workshop, and the activities that
precede and follow it, have intellectual merit through the aggregation of data
on the success of PIER, barriers to the professional success of PIER alumni, and
obstacles to graduate school experienced by California State University
undergraduates. The workshop explores specific interventions that can be
implemented to overcome these obstacles, and the merit of interdisciplinary
research as a mechanism for overcoming challenges that prevent broader
participation in STEM and STEM-dependent fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.