* 2040680
* NSF Convergence Accelerator - Track D: Data-Driven Disease Control and Prevention in Veterinary Health
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2022
* Xin Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 05/31/2022
* USD 944,875.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. The broader
impact and potential societal benefit of this Convergence Accelerator Phase I
project is to improve animal production and health. Specifically, this project
aims to address the maintenance of good swine health as a means of achieving
high productivity and efficiency in the high production global pork market. The
US is the worldâ€™s second-largest pork producer and a major player in the world
pork market, ranking second as importer and exporter country (the export value
for pork in 2019 was $7 billion). Thus, sustainability of this industry is
important both as a food source as well as from an economic standpoint.
Sustainability requires informed and timely decisions using scientific-based
analytical tools and prediction models, based on reliable and current data to
better manage swine health. However, in reality, while a vast amount of data has
been collected in all steps of primary production -from farrowing and weaning to
slaughter- such data is often incomplete, inconsistent and scattered at
different stakeholders -producers, veterinary diagnostic labs, and veterinary
clinics. Intertwined with this lack of integrated and high-quality data, there
is also a dire need for effective artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms
specifically designed to address key veterinary health challenges. The potential
impact of this project extends far beyond swine health and could be used as a
model across animal production and health in the US and globally not only
assuring high quality food supply but also providing economic advantage. The
team will build on their existing Disease BioPortal platform to facilitate the
integration and sharing of key datasets and develop new data-driven models
specifically adapted to animal health. Outcomes will not only have a direct
beneficial impact in the swine industry saving producers millions of dollars
yearly but also will significantly improve animal health/welfare, food safety
and, ultimately, public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team proposes both
data-centric and model-centric approaches with the following objectives: 1)
development of a pipeline for effective multi-level data connection and
integration, including animal diagnostics; pathogen genomes; animal genetics,
production and trade; farm management practices including biosecurity and
treatment protocols and environmental information, among others;
2)&lt;br/&gt;elaboration, implementation and validation of advanced
bioinformatic pipelines (i.e., read-based and assembly based methods) and AI
algorithms (i.e., cost-aware adaptive sampling and explainable machine learning
models) to solve key problems in the swine industry, in particular,
antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and swine influenza infections and; 3) expansion
and adoption of the Disease BioPortal platform to facilitate data sharing and AI
user-friendly usage and visualization by veterinarians, producers as well as
other stakeholders and the general public. This effort will enable us to address
critical challenges: early detection of infectious diseases and timely outbreak
investigations; better understanding of the variability and spread patterns of
pathogens within and between farms; identification of the main drivers
contributing to AMR; cost-effectiveness of the surveillance, treatment,
vaccination, and biosecurity&lt;br/&gt;strategies implemented at animal-, farm-
and system- level. While the work focuses on the swine industry and its two most
imminent challenges, the proposed data pipeline, data integration,
bioinformatics and, AI algorithm development can be applied to other livestock.
Thus, this work has the potential to improve animal health and welfare and to
secure the sustainability of US agriculture and food systems by providing data-
driven decision tools that push the frontier of precision
epidemiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.