* 2040400
* I-Corps: Tough Adhesive Hydrogels
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Benjamin Freedman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to define the
requirements for the translation of a tough, adhesive hydrogel technology for
general wound healing and internal sealants. General wound healing is a $24.6B
market globally that is growing at 6% per year. This growth is primarily driven
by increases in life expectancy and the rising prevalence of chronic illnesses.
The proposed medical adhesive technology offers highly adhesive hydrogel
scaffolds with tunable mechanical properties and the capacity to attach to wet
and moving surfaces, offering new treatment options for complex and traumatic
wound injuries. Tough adhesive hydrogels are expected to better heal injured
tissues. The translation of this technology will impact the wound healing market
by providing a dynamic multifaceted solution to unmet needs in wound care that
use multiple product types, are subject to repeat dressing changes, and result
in slow healing. This adhesive platform may be useful in many areas including
tissue adhesives, wound dressings, and tissue repair, and may accelerate the
research and commercial activities in wound healing and internal sealant
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is seeks to define the
requirements to develop improved medical adhesives using hydrogel technology.
Adhesion to wet and dynamically moving surfaces including biological tissues is
important in many fields, but has proven to be extremely challenging. Existing
adhesives are cytotoxic, adhere weakly to tissues, or cannot be used in wet
environments. To overcome these limitations, the proposed technology translates
a bioinspired design for tissue adhesion consisting of two layers: an adhesive
surface and a dissipative matrix. This approach differs from existing adhesives
as it uses a multicomponent adhesion strategy that combines electrostatic
interactions, covalent bonds, and physical interpenetration to generate
extremely high adhesion. Results have shown that tough hydrogel adhesives
generate adhesion energies on wet surfaces up to orders of magnitude higher than
those of existing adhesives. Adhesion occurs within minutes independent of blood
exposure and is compatible with in vivo dynamic
movements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.