* 2040979
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: 331 STEM:Energy 3 Universities, in 3 Cities, 1 Vision
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Dana Harmon, Texas Energy Poverty Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Atchison
* 05/31/2022
* USD 97,130.00

This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S.
leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion
and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The goal of this planning grant
is to develop a diverse, community-led, and national network for collective
impact, supported by the latest academic thought leadership to prepare young
people with valuable STEM education and workforce opportunities in energy by
combining the resources of 3 universities and 3 cities to serve 1 singular
vision: the 331 STEM:Energy Initiative. Many states and communities seek to
increase the diversity of their local clean energy workforce as they pursue
goals for decarbonization and clean-energy deployment. Yet, the supporting
education systems and human capital "pipelines" are not sufficiently developed
to support a diverse clean-energy workforce proportional to the scale of the
envisioned energy transition. The initiative will initially focus on three major
metro areas with diverse populations that are underrepresented in the growing
clean energy workforce: Houston, Detroit, and
Minneapolis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning project will build an ecosystem
of support for STEM education and workforce development in each of the three
sites by connecting local universities, community leaders, schools, and clean
energy companies to develop and deliver training and education in a distributed
cohort of students who learn in parallel across the three sites. This work is
unique in that each local cohort will be paired with a locally-sited community
solar project. Community solar represents a growing trend across the US that has
the potential to create significant local economic and environmental benefits.
Each cohort will be directly working hands-on with a solar project that creates
local benefits for the community in which the students live. Participants will
develop a greater understanding of how they may become leaders in science,
technology, engineering, and math; how their personal choices affect energy use
and the environment; and potentially find opportunities for employment in the
clean energy workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will advance knowledge
in several key areas that may broaden participation in STEM and ultimately the
clean energy workforce. The nature of the model presents an opportunity to
incorporate community-based participatory research as well as STEM education and
local workforce development opportunities, intended to help improve the
diversity of the clean energy workforce. The initiative will develop a unique,
scalable method to evaluate curricular needs and pathways and create a workforce
pipeline. Additionally, we will determine appropriate community engagement
strategies based on roles, community needs, and project requirements to
determine successful program elements between and within unique community
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.