* 2040036
* I-Corps:  Accelerating discovery research into neural-stem-cell-driven tissue regrowth through modeling and simulation
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Gunther Zupanc, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to define the
requirements of modeling and simulation platforms for drug development and/or
intervention strategies used in tissue repair. These strategies may be more
predictive and efficient than currently available through application of
experimental approaches. Ultimately, the goal for this tool is to make possible
regeneration of neural tissue lost to traumatic brain injury, spinal cord
injury, or stroke. Reaching this goal may transform the lives of millions of
patients and their families while also substantially reducing the financial
burdens to society. The translation will offer the platform as a service
tailored to the needs of scientists in preclinical (discovery) research
departments of pharmaceutical and biotech companies. By providing domain
expertise in the modeling of stem-cell-driven tissue regeneration, clients will
be enabled to narrow down the range of potentially effective compounds or
intervention strategies to those treatments with the highest probability to
succeed. This strategy could accelerate the discovery process, while reducing
the costs and time involved in research and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on advancing the
development of mathematical and computational models for a drug discovery
platform aimed at neural tissue repair. Informed by comprehensive cell-
biological data sets, these models simulate the dynamics of stem cell-driven
tissue growth during the normal development of the brain and spinal cord. In
addition, the models simulate the regenerative response of the central nervous
system after traumatic brain injury, spinal cord injury, and stroke. In recent
years, promising therapeutic strategies have been developed to promote tissue
regrowth, including activation of adult neural stem cells intrinsic to the
patient’s central nervous system, and the transplantation of extrinsic neural
stem cells to the site of cell loss. The selection and design of tests for
development of such intervention strategies is currently based on “trial and
error.” However, due to the complexity of biological factors and processes
involved in successful structural regeneration and functional recovery, this
approach consumes considerable resources and curtails progress in the discovery
of effective treatment strategies. This process may be streamlined by employing
modeling and simulations. Such a strategy may help scientists to select the most
meaningful experiments, thereby reducing time and costs associated with lab
work, while at the same time raising the quality of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.