* 2040196
* RAPID: Augmented Intelligence for Accelerating Covid-Related Scientific Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Daniel Weld, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 199,998.00

The project will develop new artificial intelligence (AI) methods to augment the
productivity of biomedical researchers and accelerate scientific discovery in
the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. We will issue weekly updates to our
widely-used Cord-19 and SciSight resources, which are a critical resource for
researchers studying SARS-CoV-2, having already been downloaded over 100,000
times by other researchers. We will also extend these resources to make them
more useful to doctors and researchers in two ways. First, we will automatically
generate one-sentence summaries of each paper to speed sensemaking of the
rapidly changing literature. Second, we will automatically extract a broad range
of entities (such as disease symptoms and research challenges) and relations to
improve filtering and search. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to generate one-
sentence summaries of research papers, we will train an abstractive BART model,
using two novel techniques: 1) co-training on the auxiliary task of title
prediction, and 2) fine-tuning using a set of one-sentence summaries that we
will generate by crowd-sourcing edits peer-review comments taken from sites such
as OpenReview. We will test our one-sentence summary generation with a
combination of automated (Rouge) metrics and user preference. In order to
increase the number of entities and relations extracted from research papers, we
will bootstrap with data-programming techniques then apply graph-neural-network
methods. We will evaluate our progress using a combination of expert-annotated
data and held out information from relevant knowledge
bases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.