* 2040022
* Temperature-adaptive behavior mediated by inter-kingdom lipid exchange
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Itay Budin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2024
* USD 562,592.00

In this project, the researcher will investigate synergistic interactions
between animal behavior and microbial metabolism during seasonal changes in
temperature. Animals, including humans, rely on the dietary intake of essential
chemical building blocks that they cannot synthesize. Polyunsaturated fatty
acids (PUFAs) are a class of essential dietary lipids that are important for
cell membrane structure at low temperatures and in the central nervous system.
Cold temperature adaptation in poikilotherms (‘cold blooded’ animals that do not
independently regulate their body temperature), and neurological function in
animals more broadly, depends on an ability to forage for PUFA-enriched food
sources. The project’s research will use fruit flies and their dietary fungi as
a model system to understand how animal feeding strategies and microbial lipid
biosynthesis have co-evolved to meet physiological needs. Through its research
aims, the project will 1) identify molecular mechanisms underlying the
physiology of a pair of organisms whose interactions are important in
agriculture and biotechnology 2) elucidate general principles of animal-
microbial interactions based on diet and 3) increase functional understanding of
a key lipid class in animal physiology and behavior. Through its education aim,
the project will promote participation in the biological sciences by students in
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To goal of this project is to
explore the mechanisms and consequences of microbial-animal lipid exchange using
a combination of behavioral, genetic, and biochemical approaches in both
Drosophila melanogaster and multiple yeast species. Polyunsaturated fatty acid
(PUFA) biosynthetic genes have been lost in many fungal lineages, so flies must
forage for specific yeast species to access these lipids. Yeast, in turn, are
immobile and rely on attracting insects to colonize new environments. In
preliminary work, the association between a natural fruit fly population and
different yeast species has been found to be dependent on temperature and yeast
PUFA metabolism. It has also been established that PUFA biosynthesis in a yeast-
based laboratory diet dictates the activity of flies in the cold and other
seasonally relevant behaviors. The project will first uncover the signaling
pathways by which fatty acids dictate fly behavior in response to cold
temperatures. It will then investigate how flies make foraging decisions to
optimize their lipidome using olfaction-based communication that has co-evolved
alongside yeast fermentation. Finally, the project will develop new experimental
systems to dissect behavioral phenotypes and physiological functions dictated by
PUFAs in specific tissue and cell types in the fly. In parallel, the project
will support research through training programs that integrate concepts across
animal physiology and biophysics. This project is jointly funded by the
Behavioral System Cluster and the Integrative Ecological Physiology Program in
the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.