* 2040175
* NSF-FDA: Generating trustworthy computational evidence to support FDAâ€™s regulatory evaluation of medical devices, via transparency and reproducibility
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2023
* Lorena Barba, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 04/30/2023
* USD 56,623.00

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has identified as a research priority the
need to improve the predictive value of non-clinical evaluation of medical
devices. Computational modeling can complement or replace laboratory studies,
animal trials, or clinical trials in many situations relating to FDA approval of
medical devices. Its potential has yet to be fully realized because no
standardized or industry accepted workflow or appraisal metrics exist for using
computational models in developing or assessing medical devices. The goal for
this project is to elevate computational modeling and simulation from scientific
research tools to high-quality regulatory tools. Increasing the role of
computational evidence will accelerate innovation and regulatory decision-making
of medical devices. The project will also increase the knowledge base about
reproducible computations, and increase the level of comfort for reviewers
handling computational evidence. Communicating this knowledge to industry will
increase the quality of device submissions. Longer term, transparency and
reproducibility standards in regulatory grade computational modeling can lead to
a change in culture, building more trust in computational evidence in this
sphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year project is a proof-of-concept
workflow and pilot study for generating trustworthy computational evidence for
regulatory non-clinical evaluation of medical device safety and efficacy. The
proof-of-concept application for this project is an electronic drug delivery
system (EDDS) prototype, an electronic inhaler based on e-cigarette devices.
This study in the context of regulatory science builds on, adapts, and expands a
framework of reproducibility, now becoming established in meta-research. In the
process, this study supports regulators and industry in understanding rigorous
and trustworthy computational evidence for the EDDS prototype, drawing upon
computational fluid dynamics models and best practices for digital evidence. The
provenance of all the research artifacts and empirical results will be
rigorously captured, recorded, and curated including, for example, data, code,
parameters, computational environment, and computational workflow. This pilot
study contributes to the literature in regulatory science, computer science,
cyber-physical systems, and medical devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.