* 2040753
* AI and the Future of STEM Learning: Engaging Research and Practitioner Audiences
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Jeremy Roschelle, Digital Promise Global
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2021
* USD 49,952.00

Advances in artificial intelligence (AI) are rapidly accelerating, both in the
United States and abroad. In the context of STEM learning, there is a strong
need to engage both investigators and practitioners to create a research agenda
that builds from an understanding of the strengths, weaknesses, and challenges
presented by AI. Building on two recent invitational convenings in AI and
education, the nonprofit Digital Promise will implement three online workshops
to engage multiple communities in developing a future-oriented research agenda.
The activities will build on recent research results from interdisciplinary
conference proceedings (e.g., International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence in Education, International Conference of the Learning
Sciences).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific activities will include three online
workshops in STEM application areas, to include the role of AI with respect to:
(1) learning and learning environments; (2) teacher learning and work; and (3)
assessment. In the first part of each workshop, invited experts will provide an
overview of current knowledge, expected advances, and important issues and
barriers. Using a structured interactive tool, attendees will extend and refine
the presentation. In the second part of each workshop, attendees will work in
breakout groups to envision what must happen in the next 3-5 years to strengthen
applications of AI to education. Approximately 60-100 participants will engage
synchronously in each online workshop, drawing from Historically Black Colleges
and Universities and other Minority Serving Institutions, school networks, and
NSF INCLUDES awardees. Outcomes of the workshops will be published rapidly for
wide distribution through both formal mechanisms as well as social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.