* 2040145
* A Predictive Framework for Micro-scale Carbonate Diagenesis: Towards More Accurate Reconstructions of Global Climate and Environmental Change
* GEO,EAR
* 01/02/2020,08/31/2023
* Miquela Ingalls, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 184,321.00

Carbonate rocks are an ideal recorder of environmental conditions on our planet
throughout Earth history because they have been forming throughout Earth's
history across many environments on land and in the sea. However, throughout the
long history of a carbonate rock, which can be millions of years or more, the
rock can be buried to many kilometers depth, which exposes the rock to extreme
temperatures and/or bring the rock into contact with water that can chemically
alter the original minerals. In other words, the chemical records of Earth's
environmental conditions within a carbonate mineral can alter under various
conditions, and therefore the chemical values measured may not reflect the
ancient environment as expected. Using 60 million year old marine rocks that
were deposited in the Tethys Sea that existed at that time between India and
Asia, the investigators have demonstrated that traditional tools may not
identify all types of chemical alteration. The team's initial data and
observations show that it is not yet understood how a carbonate rock can be
chemically altered without leaving a visual trace of that alteration. In this
study, the PIs will test their ability to use a novel chemical tool that
determines the temperature at which a carbonate mineral forms by using other
chemical tools that determine the age of that carbonate rock and are also
sensititive to changes with burial. This technique could prove valuable for the
oil and gas industry by providing additional tools for assessing the thermal
maturity of oil-producing rocks in otherwise inaccessible basins where
traditional tools cannot be used. Second, the PIs will test the capability of
many chemical techniques that look for changes on extremely small scales to
better learn how alteration happens and what fingerprints that alteration leaves
behind. The result of the second part of this project will be a new tool for
Earth scientists to use to identify altered geochemical signals from other
carbonate minerals. This will improve reconstructions of modern and ancient
environments based on carbonate minerals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbonates are
highly susceptible to biological, physical, and chemical alteration after
deposition. Carbonate 'clumped' isotope thermometry, T(delta cap 47), allows to
more accurately and completely reconstruct ancient environments by providing
measurements of carbonate formation temperature. High delta cap 47 values (low
temperature) are often viewed as indicative of primary mineral formation
temperature because clumping (delta cap 47) is typically thought to decrease
during burial in the absence of later water-mediated recrystallization at
Earth's surface. Preliminary data from buried Paleocene marine carbonates
suggests this is an oversimplification; rather, marine carbonates show evidence
of extensive oxygen exchange with non-marine 18O-depleted water and deep burial
temperatures (&gt;150 degree C), but appear unaltered using conventional
diagenetic screening metrics (i.e. optical petrography) and yield apparent low
delta cap 47-derived temperatures. These observations highlight a knowledge gap
in the isotopic effects of optically undetected carbonate alteration. The PIs
will (a) test the capability of clumped isotope measurements paired with calcite
U/Pb ages to reconstruct paragenetic sequences for sedimentary basin analysis
and (b) optimize a suite of micro-analytical techniques to identify products of
different alteration conditions, building a predictive framework for
geochemical, textural, and isotopic fingerprints of 'stable mineral
recrystallization.' The PIs will map crystallographic, elemental, and isotopic
heterogeneity within carbonates to guide selection of higher spatial resolution
delta cap 47 measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.