* 2040072
* Collaborative Research RAPID: Matriculation and Well-Being Under Emergent Events (MWEE): Using Data to Empower Campus Communities in Times of Crisis
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Harriet Nembhard, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2022
* USD 106,506.00

Each of the nearly 20 million students that attended American colleges and
universities in Fall 2019 had his or her education disrupted due to the COVID-19
pandemic. Colleges and universities responded quickly and dynamically to help
mitigate disease spread while continuing to deliver a high-quality learning
experience. Mitigation strategies involved rapid transitions to online learning,
closure of on-campus housing with little to no notice, and drastic changes to
student and university life over several weeks. The disruption has drastically
changed our communities, and these changes may be particularly challenging for
our most vulnerable students, including ones with housing and hunger insecurity
or behavioral health issues. This RAPID project, Matriculation and Well-Being
Under Emergent Events (MWEE), will utilize time-sensitive data associated with
the COVID-19 pandemic to study student well-being. MWEE will focus on
engineering students in undergraduate programs where a component of course
success is often hands-on labs and teamwork. MWEE will harness data from five
campuses, engage communities and encourage the development of processes and
actions to address this global challenge. The institutions include a private
university, a public university, and three land-grant universities, one of which
is a historically black college and university (HBCU). Geographic regions
include the South, Midwest and Pacific Northwest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better
understanding of critical factors that influence the success of vulnerable
students can provide insight for developing effective interventions for reducing
college attrition associated with COVID-19. The knowledge can also potentially
inform university decisions regarding response to other emergent events. MWEE
aims to (i) collect and synthesize structured and unstructured data from
multiple sources that relate to the health and behavior of students and (ii)
utilize machine learning and optimization techniques to learn from the data to
identify best practices, identify students at risk, and inform potential
policies and interventions. The MWEE methodology will create a new convergent
scientific paradigm to understand, assess, and measure individual and community
well-being and resilience during complex and novel situations such as the
COVID-19 pandemic. It is expected that universities will be able to layer the
results with data from their campuses to predict retention and graduation rates
given emergent events including COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.