* 2040346
* Quantifying Crop Biomechanics Across Plant Lifespans
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Erin Sparks, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 05/31/2024
* USD 406,914.00

This grant will support research in fundamental crop biomechanics, which will
enhance basic scientific knowledge and contribute to the future of agricultural
sustainability. In agriculture, unpredictable severe storms can cause
significant crop damage. This includes crop loss due to mechanical failure. This
mechanical failure is called lodging, and can be the outcome of stem breaking or
plant uprooting. Research on crop mechanical failure has been limited by
uncontrolled and unpredictable weather patterns. Instead, tools have recently
been developed to measure plant mechanical properties and link these
measurements to plant resilience and lodging-resistance. This work will quantify
plant mechanics over the lifespan of a maize (corn) plant, and determine the
cellular signals and architectural features that influence plant mechanics.
Understanding how plant mechanics are established provides a foundation for the
development of mechanically resilient crops. This will enhance the future of
agriculture, which is a significant portion of the U.S. economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the problem of multi-scale signal
perception in shaping crop biomechanics across plant lifespans. A major
knowledge gap exists in understanding lifespan-related biomechanical adaption
and mechanobiological response of crop plants when subject to dynamic forces
(e.g., wind). This project tests the hypothesis that lifespan-related changes to
plant flexural stiffness are due to cellular-level mechanoreception of dynamic
forces interacting with growing plant architectures. To address this hypothesis,
the researchers will quantify changes in maize flexural stiffness over lifespans
and determine if there is a role of cellular-level mechanosensing and plant
architecture in establishing lifespan flexural stiffness. Overall, the research
in this project will link multi-scale crop biomechanics and provide a foundation
for future crop improvement. This project is jointly funded by the Biomechanics
&amp; Mechanobiology program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.