* 2040186
* NSF Student Participation Grant for 2020 IEEE International Conference on Green and Sustainable Computing (IEEE IGSC)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Mahdi Nikdast, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2021
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal is for support of participation in the 2020 International Green
and Sustainable Computing Conference (IGSC). Due to the COVID pandemic, this
year's conference is virtual. There will be no travel but the award allows for
expanded participation. IGSC has established itself as the premier conference in
this area. Green computing is a newly evolving research area that is
establishing itself as an interdisciplinary research area spanning across the
fields of computer science and engineering, electrical engineering and other
engineering disciplines. Green computing or sustainable computing is the study
and practice of using computing resources efficiently, which in turn can impact
a spectrum of economic, ecological, and social objectives. Such practices
include the implementation of energy-efficient central processing units and
peripherals as well as reduced resource consumption. In addition, IGSC covers
applications and systems that use computing and information systems to
accomplish sustainability in power grid, environment, climate, agriculture, and
many other social and economic applications. The conference offers researchers,
industry participants, and students the forum for a growing awareness of the
study and practice of using computing resources efficiently, which in turn can
impact a spectrum of economic, ecological, and social
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant encourages students interested in
green or sustainable architecture, networks, circuit design, software, and
applications, as well as students interested in use of computing for
sustainability in other areas, to find useful information on the topics of their
choice. It also provides an excellent opportunity for many students nationwide
to get familiar with and engage in a new research area of national importance.
Students not having a paper in IGSC or otherwise without the resources that
allow the opportunity to attend IGSC will be eligible for these
funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.