* 2040716
* Trapped in travertine: Physical and chemical signature of paleoseismicity in hot spring deposits on active faults of the Central Nevada Seismic Belt
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Katharine Huntington, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 460,596.00

In order to understand earthquake hazard, scientists investigate the record of
past earthquakes to as a means to constrain the possible size of future
earthquakes and how often they might recur. In regions with limited historical
records or large, infrequent events, the evidence is held in the geologic
effects of ancient ground-surface ruptures. But not all earthquakes produce
these ruptures nor are they always well preserved in the geology. The proposed
work seeks to expand the geologic tool kit for earthquake history by exploring
the record of earthquakes preserved in the amount and chemical make-up of
minerals related to hot springs along active faults. Because faults can be
conduits for hot-spring waters, and because earthquakes change the internal
structure of faults, researchers expect to see differences in hot-spring
minerals deposited before and after past earthquakes. The field sites, located
in a region of central Nevada with a history of large earthquakes, contain many
hot-spring mineral deposits, along with other geological features that record
earthquake and ground water history, making it an ideal place to test the
relationship between earthquakes and changes in hot-spring mineral deposits.
Results from this study will provide important new insights into the lifecycle
of hot springs and other hydrothermal systems and have direct bearing on
earthquake risk in a seismically active part of the western United States. If
this work shows that hot-spring minerals record past earthquakes, hot-spring
minerals could be used for understanding earthquake hazard in other places of
the United States and around the world. In addition to the scientific objectives
of the project, it will also contribute to the training and research efforts of
honors undergraduate students in an important STEM discipline, it will support
postdoctoral training for an early career female researcher thus broadening
participation of underrepresented groups in the earth sciences, and it will
provide for educational outreach activities and development of online learning
materials in conjunction with IRIS (Incorporated Research Institutions for
Seismology) and the educational outreach program GeoFORCE.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrothermal systems are transient features in active
tectonic and magmatic regimes, representing the ephemeral co-location of
permeability, heat, and fluid. They are sensitive to both internal and external
perturbations from the many factors influencing local hydrology. The proposed
work will explore millennial-scale variability in discharge, composition and
temperature at several hot-spring travertine deposits to explore the impact of
climate and seismic forcing on hydrothermal systems. The approach includes: 1)
construction of physical, chemical, and isotopic travertine stratigraphy from
field mapping, shallow (~10 meter) core, major and trace element analyses, and
stable, radiogenic, and clumped-isotope analyses; and 2) geochronology to
constrain the time of physical and chemical changes preserved in the spring
deposits. The field sites, located in Buena Vista and Dixie valleys in the
northern Central Nevada Seismic Belt, contain multiple travertine deposits,
detailed paleohydrologic records from Late Pleistocene to Holocene lake level
fluctuations, and a robust record of large (M 6 to &gt;M 7) Late Pleistocene to
historic earthquakes, making it an ideal place to evaluate the mechanisms
influencing hydrothermal discharge across multiple spatial and temporal scales.
The stratigraphic, chemical, and thermal histories of travertine deposits
resulting from this study will provide important new insights into the life
cycle of fluid flow from faults across multiple time scales, from co-seismic
rupture and interseismic sealing to the influence of regional hydrologic
changes. Chemical evidence for seismic events in the hydrologic record preserved
in these deposits would add to the understanding of regional seismic risk
independent of discrete surface deformation and would represent a new approach
for identifying paleoseismic events. This has direct bearing on seismic
recurrence intervals in an historically active region of the western United
States and broader implications for seismic hazard assessments in a variety of
global settings, where hydrothermal activity and seismicity coincide with
population centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.