* 2040138
* Increasing Underrepresented Minorities in STEM: The 47th NOBCChE Annual Conference (Virtual)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Murrell Godfrey, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 49,980.00

This award supports the participation of undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral students at the Annual National Organization for the
Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE)
conference, held Sept. 24-25, 2020. The 2020 NOBCChE conference is in a virtual
format in 2020 due to disruptions from COVID-19. Selected participants are from
underrepresented minority groups in the Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) fields. In addition to providing registration support for
students, this award enables the development of a robust online platform for
participant engagement. This is funded by Divisions of Chemistry and Materials
Research, both of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Biological Science
Directorate, and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, and Transport Systems
as well as the Division of Industrial Innovation and Partnerships, both of the
Engineering Directorate. The Principle Investigator is Godfrey Murrell of the
University of Mississippi. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
opportunities for participants to engage in four major areas of focus: 1) STEM
technical and professional development; 2) networking and mentorship
opportunities with STEM professionals; 3) exposure to prestigious minority role
models in STEM; and 4) STEM career advancement opportunities. Student
participants interact with peers and professionals from industry, government,
and academia to develop collaborations and to explore opportunities to pursue
graduate degrees in the chemistry, chemical engineering and related disciplines.
This is accomplished through a virtual conference. These opportunities not only
impact these specific participating individuals, but also benefit the larger
community of STEM field practitioners as these activities are useful in
recruiting and retaining individuals from underrepresented talent pools. NOBCChE
seeks to increase the number of minorities in the STEM workforce. The
compression of the typical weeklong NOBCChE conference to two days is augmented
by post conference access to various materials. Assessment plans enable the
comparison of prior in person NOBCChE events to this first ever virtual
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.