* 2040361
* Planning Workshop: Addressing Wireless Communication Needs in Underwater Technologies. The Workshop is Scheduled to be Held in the Fall of 2020.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Yahong Zheng, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Zhengdao Wang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 23,047.00

Oceans, lakes and rivers cover more than 70 percent of the Earth surface with
water and the value of key ocean assets is estimated to be over $24 trillion.
Therefore, it is of great importance to sustain the growth of the blue economy
and develop the ocean technologies, such as ocean energy harvesting, Autonomous
Underwater Vehicles (AUV), and Internet of Underwater Things (IoUT), etc.
However, underwater wireless communication has been a long-standing bottleneck
to advancing ocean technologies because the physical communication media are
hostile to radio frequency, optical, or acoustical means of wireless
communications. The future growth of blue economy especially calls for
underwater wireless communication technologies that are reliable, medium-
distance, and high data-rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning workshop is to
invite 50 -- 100 researchers from different sectors of underwater technologies
and discuss funding recommendations via two days of Zoom meetings. The goal is
to engage the multiple sectors of stakeholders including underwater
infrastructure and environmental monitoring, offshore fishing and aquaculture,
offshore oil and gas and energy harvesting, diving and recreation, scientific
research, and military surveillance. The specific objectives of the workshop are
to answer the questions regarding the most important applications, performance
requirements, and environmental impacts of underwater wireless communications
for the research community to focus on in the next five to ten years, and the
recommended funding mechanisms and research topics for the research community to
achieve the desired technology advances. The outcome of the planning workshop
will aid the NSF to create a potential funding program that aims at advancing
the underwater wireless technolgies. The workshop has the potential to engage
researchers from different ocean technology sectors and foster multi-
disciplinary research. The workshop findings will be disseminated through
website sharing and conference presentation, and will be used to create course
modules with the entrepreneurial mindset learning (EML)
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.