* 2040970
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: An NSF CREST Centers Collaboration to Advance Minority Undergraduate Student Researchers in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2021
* Maria Tamargo, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 10/31/2021
* USD 99,649.00

The growth of the United States STEM workforce is important to economic and
global competitiveness. Developing STEM talent among all sectors of society is
needed in order to grow the workforce. This planning grant project is building
on the established strengths and network of the NSF Centers for Research
Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) with a leadership team of experts
from four minority-serving institutions: The California State University, Los
Angeles; the University of New Mexico; the University of Puerto Rico-Mayagüez
Campus; and the City College of New York, the City University of New York. The
project goal is to build a framework, based on the five NSF INCLUDES design
elements, that create the capacity required to: (1) Provide support to CREST
Centers and other institutions of higher education to develop robust
undergraduate research programs and a pool of research-ready underrepresented
minority undergraduate students; (2) Engage partnering organizations to expand
opportunities to showcase their assets in conference and events that focus on
historically underrepresented minority students in STEM; (3) Enhance channels of
communication across collaborators, to share opportunities such as scholarships,
internships, summer research programs, workshops, and research conferences; and
(4) Develop pathway agreements between partnering universities to increase and
improve the opportunities for students to go into doctoral and post-doctoral
programs. The outcomes of this planning grant are expected to lay the foundation
for a future alliance, center or network to address the identified broadening
participation challenge in STEM at a national scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
planning grant leadership team will engage a steering committee with
representatives from the California State University, Bakersfield; the
University of Texas at San Antonio; University of California, Merced; Prairie
View A&amp;M University; and California State University, San Bernardino.
Together, the leadership team and steering committee will conduct workshops with
a broad group of institutions of higher education, other CREST Center awardees,
professional societies, national laboratories and NSF HBCU Research
Infrastructure for Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) awardees. The workshops
will provide a forum for partnering organizations to build a collaborative
infrastructure: To develop a shared vision; to expand the partnerships to
include a broad community of organizations and institutions; to establish shared
goals and metrics; to solidify the leadership structure; and to establish and
improve communication across the partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
INCLUDES planning grant is funded by the NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science program (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance
U.S. leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity,
inclusion and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The planning grant is
also funded by the NSF’s Centers for Research Excellence in Science and
Technology program (CREST); and the CREST program provides support to enhance
the research capabilities of minority-serving institutions (MSIs) through the
establishment of centers that effectively integrate STEM education and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.