* 2040995
* NSF INCLUDES - Partnerships for Innovation (PFI) Planning Grant: HBCU Business and STEM Innovation Network
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Josiah Sampson, Stillman College
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

This NSF INCLUDES - Partnerships for Innovation planning grant is funded by two
NSF programs: a) NSF Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of
Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a
comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and
innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion and broadening participation in
STEM at scale; and b) Partnerships for Innovation (PFI), a program which goals
are set forth by the American Innovation and Competitiveness Act of 2017 (S.3084
— 114th Congress; Sec. 602. Translational Research Grants). PFI offers
researchers from all disciplines of science and engineering funded by NSF the
opportunity to perform translational research and technology development,
catalyze partnerships and accelerate the transition of discoveries from the
laboratory to the marketplace for societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this planning grant are to engage Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) working on STEM innovation and entrepreneurship as well as
the broader academic community and STEM related industries; and to develop a
network that serves as a high- performing resource of STEM innovation and
entrepreneurship by providing best approaches, activities, and implementation
strategies. This work will utilize the shared efforts and vision, goals, and
metric elements of the NSF INCLUDES collaborative infrastructure to: 1) develop
and establish a collaborative network of HBCUs focused on providing strategies
and best practices to enhance business innovation and economic development; (2)
establish a baseline understanding of the current research, models, and gaps in
the literature regarding STEM innovation and entrepreneurship infrastructure and
capacity building at HBCUs; (3) establish best practices for institutional
capacity-building, faculty, and strategic planning around innovation and
entrepreneurship at HBCUs; and (4) enhance the effectiveness of recruiting,
retaining, and advancing URM students in STEM fields – academically and
professionally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To reach the goals stated above, the
project will endeavor to create an ecosystem between HBCUs, industry, and non-
profit stakeholders around innovation and entrepreneurship. To develop this
ecosystem we will 1) perform a national assessment of HBCUs currently engaged in
STEM innovation and entrepreneurship; 2) establish a cooperative agreement for
all partners involved; 3) hold two virtual workshops with partners during the
spring and fall of 2021; and 4) meet quarterly throughout the year. This grant
will create new partnerships aimed at supporting and increasing STEM
entrepreneurship and innovation development at HBCUs by: (a) creating a platform
to advance participation of HBCUs in the nation's science and engineering
innovation enterprise; (b) informing and engaging various stakeholders on best
practices for creating and sustaining an entrepreneurial environment on HBCU
campuses; and (c) creating guidelines and a framework for HBCU leaders to
develop STEM entrepreneurial programs and courses at their respected
institution. HBCUs are not only access centers and the producers of graduates
with quality degrees, but in essence, the backbone of a majority of African
American educational experiences. This network will foster conversation,
collaboration and new connections among the current NSF INCLUDES awardees
working on broadening participation in STEM innovation and entrepreneurship as
well as the broader academic, industry, and nonprofit STEM community. Supporting
and strengthening HBCUs to produce diverse entrepreneurial innovators will
provide a wider network of valuable resources, thereby enhancing scientific and
technological knowledge and increasing the national pipeline of enabled, well-
trained STEM entrepreneurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.