* 2040048
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research - P2P: Predators to Plankton - Biophysical Controls in Antarctic Polynyas
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Grant Ballard, Point Reyes Bird Observatory
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 12/31/2024
* USD 128,716.00

NSFGEO-NERC Collaborative Research: P2P: Predators to Plankton – Biophysical
controls in Antarctic polynyas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part I: Non-technical
description: &lt;br/&gt;The Ross Sea, a globally important ecological hotspot,
hosts 25% to 45% of the world populations of Adélie and Emperor penguins, South
Polar skuas, Antarctic petrels, and Weddell seals. It is also one of the few
marine protected areas within the Southern Ocean, designed to protect the
workings of its ecosystem. To achieve conservation requires participation in an
international research and monitoring program, and more importantly integration
of what is known about penguin as predators and the biological oceanography of
their habitat. The project will acquire data on these species’ role within the
local food web through assessing of Adélie penguin feeding grounds and food
choices, while multi-sensor ocean gliders autonomously quantify prey abundance
and distribution as well as ocean properties, including phytoplankton, at the
base of the food web. Additionally, satellite imagery will quantify sea ice and
whales, known penguin competitors, within the penguins’ foraging area.
Experienced and young researchers will be involved in this project, as will a
public outreach program that reaches more than 200 school groups per field
season, and with an excess of one million visits to a website on penguin
ecology. Lessons about ecosystem change, and how it is measured, i.e. the STEM
fields, will be emphasized. Results will be distributed to the world scientific
and management communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical
description: &lt;br/&gt;This project, in collaboration with the United Kingdom
(UK) National Environmental Research Council (NERC), assesses food web structure
in the southwestern Ross Sea, a major portion of the recently established Ross
Sea Region Marine Protected Area that has been designed to protect the region’s
food web structure, dynamics and function. The in-depth, integrated ecological
information collected in this study will contribute to the management of this
system. The southwestern Ross Sea, especially the marginal ice zone of the Ross
Sea Polynya (RSP), supports global populations of iconic and indicator species:
25% of Emperor penguins, 30% of Adélie penguins, 50% of South Polar skuas, and
45% of Weddell seals. However, while individually well researched, the role of
these members as predators has been poorly integrated into understanding of Ross
Sea food web dynamics and biogeochemistry. Information from multi-sensor ocean
gliders, high-resolution satellite imagery, diet analysis and biologging of
penguins, when integrated, will facilitate understanding of the ‘preyscape’
within the intensively investigated biogeochemistry of the RSP. UK collaborators
will provide state-of-the-art glider technology, glider programming, ballasting,
and operation and expertise to evaluate the oceanographic conditions of the
study area. Several young scientists will be involved, as well as an existing
outreach program already developed that reaches annually more than 200 K-12
school groups and has more than one million website visits per
month.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.