* 2040655
* Responses of Universities to Crisis- Impact and Implications on Underrepresented Minority Engineering Faculty
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Donna Stokes, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,693.00

In light of the COVID-19 pandemic, social unrest, financial and other crises, it
is important to understand the impacts of such events on higher education. In
particular, close attention must be paid to the impact these events have on
underrepresented minority (URM) faculty representation in engineering, already
of grave concern before the pandemic. This work aims to ensure that their voices
are heard and reflected in policy change impacting their career trajectories.
This project will utilize a holistic approach to gathering data from URM
engineering faculty, especially women, from a variety of institution types,
(e.g. Hispanic Serving Institutions, Predominately White Institutions, and
Historically Black Colleges &amp; Universities). The voices of these faculty
will be used to inform policy makers in academia of multiple aspects of the
convergence of multiple crises on the professional outcomes for URM engineering
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will be at the forefront of research
investigating policy development and implementation related to URM engineering
faculty sustainability and advancement. It aims to inform systematic, long-term
and doable plans addressing potential further disruption and/or lasting change
in the Academy. This project will be accomplished by (1) collecting data of the
lived experiences during these crises and sharing URM engineering faculty
insights about the impact to their personal lives and professional careers; (2)
building a dataset of interim and current university policies related to themes
determined from data collection/analysis; (3) using the data to inform policy
change and to energize current initiatives to support retention of URM
engineering faculty and (4) hosting a virtual colloquium for collaboration and
sharing of best practices among university faculty and leaders for supporting
and strengthening efforts for broadening participation in engineering. This
research will reveal how interim and/or new policies and practices during and
after a crisis can impact the career trajectories of URM engineering faculty.
This work is urgent given the fact that the number of URMs seeking terminal
degrees in engineering and the number of URM engineering faculty has flat-lined.
This study will provide recommendations for procedure and policy
revisions/augmentation for universities aimed at ensuring faculty success during
and after current and emergent crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.