* 2040783
* NSF INCLUDES Planning Grant: Broadening Participation of Underserved Students in STEM and CTE in the Middle Grades
* EDU,EES
* 11/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Benjamin Williams, National Alliance for Partnerships in Equity Education Foundatio
* Standard Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 02/28/2022
* USD 100,000.00

This NSF INCLUDES planning grant is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and
Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S.
leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion
and broadening participation in STEM at scale. The NAPE Education Foundation
will build on the success of its NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch
Pilot, Intermountain (IM) STEM, to plan for and develop a national alliance of
local and state change agents--leaders from organizations with influence over
policies, practices and resource flows--using a collective impact framework. The
goal of this national alliance is to increase the participation, retention, and
program completion in STEM and career and technical education (CTE) pathways of
girls; individuals who are Black, Indigenous or Native, and People of Color; and
individuals from the broadened definition of special populations in Perkins V,
with a particular focus on students with disabilities and students from
economically disadvantaged families. The recently reauthorized Strengthening
Career and Technical Education for the 21st Century Act (Perkins V), now aligned
with the Every Student Succeeds Act, contains new provisions emphasizing the
need for CTE experiences and career guidance and counseling in the middle grades
(5-8 grades), which is a critical time for studentsâ€™ STEM course-taking
decisions. Using this critical juncture in the education pathway, NAPE and the
co-PIs from the California Department of Education, the South Carolina
Department of Education, the Utah STEM Action Center, Butler Tech Schools in
Ohio, and other partners will create a national collective impact network to
build capacity for diversity in CTE in the middle
grades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant represents a national public
and private partnership of large well-positioned organizations brought together
to collaborate on addressing the broadening participation challenges in STEM and
CTE. The project will advance the knowledge of how collaborative efforts can
lead to transformative systems change. The planning process will focus on three
design elements of collaborative infrastructure: creating a shared vision;
building partnerships; and identifying goals and metrics to measure progress and
outcomes. The process will also include an external evaluator who will conduct a
formative evaluation and whose expertise will be used in setting goals and
metrics. The planning process will include leadership development, partnership
expansion, crowdsourcing, and virtual convenings resulting in a strategic plan
for a national collective impact network to address equity gaps in STEM and CTE.
This effort will bring the STEM and CTE community together to plan the formation
of a collective impact alliance that will foster an ecosystem with the capacity
to inform and empower educational stakeholders to create the needed systems
change that will ensure the participation of underrepresented students in STEM
and CTE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.