* 2040575
* NSF Convergence Accelerator-Track C: Quantum-Interconnected Optomechanical Transducers for Entanglement-Enhanced Force and Inertial Sensing
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2022
* William Clark, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 05/31/2022
* USD 999,797.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. Sensors are a
pivotal component in a wide range of applications such as positioning,
navigation, imaging, and timing. Quantum sensors are of technological interest
due to their enhanced sensing performance. This project will create a quantum-
sensing architecture that interconnects a variety of sensors with optical
interfaces to form a network that has inherently quantum characteristics (of
entanglement). Such a quantum sensor network will have benefits in a range of
applications, including atomic force microscopy, inertial navigation, space
communications, and healthcare imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance knowledge by showing how to harness entanglement interconnects and
enhance the sensitivity, accuracy, and stability of real-world force, inertial,
RF, and other types of sensors. Use-inspired applications will include AFM for
quantum materials studies, positioning and navigation in GPS-denied
environments, and precise beam pointing for space-based laser communications. By
harnessing tools in quantum optomechanics such as a squeezing-enhanced
interferometry and radiation pressure cooling, the team will deliver the first
entanglement-interconnected optomechanical AFMs and inertial sensor arrays and
then scale up arrays for multi-order-of-magnitude performance improvements over
existing technologies. This project will advance the training of the US quantum
workforce by engaging scientists and engineers at multiple education and career
stages in university, industry, and national laboratory environments.
Participants will gain theoretical background knowledge of quantum information
science (QIS) and experimental skills for quantum optics, integrated photonics,
optomechanics, and quantum-system engineering in a convergent, team-science
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.