* 2041446
* Optimizing Information Value in Heterogeneous Multi-agent Transportation Systems (OPTIMA)
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Zhaomiao Guo, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2024
* USD 359,516.00

This project addresses the use of advanced sensing, communications, and
computing technologies in studying value of information in transportation
systems made up of heterogeneous traffic (cars, autonomous and connected
vehicles, buses, bicycles, etc.) The wealth of data available on these systems
enables new approaches to information provisioning that have the potential to
improve transportation system efficiency, reliability, and resilience. The
project develops a unified modeling framework for information provision
considering heterogeneous non-cooperative stakeholders and addresses three
critical questions: (1) How do we model adaptive behavior of different traffic
components in response to evolving information updates? (2) What are the limits
of positive and negative information on systems efficiency, reliability, and
resilience? (3) Given limited resources, what, when, and where should the
information be communicated with which groups of stakeholders to optimize system
performance? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops the theoretical
foundation to study information provisioning over heterogeneous multi-agent
transportation networks and provides critical insights on information sensing,
sharing, and protection for smart mobility. The approach integrates stochastic
multi-agent optimization, traffic network equilibrium modeling, and variational
analysis to study value of information and information design for modern multi-
modal transportation systems. The project will leverage recent theoretical
advancements on convexification, decomposition, and approximation theories to
cope with the computational challenges brought by multi-agent interaction,
multi-stage decision making, and multi-dimensional scenarios. The project
leverages collaborations with the University of Central Florida (UCF)
transportation system, City of Orlando, and Argonne National Laboratory. The
project will also develop educational materials for a broad audience and support
the development of a new generation of transportation
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.