* 2041366
* CAREER: Topographic Controls on Overmarsh Circulation and Sedimentation along a Salt Marsh - Forest Continuum
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Jessica Sullivan, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 07/31/2026
* USD 474,322.00

Salt marshes remain the focus of intensive study due to their ecosystem
functions (i.e. water storage, nutrient redistribution, and carbon
sequestration) and in light of potential impacts of sea-level rise and coastal
development on their overall stability. The ability of marshes to migrate inland
as waters rise is considered a first-order determinant of their future survival.
This project is specifically designed to determine the influence of subtle marsh
topography on how, when, and where marshes retreat inland. This project will
have broad educational impacts by engaging a large number of undergraduate
students in field work, design and implementation of a new field teaching
laboratory, and a new field-based undergraduate course. Educational aspects of
this work are designed to prepare the next generation of geoscientists to
address scientific and societal issues related to coastal zone stability.
Informal learning for the general public includes the creation of an interactive
digital kiosk for the University of South Carolina Aiken Ruth Patrick Science
and Education Center designed to increase public awareness of environmental and
socio-economic issues associated with coastal zone response to climate and land
use change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary scientific objective of this
project is to quantify the topographic controls on overmarsh flow,
sedimentation, and water residence times across a salt marsh – forest continuum
within the ACE Basin, SC. The marsh-forest continuum encompasses a natural salt
marsh, a reclaimed rice field marsh or “ag-marsh”, and an ag-marsh-forest
ecotone, allowing for a space-for-time substitution to advance knowledge on the
geomorphic controls on marsh morphodynamics across various marsh types and
stages of development. It is hypothesized that the artificial drainages of ag-
marshes facilitate hydraulic connectivity of surface flows within and between
marsh systems, and with neighboring uplands, thereby enhancing inundation extent
and residence times, and influencing rates and patterns of forest-marsh
transgression. Hence, this project will help illuminate the role of ag-marsh
landscapes as corridors for inland marsh migration in response to sea-level
rise. Field observations of in-channel and overmarsh flows, and modern and
historic sedimentation rates will be evaluated in the context of marsh
topography, drainage structure, hydraulic connectivity and vegetation effects. A
computer model will be developed to predict salt marsh response to natural and
anthropogenic forcing across local and regional spatial scales, and at hourly to
multi-decadal time scales. Such information can be used to bolster coastal
vulnerability models, and can help inform policy and decision making strategies
related to marsh restoration and conservation. This project is jointly funded by
the Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.