* 2041397
* EAGER Collaborative Research: Testing a new sensor for short term and long term measurement of heat flow in lakes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Michael Manga, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 10,000.00

This project will develop a new probe to measure the amount of heat coming out
of the ground beneath lakes. The probe will overcome current limitations by (1)
enabling visual site selection so that researchers know where and how the probe
is placed in the lake floor environment and pin-point important lake floor
features such as gas seeps and chemosynthetic communities, (2) providing real-
time data to assess data quality and site evaluation, and (3) monitoring
temperature changes over time that might arise from changes in lake temperature.
The probe will be deployed and tested in Mono Lake, California. Mono Lake has
hosted the youngest volcanic eruptions in the region. There are, however,
currently no heat flow measurements within the lake to constrain recent volcanic
activity and volcanic hazards. The measurements may reveal the extent of magma
bodies that connect the subsurface to the volcanic eruptions seen at Earth’s
surface. This project will be integrated into a summer field camp so that 20
students can participate in the measurement campaign and data interpretation.
This project provides an opportunity to test new instrumentation that would be
useful in a broad range of settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prototype
geophysical probe, called the LTMP (Lake Thermal Monitoring Probe) consists of a
compact (1-3 m long), lightweight (&lt;20 kg), camera-mounted Lister-type heat
flow probe designed for deployment by only two people on a small (~5 m) vessel
in a lake bottom. The probe will be designed to provide both real-time lake
floor video for site selection, and real-time subsurface temperature monitoring
for up to one year, with data continuously beamed back to researchers. If the
new probe works, it will provide a new high-resolution tool for measuring heat
flow and fluid flow changes in complex geologic settings like caldera lakes,
revealing how heat flow below lakes is coupled to other geosystems and hazards
(e.g., the atmosphere, groundwater, volcanoes,
earthquakes).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.