* 2041965
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Shallow Cased Drilling Capabilities in Extreme Environments
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Kent Anderson, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 128,727.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Seismology is the study of vibrations in the
earth that result from earthquakes, volcanoes, and many other seismic sources.
To better understand these vibrations, seismologists install highly sensitive
equipment (seismometers) in carefully controlled environments to record the
smallest possible signals providing higher quality data to analyze. Like
listening to music on a bad set of speakers can remove the nuances of the
particular song, seismometers in noisy installations cannot detect the nuances
of say signals from a volcano. As these experiments move closer to the actual
source (volcano) the environment gets more difficult to control, resulting in
noisier data and less signal. Therefore, seismologists strive to improve the
installations of seismometers in these difficult locations to improve the data
recorded, and thus, improve the understanding of how, in this case a volcano,
works and how better to understand the risks it poses. This project will seek to
vastly improve seismometer installations in very extreme environments by
developing a small, helicopter-portable drilling rig that can be flown to very
high altitudes and be operated in very low temperatures. The target for the
testing of this new drilling capability will be at the summit of Mt Erebus,
Antarctica the southernmost active volcano on Earth and one that is less than 25
miles from the United States largest research base in Antarctica McMurdo
Station. At the conclusion of this project, the researchers will have the
capability to install high quality, posthole-style seismometers anywhere in the
world in nearly any environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of the development and proof-of-concept
demonstration of new technology to install posthole-style seismic sensors in
varied rock conditions at high altitude (above 3,000 m) and extremely cold
locations, such as high volcanoes and/or mountain/polar regions. In particular,
we propose to develop a helicopter-portable drilling system that can drill up to
15.25 cm cased and grouted, vertical postholes suitable for high-performance
broadband seismic sensors or other instrumentation. A full demonstration of this
capability is proposed by drilling five sites near the summit of Mt Erebus
volcano and three sites around the perimeter of Ross Island, Antarctica to
facilitate the installation of a new Erebus seismic and infrasound network. The
capabilities developed under this award will be useful to geophysical and more
general Earth science investigations in other areas and regions. The portability
of the system combined with its ability to operate in extreme environments
ensures that it will be more than suitable for operating in diverse conditions
world-wide. This capability will enable collection of new types of and higher
quality data, for scientific advancement. By engaging a broad and experienced
team in the design phase, we expect to benefit from collective expertise and
knowledge sharing and ensure that the designs and solutions we develop are
effectively implemented in the final product that will broadly benefit the Earth
science community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.