* 2041910
* CAREER: Data-Driven Inversion of Subduction Zone Topography using Tectonic Geomorphology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Sean Gallen, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 383,217.00

The development of Earth’s topography impacts the flux and routing of surface
water, sediment, and nutrients to oceans, affects feedbacks between the solid
Earth and atmosphere, and impacts the evolution and diversity of species.
Earth’s topography is also a primary observable of tectonic activity. For
example, nearly every Earth science student learns to identify deep ocean
trenches and adjacent mountain belts as the surface expression of active
subduction, where one tectonic plate dives beneath another. It follows that we
should, in principle, be able to use subduction zone topography (or that of any
other active orogen) to understand the underlying geodynamic processes involved
in its construction. While scientists have made great strides in this direction,
recovering tectonic signals directly from topography remains a crucial
challenge. This research will develop and apply new methods to narrow this
knowledge gap through a case study of the Calabrian subduction zone in southern
Italy. This study will clarify the role of topography as a recorder of
subduction zone dynamics and improve understanding of the landscape response to
geodynamic forcing by disentangling crustal, mantle, and earth surface
contributions to topographic change. The new methods and results will be
relevant for better understanding the context of earthquake hazards along these
dynamic plate boundaries. Through a three-pronged educational outreach program,
this project will engage traditionally underrepresented groups in primary
research, develop community education modules, and host workshops to train
professionals to use the scientific and educational materials
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will conduct a plate boundary-scale
paleo-geodetic experiment realized through the development and application of a
novel data-driven Bayesian inversion of tectonic geomorphology measurements and
fluvial topography. This approach will be used to test the hypothesis that the
recent and rapid rise of topography above the Calabrian subduction zone is
driven by mantle dynamics associated with slab tearing and asthenospheric flow
around torn slab edges. This study will compile existing and generate new
datasets on long-term erosion rates, the magnitude and age of uplifted marine
and river terraces, and fault slip and kinematics. This project will train two
Ph.D. students and three undergraduates through participation in field and lab
work, data analysis, modeling, outreach, writing, and national conferences. The
integrated education plan will focus on three related components: (1) an
undergraduate training network (UTN), (2) development of community educational
resources, and (3) targeted outreach and training. The UTN will recruit three
undergraduate students, emphasizing those from underrepresented groups, to
participate in a multi-year program to foster the development of next-generation
leaders in Earth science through participation in research and outreach. Working
with experts at the Geodesy Tools for Societal Issues (GETSI) program and
Science Education Research Center (SERC), community educational resources
developed will focus on field geodesy and tectonic geomorphology techniques and
datasets generated during this study. Outreach and training of the generated
scientific and educational materials will be bolstered through participation in
GETSI-sponsored outreach and the hosting of workshops at national
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.