* 2041212
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Palatal approximant strengthening - social and phonetic aspects of a language change in progress
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Barbara Bullock, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 12,692.00

Despite their seemingly innumerable differences, the languages of the world all
share one thing in common: they continuously change over time. Sometimes these
changes take an element of a language's structure in an unexpected direction.
Such is the case in the language examined in this study, where palatal
approximant sounds, a speech sound similar to the "y" in English words such as
"you" or "yes", has begun to be pronounced as the affricate "j" in the English
word "jeans" or the fricative "s" in the English word "closure". This change is
known as palatal approximant strengthening because the affricate and fricative
sounds replacing the approximant require more articulatory effort and produce
more acoustic energy in the speech signal. Most phonetic changes result in
sounds characterized by less articulatory effort and less acoustic energy, and,
thus, palatal approximant strengthening is an unexpected change. Studying a
cross-linguistically rare type of phonetic change like palatal approximant
strengthening offers a chance to gain deeper empirical insight into the
physiological, social and linguistic forces that conspire to shape how
individuals communicate and how languages change over time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is guided by three research questions that
are of descriptive and theoretical importance to the field of sociophonetics and
its various applications (e.g. natural language processing, forensic science,
etc.): 1) What is the acoustic profile of palatal approximant strengthening in
particular languages where it occurs? 2) What are the linguistic factors that
condition palatal approximant strengthening in particular and phonetic
strengthening more generally? and 3) How does palatal approximant strengthening
pattern in the social matrix of speaker groups comprising the speech community
for the relevant languages? To address these questions, this study's research
design integrates a triangulated acoustic analysis of experimental and
conversational speech data gathered from a large, diverse sample of speakers.
The resulting corpus of speech data will be made available to the public through
the Texas Data Repository for continued scholarly and industry-related
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.