* 2041328
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: On-line Integration of Social and Linguistic Cues during Speech Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Keith Johnson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2022
* USD 12,983.00

How do social characteristics of a speaker influence how listeners process their
speech? There is evidence that social characteristics, like a speaker's age,
gender, and so forth, can shift how listeners respond to their speech. For
example, ambiguous sounding words are recognized quicker and more accurately
when matched with pictures of speakers who are likely to say those words, and
changing a visual cue about a speaker while keeping the audio constant can
change listeners' judgments of what they heard. An unanswered question is
whether social information is directly affecting perception, or if it is only
affecting later decision-making. This study investigates how listeners use
social cues in real-time by measuring the cues' influence on the earliest stages
of speech perception. This is critical to our understanding of the role of
social information during speech perception and will further develop our models
of human language processing. Additionally, a more robust understanding of how
social and acoustic cues interact may lead to the development of targeted
therapies for certain types of language disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous
work has demonstrated that social cues can directly shift categorization
behavior, but the paradigms used in the majority of this work do not allow
conclusions to be drawn about the specific time-course of social and acoustic
cue integration. The specific time-course of this process is critical to debates
over the nature of linguistic representation (episodic vs. abstract) and
processing (feed-forward vs. interactive models). This study investigates the
following questions: whether social cues can influence on-line perception as
detected via eye-tracking during (a) a Ganong task and (b) a compensation for
coarticulation task, and (c) whether social cues can induce selective adaptation
effects in perception. The data from these experiments will directly address
questions of the time-course of speech perception and inform debates over the
representations and structures of models of speech
perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.