* 2041204
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Processing foreign-accented speech in noisy conditions in children and adults
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Janet van Hell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2024
* USD 11,246.00

In today's globalized world, people increasingly encounter speakers with a
foreign accent: the majority of English speakers across the world, for example,
are non-native speakers. Moreover, natural speech communication rarely takes
place in ideal listening conditions and we often listen to others when
surrounded by background noise. Processing and comprehending foreign-accented
speech in noisy backgrounds has thus become a common characteristic of everyday
communication. This is also true for school-aged children, as their peers may be
foreign-accented speakers and their classrooms can be noisy. Prior linguistic
research has demonstrated that the addition of background noise can impact the
understanding of foreign-accented speech, more so than native-accented speech,
and increased cognitive demand has been proposed as the possible explanation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project measures cognitive demands during sentence
processing, combining behavioral and neurocognitive (EEG) techniques, to examine
three questions: What are the linguistic-cognitive mechanisms underlying the
processing of foreign-accented and native-accented sentences embedded in
background noise and in quiet conditions in (1) adults and (2) children? (3)
What are potential sources of individual variability in behavioral and neural
responses to semantic anomalies in native- and foreign-accented sentences
presented in background noise and in quiet? Two age groups will be tested in two
experiments: young adults and children aged 9-11. In the EEG task, participants
listen to native- and foreign-accented English sentences. Half the sentences in
each accent condition will be embedded in background noise, and the remaining
sentences in quiet; half the sentences will contain semantic anomalies and half
will be semantically well-formed. Participants will also complete a language
background questionnaire, reporting demographic information, language use,
proficiency, and accent exposure, as well as behavioral tasks measuring
individual differences in linguistic and cognitive abilities. This project
provides foundational insights on the cognitive and neural bases of foreign- and
native-accented speech processing in noisy and quiet environments. The outcomes
also have real-life implications and can, for example, inform educators on
facilitating optimal learning environments in their
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.