* 2041040
* Acquisition of a tabletop SEM/EDS system at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Brian Schubert, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 162,850.00

This Instrumentation and Facilities award supports the School of Geosciences at
University of Louisiana at Lafayette with the acquisition of a tabletop
analytical Scanning Electron Microscope [SEM] to advance on-campus
undergraduate/graduate education and support research in STEAM [Science,
Technology, Engineering, Art, Mathematics] disciplines. Thanks to its electron
beam, SEM has distinct inherent advantages over optical microscopy: larger
magnification, sharper images and chemical identification. A broad range of
materials including wood, bones, fossils, rocks and minerals can be imaged and
analyzed within a few minutes. The instrument will be used for advanced research
in environmental studies, petroleum geology, and mining geology. The SEM will be
remotely accessible through an internet connection, with an on-site operator,
for demonstrations in classroom on campus and in secondary schools for science
demonstrations. This connectivity will allow a large number of students from
under-represented groups to participate in live exploration of materials. The
best, high resolution images will be printed in large format to be displayed as
part of science &amp; art exhibitions on campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SEM
instrument will allow the main investigators and their graduate students to
acquire high quality digital imagery and will promote interactive exploration of
the samples. The new, state of the art tabletop SEM, includes a modern energy
dispersive (EDS) detector that provides rapid quantitative chemical analyses.
This instrument will support the new interdisciplinary PhD program in Earth and
Energy Sciences at UL Lafayette. The SEM+EDS system and its new microanalytical
capabilities will enable scientists to conduct research on six targeted
projects: 1) the microstructural record of co-seismic deformation in fault rock;
2) the roles of fluids in strain localization in the middle of the continental
crust; 3) the record of climate/carbon cycle change in fossil wood; 4) the
chemical record of climate change in precipitated carbonates in lakes; 5) life
and death of methane-oxidizing microbial communities in relation with methane
emissions; 6) the mineralogical record, in central Louisiana, of the asteroid
impact that killed the dinosaurs 65 million years ago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.