* 2041539
* EAGER: Unlocking the clumped isotope signatures of marine nitrate
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Sebastian Kopf, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2022
* USD 217,813.00

Nitrogen is a limiting nutrient for life in many marine environments. Its
availability shapes the structure and productivity of marine ecosystems. To
better understand the cycling of nitrogen, scientists need tools to track the
processes that affect nitrogen in nature. Past research into the nitrogen and
oxygen stable isotopes of nitrate has enabled pivotal insights into the global
nitrogen cycle. At the same time, it has highlighted many unresolved
complexities in the cycling of nitrogen. Unfortunately, classical isotope
measurements are limited in capturing the processes that transform nitrogen in
nature. This is because the resulting isotope signatures are always a
combination of at least three factors. First, the isotopic composition of the
source compound. Second, the mechanism of the process. And third, the
completeness of the transformation. In this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project, the investigators thus propose to explore a new
analytical approach. The goal of the proposed research is to measure the doubly-
substituted or “clumped” isotopologs of nitrate for the first time. Clumped
nitrate isotopes have the potential to record specific nitrogen transformations.
The proposed work could unlock these clumped nitrate isotope signatures as a new
tool to study nitrogen in the oceans. In addition to the technology itself, this
project will develop open-source software tools for the analysis of isotopolog
data to support future work on similar analytes of interest. The proposed
project will also create an opportunity for community college students to visit
participating laboratories at CU Boulder. In collaboration with the five
community colleges of the Denver Metro STEM Alliance for Minority Participation,
interested students will meet current CU Boulder students, learn about ongoing
undergraduate research, summer research opportunities and 4-year college
transfer pathways. The participating community colleges educate a large number
of students from underrepresented backgrounds. Creating pathways for these
students to continue on to a 4-year degree and a successful career in STEM
research and industry fields is a critical piece of the puzzle for increasing
diversity in STEM disciplines nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
investigators propose to develop a new technological approach to studying the
isotopes of marine nitrate by electrospray ionization (ESI)-Orbitrap mass
spectrometry. This approach provides a path to quantifying up to 3 new isotopic
dimensions of nitrate. These doubly substituted, “clumped” nitrate isotopologs
(15N18O, 18O18O, 17O18O) have never before been analytically accessible and
could fundamentally transform our understanding of how individual nitrogen
cycling pathways interact to shape ocean ecosystems and the global nitrogen
cycle. Because they are intramolecular isotopic dimensions, the relative
abundances of these clumped nitrate species directly reflect kinetic and
equilibrium isotope effects of the processes that form and destroy them. The
objectives of this project are thus to 1) establish an ESI-Orbitrap methodology
for the reproducible quantification of all singly and the three major doubly
substituted isotopologs of nitrate; 2) develop and demonstrate scalable and
easily transferable protocols for the extraction and preparation of nitrate from
marine samples for ESI-Orbitrap analysis; 3) initiate a pilot study of the
clumped nitrate space in marine samples. Beyond its immediate impact on research
in chemical oceanography, this project will introduce the geochemistry community
to a new generation of intact molecule isotope-ratio mass spectrometry that can
be adapted to other oxyanions and metabolites widely studied in marine systems
(e.g., sulfate, amino acids, lipids). Developing nitrate as a model for ESI-
Orbitrap isotope analytics also will benefit other fields of science including
agricultural research, terrestrial ecosystems science, and atmospheric
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.