* 2041248
* Words, phrases, and sentences at the interface of phonology and morphosyntax
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Gregory Anderson, Living Tongues Institute for Endangered Languages
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2026
* USD 219,347.00

This project is designed to determine how the basic linguistic units of language
such as word, phrase, sentence can be characterized in terms of sound patterns
and phenomena such as intonation or stress placement. Preliminary investigations
have revealed significant mismatches between the combinatorial patterns of parts
of words, i.e., what defines morphological or grammatical words, and the
prosodic or phonological patterns and phenomena that are associated with such
strings. This project identifies sets of prosodic and phonological features, the
processes that define their domains, and how these do (or do not) interface with
grammatical (morphosyntactic) and syntactic structures, as well as the role of
intonation in marking focus in words, phrases, and sentences. We can then
confidently hypothesize what the characteristic phonological properties of
words, phrases, sentences (or any other unit) are and how these are integrated.
The findings form the basis of a large searchable database serving as a resource
to facilitate significant cross-linguistic comparison that opens new prospects
for examining the phonology-morphosyntax interface. This project offers major
opportunities for primary research in science by speakers of minority languages
who are vastly underrepresented communities of scientists and thus this activity
helps decolonize linguistics as a discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
analyzes how basic units like word, phrase or sentence are defined phono-
prosodically (distribution of sound co-occurrences and alternations,
intonational patterns, etc.), based on quantitatively valid samples supported by
instrumental acoustic data and incorporating potential phonetic variation across
different demographic subgroups of speakers (male vs. female, young vs. middle
aged vs. elderly, speakers of different regional varieties, actively bilingual
speakers or not, speakers of endangered languages vs. speakers of healthy
languages, etc.). The project sets the foundation for modeling the various
processes of change that may have operated at different historical periods or
which may be currently ongoing, whether these are due to language contact or
not, thus significantly advancing typological linguistics and contact
linguistics. In addition to producing the comprehensive, searchable online
database, research findings are to be disseminated through publications on
individual languages as well as in comparative
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.