* 2041569
* I-Corps:  Extremely compact, low-power sensing nodes that may fulfill the promise of smart dust
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Barry Johnson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to explore
applications of new wirelessly connected sensors. The proposed technology
advances a an ultra-low-power sensor device for the Internet of Things (IoT),
smart dust, or edge intelligence (EI) devices. Relative to current sensors, the
proposed technology may create 100-fold improvements in the cost of thorough
coverage and battery life, virtually eliminating the cost of battery replacement
and sensor maintenance. Example applications in agriculture include preventive,
cost-effective, and continuous monitoring of temperature, rainfall, wind
direction, soil moisture, pests, and illness for informed decision-making. Other
applications may include preventive/therapeutic healthcare, animal welfare,
environmental monitoring, transportation, and industrial
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project investigates translation
of a novel system-on-chip (SoC) with end-to-end computing on asynchronous
streams data-path that is composed of Asynchronous Sigma-Delta Modulators (ASDM)
for acquiring sensor data, a computing-core for streams, a clock-less wireless
interface and an analog memory. The key for the SoC power efficiency is the
unique data representation - the ASDM maps analog data to asynchronous streams
of 1s and 0s instead of digital numbers. The streams are sent to the computing-
core composed of processing elements, such as multipliers and adders. A
multiplier for streams may be implemented with a single AND gate and an adder
with a 2:1 multiplexer, achieving savings in power and area of up to 90%
compared with typical approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.