* 2041414
* I-Corps:   A device to improve the ability to monitor the fetus and uterus during pregnancy, labor, and delivery
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2021
* Julie Hasenwinkel, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new fetal monitor to accurately assess fetal health and the
integrity of the uterine scar in the case where a woman has a previous C-section
(operative) delivery. There are about 4 million births in the US annually. The
fetal monitoring market is expected to reach approximately $3.6 billion in 2022.
This project will advance translation of a monitor providing accurate data,
improved maternal mobility, and better outcomes. Furthermore, the technology is
envisioned to be disposable, reducing exposure to pathogen transmission - a
benefit in particular during the pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project advances translation of a medical device that monitors the fetus and
uterus during pregnancy, labor and delivery. Fetal monitors today are unreliable
at providing consistent interpretive data of fetal well-being in utero and
require constant readjustment to ensure consistent fetal tracing. This process
is cumbersome and introduces dangerous errors, most often due to fetal, maternal
and monitor movement. This process explores a wireless device generating
valuable monitoring data in a consistent, thorough, hygienic, and efficient
manner that is comfortable for the patient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.