* 2041676
* I-Corps:  Real-time characterization using in-line angular scatterometry during high-speed roll-to-roll fabrication processes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,10/31/2021
* Steven R. J. Brueck, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project provides real-
time measurements to optimize yield and reduce waste in novel roll-to-roll (R2R)
manufacturing processes. The proposed high-speed technology can perform the
critical non-contact, real-time measurements without interfering with high-speed
R2R fabrication processes. Commonly used analytical tools use statistical
analysis procedures; none of them can be implemented during real-time R2R
fabrication systems due to their large-size and vacuum conditions. The proposed
technology closes the gap between new fabrication processes and systems that
measure in real time.

This I-Corps project focuses on the commercialization of metrology technology
for novel fabrication processes used in nano-technology products (e.g. nano-
imprint lithography, roll-to-roll, and wafer-scale). The proposed in-line
optical angular scatterometer provides real-time metrology without interfering
with fabrication processes. Optical Angular Scatterometry offers enough
resolution to characterize structures down to approximately 20 nm and 24 nm
(pitch size) for pattern metallic and photoresist nanostructures. Projections of
sensitivity show enough resolution and sensitivity for dimensions down to
approximately 10 nm. The proposed scatterometer system has been demonstrated on
a moving substrate at a speed of 50 cm/s, well above currently projected roll-
to-roll manufacturing speeds. Various 1D, 2D, and 3D patterns have been studied
in good agreement with both static off-line scatterometers and SEM measurements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.