* 2041158
* EAGER: Measuring and controlling nanoscale interactions in biomatter via quantum degrees of freedom
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Clarice Aiello, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 10/31/2023
* USD 220,069.00

Clarifying nanoscale interactions in biological matter is arguably one of the
most ubiquitous challenges in biology today. The small length scales involved
require that quantum effects be taken into account in both modeling and
experiments. For example, experimental data suggest that (quantum) vibronic and
spin degrees of freedom might underlie a myriad of biologically relevant
nanoscale phenomena including: the biosensing of magnetic fields for animal
navigation; the regulation of metabolic and physiological function; and the
efficiency of electron transport through biomolecules. If this is true, it
follows that nanoscale interactions within biological matter could be controlled
via quantum-based approaches. In this project, the physiology of cells will be
systematically controlled through engineered optical pulses affecting and
“driving” different vibronic quantum states inside proteins. Having nanoscale
electromagnetic handles onto cellular processes will enable the monitoring and
selective stimulation or suppression of cellular and biological functions that
are electromagnetic in nature. Controlling nanoscale interactions in biological
matter will impact fields as diverse as therapeutics and biomimetic
technologies. For example, the course of disease could be altered by controlling
quantum-mediated pathways, or by developing drugs that quench or stimulate them;
and technological sensors of electromagnetic field could be optimized to rely on
quantum rules evolved by nature over the course of millions of years. In
addition, the work will open up avenues for interdisciplinary research in
chemistry, physics, and biology. Students engaged in this project will benefit
from the opportunities to engage with a variety of experimental techniques at
the interface of chemistry, biology, material science and
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments suggest that quantum nanoscale
interactions in biological matter might underlie phenomena as varied as magnetic
field detection for animal navigation, metabolic and physiological regulation in
cells and optimal electron transport in biomolecules. If this is true, it
follows that nanoscale interactions within biological matter could be controlled
via quantum degrees of freedom. Here, (quantum) vibronic degrees of freedom in
proteins will be excited and controlled, with views to systematically assess
macroscopic physiological reactions to such quantum stimuli. In a setup that
combines confocal microscopy with electrophysiology capabilities, ultrafast
optical pulses (femtosecond) will address distinct (quantum) vibronic degrees of
freedom in proteins inside cells; cellular physiology will be concomitantly
tracked at pertinent timescales (millisecond to second) by the fluorescence of
metabolic dyes and by electrophysiological responses. Proteins photoexcited in
this way have been demonstrated to influence ion channel functioning and thus
macroscale physiology. Importantly, in this project the ultrafast pulses will be
numerically engineered to subject particular vibronic pathways to optimal
quantum control. Thus, the effect of (fast) engineered nanoscale interactions at
the quantum level will be read-out by the effect that they produce on
macroscopic biological matter and its (slow) physiological functioning. A long-
term goal is to establish how the photoexcitation of proteins with quantum
engineered light pulses translates into repeatable physiological outcomes in
cells. This knowledge can be used to drive organismic behavior and physiological
function through the control of (quantum) vibronic pathways by tailored light
fields. This project will contribute to the training of interdisciplinary
researchers working at the interface of chemistry, physics, and biology, and who
will be well-versed in a variety of experimental techniques (optics, quantum
control, spin physics, cellular biology, nanomaterials
development).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.