* 2041920
* CAREER: Modern Algorithm Design via the Optimization Lens
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Deeparnab Chakrabarty, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 03/31/2026
* USD 308,712.00

Computer Science is a rapidly growing field leading to new kinds of
computational problems. For example, data is being produced at a huge rate
today, and an algorithm's access to it is restricted either due to sheer volume
or due to ownership concerns. This forces designers to revisit classical
algorithms. In machine learning, one uses clustering algorithms to learn about
unlabeled data. However, the presence of noise and anomalies can distort this,
and one needs good outlier-detection algorithms. The goal of this project is to
use and enhance techniques from mathematical optimization to tackle these new
algorithmic challenges. In doing so, the project will create unified
methodologies to attack problems arising in different areas. In turn, these news
ideas will also lead to answers to classical optimization problems. Work on this
project will go hand-in-hand with the creation of relevant courses in
undergraduate and graduate curriculum which focus on these new algorithmic
insights. The educational component of this project also includes a plan for
injecting computer science and algorithmic thinking into the K-12
system.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the project focusses on three
areas. The first area is about query access models where algorithms can access
data only via asking certain kinds of questions. A main thrust is to completely
understand the query complexity of fundamental problems such as submodular
function optimization and matroid intersection. The second area is the
development of new approximation-algorithm techniques to tackle outlier-
detection problems in clustering. The project will also focus on richer
objective classes for clustering, thereby paving the way for integer convex
optimization. The third area is the development of the primal-dual optimization
schema to design faster parallel algorithms, especially for perfect matchings in
graphs, which is a fundamental problem in algorithms. By addressing these
questions, this project will create new algorithmic paradigms that will be
useful for tackling a range of modern-day relevant
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.