* 2041629
* CAREER: Unraveling post-invasion dynamics of the amphibian-killing fungus via rapid genetic diversity assessments of both hosts and pathogens
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* David Rodriguez, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 08/31/2026
* USD 635,333.00

In wildlife, prominent examples of mycoses (diseases caused by fungi) include
white-nose syndrome and the recent spread and emergence of snake fungal disease,
but no other fungal pathogens have been more destructive to wildlife than the
amphibian chytrids (genus Batrachochytrium). Chytrids are essentially ubiquitous
in the environment, yet they are relatively understudied. Amphibian chytrids
continue to cause population declines and species extinctions globally.
Unfortunately, the most severe amphibian declines have occurred in Neotropical
forests, which are also threatened by deforestation. For tropical amphibians,
the threat of disease, coupled with habitat loss, requires rapid measurements of
host diversity at the population scale to unravel complex disease dynamics.
Studies of disease dynamics can benefit from the development and use of genetic
methods that can be applied in real-time and in the field. By leveraging
emerging portable technology to measure genetic diversity, this project will
gather data for both hosts and pathogens to test hypotheses regarding the
specificity of their interactions, determine which hosts drive spread or act as
reservoirs, and contribute to amphibian conservation. The research and
educational goals of the project will be implemented at a Hispanic-Serving
Institution and led by a first-generation, Mexican-American Principal
Investigator (PI), and thus, will increase the participation of underrepresented
groups in STEM at all levels. Additionally, the project will serve to train the
next generation of students and international biologists in the application of
emerging genetic methodologies to address common challenges in disease ecology,
which can be extrapolated to other systems where diverse hosts drive pathogen
spread.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
elucidate fungal pathogen diversity and post-invasion pathogen dynamics in
equatorial forests and their understudied canopies by identifying which hosts
have driven the transition from an epizootic to an enzootic pathogen. The aims
of this research are to: 1) perform real-time strain detection using portable
quantitative PCR instruments and DNA sequencing using portable nanopore
sequencers to reveal pathogen diversity and geographic distribution along an
equatorial transect, 2) parse amphibian genetic identity in a hyper-diverse
assemblage to allow host-specific estimates of pathogen/strain prevalence, and
3) use cophylogenetic analyses to test for the influence of host diversity on
pathogen invasions. The PI is uniquely positioned to achieve these research
goals while providing experiential learning opportunities to underrepresented
students in STEM at the undergraduate and graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Systematics and Biodiversity Cluster and the Evolutionary Processes Cluster in
the Division of Environmental Biology at the National Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.