* 2041894
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Studying Problematic Content in the Web Advertising Ecosystem
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Franziska Roesner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 515,996.00

Online ads pervade the daily lives of all web users and underpin the current
financial model of the web. In addition to well-designed advertisements for
legitimate products and services, many ads contain content that is potentially
problematic for the people who see and click on them. For example, ads may use
misleading, deceptive, and in some cases, illegal practices. These ads can have
negative impact on web users financially, waste their time and attention, and
spread deceptive or misleading claims; they can include misinformation, scams,
and malware. The potential harmful impact of these ads threatens to undermine
the web’s aspirational role as a trustworthy information source and the
reputation and effectiveness of legitimate online advertising revenue. This
project aims to systematically study and classify the problematic content that
appears in web ads and measure its impact on people who browse the web. The
findings will ultimately lay a foundation for technical or regulatory solutions
to improve the quality and authenticity of the web advertising ecosystem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the researchers are conducting a
systematic investigation into problematic ad content on the web, leveraging
techniques including web crawling, ad detection, and in-the-wild user studies.
The research draws on perspectives from computer security that predict or
anticipate system misuse. The researchers are characterizing, classifying, and
measuring the prevalence of problematic content in the online ad ecosystem to
discover what problematic ad content exists, where it appears, who is targeted,
and which ad providers serve it. The research uses qualitative and quantitative
methods to study people’s perceptions of and interactions with this type of
content, asking what users consider problematic, and what impact this content
has on users’ time or attention. The research lays a foundation for technical
and policy-based defenses for problematic content shown in, and spread through,
online ads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.