* 2041523
* Collaborative Research: Multidimensional single-cell phenotyping for elucidating genome to phenome relationships
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Andreas Vasdekis, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 02/29/2024
* USD 336,514.00

The aim of this project is to develop methods and apply them to better
understand how cells can optimally perform more than one task simultaneously,
such as to grow and to synthesize biofuels at high quantities and efficiently.
These findings are expected to accelerate ongoing efforts that employ biological
systems as factories to produce high-value chemicals, and, thus, contribute to a
more sustainable bioeconomy. This project will also offer exceptional training
opportunities to high school and undergraduate students underrepresented in
science, with a focus on transferring the mathematical rigor of physical and
engineering sciences to biology. Further, this project is highly
interdisciplinary, thus offering exceptional training opportunities to graduate
students towards professional careers that address multifactorial societal
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems biology has greatly improved our ability to
program cells to perform a specific task. As the number of desired tasks
increases, however, the complexity of biological systems restricts our ability
to program or explore the foundation of cells that optimally perform multiple
tasks simultaneously. This project will address this challenge via
transformative microfluidic screening of combinatorial mutant libraries with
single-cell resolution. Single-cell resolution will critically enable the
selection of mutants directly from growing cultures, as well as quantify
cellular noise. By applying the proposed method to an important biofuel platform
and by combining the experimental results with genome-scale metabolic models,
the project will generate fundamental knowledge on the genome-wide origins of
multidimensional phenotypic traits and cell-to-cell phenotypic heterogeneity.
This project is jointly funded by Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster of the
MCB Division and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.