* 2041751
* CAREER: Developing Peptide Amphiphiles into Next-Generation Electronic Materials and Model Systems to Study Protein Functions
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Lee Solomon, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 01/31/2026
* USD 263,229.00

Non Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This convergent research project
seeks to create new advanced technologies to address the increasing demand for
faster, smaller, more efficient integrated circuits by utilizing a protein-based
fiber (termed a “PA”) for more effective electron transport. The results of such
work will open the door for a new wave of electronic materials with advanced
circuitry characteristics and capabilities, allowing many of the electronics
used each day such as cell phones, televisions, and microwaves to become more
efficient, compact, and powerful. Currently, in a simple electronic system, the
wire’s only function is to serve as the highway for electrons between
transistors or switches. This project will create a new type of electronics
containing wires made from the biologically-based PA materials. Rather than just
serve as a connector, this new ‘biological wire’ would be an active component of
the circuit, directing electron flow between components while also processing
information. This is of significant practical value as the additional
functionality would allow us to scale down, reducing components and transistors,
while saving power and costs. The educational component seeks to develop a
pathway for scientists to use their expertise to affect change on a global scale
by training them to be active in science-policy. Through a combination of
coursework and internships within the federal government students will see how
their science is used to improve people’s lives and how they can use their
technical expertise to help the government more effectively carry out its goals.
The award will support the careers and training of the PI (an early career
scientist and former AAAS Science and Technology Policy fellow), and a diverse
cross-section of students from high school through graduate level of study
across various scientific disciplines. The PI and his group will also mentor
local undergraduate and high school students through George Mason's highly
competitive Aspiring Scientists Summer Internship Program, connecting a new
generation of students to bench science. The project’s components will involve
biochemistry, physics, engineering and policy, providing students with a
thorough training regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Solomon group proposes to use Peptide Amphiphiles
(PAs) to study biological electron transport, which underlies a host of
functions from mineral cycling to bioremediation. No sufficient biomimetic model
systems exist to study these processes, but one is needed to isolate the core
chemical and biophysical principles that drive these functions. PAs are short
peptides connected to a lipid tail that polymerize into long fiber structures
and bind the natural cofactor heme B. Due to their simple structure and
polymeric character, minute changes are amplified and the core biophysical
principles are readily observable, and their synthetic character allows those
functions to be exploited in non-natural contexts. Aim one focuses on the
peptide; the amino-acid sequence will be changed to measure how different
cofactor environments affect electron transport. Aim two will focus on the
lipid, which will be modified such that these PA fibers can self-assemble into
discrete sections leading to electrochemical interfaces and gradients. In aim
three, heme will be replaced with other redox cofactors to impart new
electrochemical functions. Combining the results of these aims will produce a
multifunctioning PA fiber that can uncover the core biophysical aspects of many
biological electron transport functions. Additionally, these materials will be
developed into electrical wires that incorporate decision-making peptide
components and process information, which could lead to new types of bio
circuitry with improved computing power. Dr. Solomon’s educational component
aims to develop a science-policy curriculum for graduate students. This
certificate program will be built around a combination of lecture material to
explain the workings of the government and an internship component where
students will apply their scientific training directly to the policy making
process. This program will improve student’s understanding of how their work can
be integrated into federal policy and improve the government by seeding offices
with technical expertise not currently available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.