* 2041952
* Virtual Organization for Computing Research in Pandemic Preparedness and Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Madhav Marathe, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,515,290.00

This Virtual Organization (VO) will facilitate communication and collaboration
among CISE scientists currently involved in pandemic research through the NSF
RAPID program. With the guidance of a Steering Committee composed of members
from industry, academia, and government agencies, the VO will encourage the
sharing of research results in a way not available without a concerted effort.
The depth and breadth of multi-disciplinary collaboration enabled by this VO
will be extended to include researchers, educators, and students interested in
general topics related to pandemic planning and resilience. Utilizing a variety
of dissemination platforms, the VO will harness the synergies of the CISE RAPID
research programs to facilitate scientific advances and advance public health in
the US and around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The VO will: (i) facilitate
the collection of a comprehensive collection of data sets, software tools, and
documentation that can be shared by the research community; (ii) identification
of new research efforts resulting from the cross fertilization of ideas from
various subdisciplines of CISE research; (iii) a research roadmap that proposes
research directions in CISE sciences that can lead to effective methods to
prepare for and recover from future pandemics; and (iv) training and other
pedagogic materials needed for educating future generations of scientists in
topics related to pandemic preparedness, recovery, and resilience. The increased
levels of collaboration fostered by this VO have the potential to result in
innovative computational methods and technologies for dealing with future
pandemics. The research roadmap will include identification of key research
topics, risks, and gaps in the current R&amp;D landscape that will significantly
benefit the research community and serve as the blueprint for researchers,
funding agencies, and policy makers on the role of information and communication
technologies (ICT) in developing break-through solutions for pandemic
resilience. While it is not possible to prevent pandemics completely, developing
resilience techniques will enable society to prepare for and cope with the
aftermath in a more effective manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.