* 2041631
* Characterization of the Oceanic Lithosphere-Asthenosphere Boundary in the Colombian Subduction Zone through Receiver Function Analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Linda Warren, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2024
* USD 243,553.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
test two competing models of the boundary separating the Earth’s stiff outer
layer (lithosphere) from the underlying, weaker layer (asthenosphere). One model
proposes that this boundary is a narrow channel that decouples the lithosphere
and asthenosphere. The other model proposes that this boundary forms a broad
band of deformation that couples the lithosphere and asthenosphere. Each model
has important implications for our understanding of plate tectonics—the process
which drives the Earth’s long-term geologic evolution—and its relation to the
Earth’s interior. Each model carries predictions about the boundary between the
lithosphere and asthenosphere. These predictions can be tested using receiver
functions. In collaboration with the Universidad Nacional de Colombia, this
project uses recordings from seismic stations of the Colombian National Seismic
Network located above the Colombian subduction zone. In this region, the
characteristics of Nazca oceanic plate’s lower boundary can be examined over a
range of depths to determine which of the models is most accurate. Understanding
which model is most accurate will benefit society by helping to constrain the
force balance acting on tectonic plates, especially around subduction zones
where potentially destructive earthquakes driven by these forces occur. This
project further benefits society by deepening international collaboration
between institutions in the US and Colombia as well as furthering STEM education
by providing training in seismology to a postdoctoral
fellow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations of the oceanic lithosphere-
asthenosphere boundary (LAB) support two categories of contradictory models for
coupling between the lithosphere and underlying asthenosphere, and
correspondingly contradictory implications for plate tectonics. One category
interprets the boundary to be a narrow, melt-rich channel that decouples
lithospheric plates from the asthenosphere. Plate motion is thus driven largely
by slab pull. The other category interprets the boundary as a broad zone which
couples plates to the asthenosphere. Plate motion is thus strongly influenced by
asthenospheric flow induced drag. These models predict differing structures and
localizations of shear along the LAB. Channel models predict two closely spaced,
highly sheared boundaries while coupled models predict either a single boundary
with little shear or a single highly sheared boundary. The predicted features
respond differently to increasing pressure due to subduction. Channels narrow
with depth and coupled structures persist to greater, differing depths, so
observing a plate as it subducts offers an ideal natural experiment to test
these models. Seismic waves with different frequency contents interact with
these structures such that high frequencies can better image channels while low
frequencies can better image coupled structures. This project uses P-to-S-wave
receiver function analysis of radial and transverse components recorded at
broadband seismic stations to examine structural characteristics and shear
localization along the boundary. The complete characterization of structure and
anisotropy caused by shear requires long-term observations at seismic stations
from the coast to the back arc at a range of frequency bands. This project uses
data from 2010 to the present from 26 stations in the Colombian National Seismic
Network to investigate and characterize the subducting Nazca oceanic plate’s LAB
from depths of &lt;100 km at the coastline to &gt;400 km in the back arc. These
observations will provide constraints on the depth, thickness, and anisotropic
properties (if present) of the boundary and use these to test the proposed
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.