* 2041192
* SBP: Implicit Bias: Separating Person and Context
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Patrick Curran, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 465,738.00

Implicit bias refers to mental associations linking social groups with
evaluations or stereotypes. Research suggests that implicit race biases are
widespread, difficult to change, and that these associations may contribute to
unintended discrimination. There is no consensus, however, on whether implicit
bias is best understood as a feature of a person, or as a consequence of
inequalities and stereotypes cued by the social environment. Does implicit bias
operate as an individual attitude, so that a person's behavior can be predicted
from their implicit bias score? Or does it operate like a feature of the
context, such that any individual would have greater implicit bias when passing
through some contexts than others? Addressing these issues can help
organizations make more informed decisions about how best to reduce unwanted
disparities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of three longitudinal
studies to measure stability and change in implicit bias over time, and across
different contexts. It measures implicit bias across twenty cities to understand
how much scores depend on the city-wide context, as opposed to the individuals
who compose that context. The project measures city-level changes, such as
protests against racial discrimination and changes in local ordinances and
monuments, to understand whether such changes are followed by changes in
implicit bias. And it examines whether individuals' level of implicit bias
changes when they move from one social context to another. It is unlikely that
the answers to these questions are that implicit bias entirely reflects the
person or the context. Instead, the project aims to quantify the contributions
of each, and how person and context interact with each other. This research
contributes knowledge about the fundamental nature of implicit bias and the most
promising directions for reducing unintended
discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.