* 2041389
* Flourish: A Network for Pre-Tenure Social and Personality Psychologists of Color
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Morgan Jerald, Society for Personality and Social Psychology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 49,999.00

The fields of social and personality psychology succeed in part because of the
diversity of their scientists. However, as scholars of color advance in the
field they are less likely to find peers and mentors of color at their
respective academic institutions. Reversing these trends is a top priority for
personality and social psychological science. This project creates new and
continuing opportunities for pre-tenure faculty of color to develop
relationships with their peers and to connect with tenured faculty of color who
serve as mentors. The activity – Flourish – is a year-round network for pre-
tenure social and personality psychologists of color that includes an annual
retreat and online workshops throughout the year. The retreat features
participant- and mentor-led workshops on professional development, teaching
strategies, and research productivity for scholars to strengthen their academic
profiles and build a successful case for advancement. Year-round activities
feature weekly collaborative writing spaces, meetings with peers and mentors,
and tracking of professional achievements. Flourish provides a critical
opportunity for retention within higher education, within the field of
social/personality psychology, and expanding a pipeline of scholars who will
serve as successful role models for future generations of faculty and
scientists. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Faculty of color face unique challenges to
advancement that hinder success at their respective institutions. These faculty
members experience cultural, geographic, and professional forms of isolation
especially when there are few faculty of color in their department or academic
divisions. They can also be tasked with disproportionate amounts of service that
disrupt teaching and research productivity, which are essential for career
advancement. Strategic initiatives for diversifying science often focus on the
recruitment stage but tend to neglect later stages of career development and
advancement. Flourish offers resources for addressing challenges and mitigating
negative consequences for tenure-track faculty of color by providing
confidential spaces for sensitive discussions, expanding professional and social
networks, affirming scholars’ positions, and promoting their work. Workshops
dedicated to defining tenure/promotion guidelines, identifying institutional
norms, and setting individualized goals provide a clear and precise support path
designed to increase the likelihood of successful advancement. The ultimate goal
of Flourish is to foster promotion, retention, and inclusion for faculty of
color to diversify the field and research of social and personality
psychology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.