* 2041039
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Rural Resiliency Hubs: A Planning Approach to Addressing the Resiliency Divide
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Marcia Mardis, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 06/30/2024
* USD 49,924.00

Public libraries provide rural citizens with critical information, services, and
support to withstand adversity. Numerous local, state, and federal agencies use
public libraries as aid distribution points, volunteer reception centers,
shelters, and temporary office spaces. While disaster resilience research has
focused primarily on urban settings, rural environments have different,
understudied, characteristics. The considerable geographical variability in
rural areas has also made the “resilience divide” apparent in natural disasters’
aftermath, such as 2018’s Hurricane Michael. As such, the goal of this project
is to study and develop emergency plans that fit distinct needs of rural
communities, guided by a central hypothesis: Understanding interdependencies
among the community actors, population needs, environment, information, and
infrastructure that foster emergency operations efficacy in rural communities
can lead to the successful strategies and policies for optimizing multi-faceted
disaster response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the resilience divide, this
project will explore three research questions: (1) What interactions between
community actors, population needs, environment, information, and infrastructure
foster disaster resilience in rural communities? Additionally, how do rural
stakeholders and residents view public libraries in this system? (2) How can the
interdependency and interconnectivity between social, spatial, environmental,
and infrastructural factors in community resilience be measured and modeled to
reveal the divide in resilience for rural communities? (3) How can this
resiliency divide be bridged by using rural libraries as resiliency hubs for
natural disaster response? Additionally, what are the policy and infrastructural
issues relating to promoting libraries in a disaster resilience system? The
questions will be explored via heterogeneous data collection and fusion and by
developing multi-network resilience metrics and multivariate prioritized risk
maps. The project team will identify the critical issues, challenges, and
obstacles to designing resilience hubs in the study region of Calhoun County,
Florida, and develop socioeconomic and demographic mathematical metrics to
account for infrastructure characteristics, social factors, land use, and other
localized conditions. The team will create vulnerability maps using Geographical
Information Systems-based tools to identify high-need places in Calhoun County,
which will be supported by the library-community outreach to educate residents
about available services. Maps will also inform spatial optimization models for
mobile emergency response library hub locations. This project’s findings,
community engagement methods, and practice-based solutions may be scalable to
other disaster-prone, rural regions. This project is in response to the Civic
Innovation Challenge program, Track B—Resilience to Natural Disasters—and is a
collaboration between NSF and the Department of Homeland
Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.