* 2041339
* FW-HTF-RM: Introducing Patient-Specific Therapy Profiles in Electronic Health Records for Guiding Treatment Selection in the Era of Genomic Medicine
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* William Bobo, Mayo Clinic Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,368,891.00

Clinicians (workers) rate electronic health record (EHR) systems (human-
technology frontier), used to review and document patient's health status and
enter orders for drug prescription (work), an 'F' for usability. Specifically,
the EHR is often seen as a barrier to care, rather than a tool to facilitate
high quality care. This is due, in part, to high volumes of EHR alerts that are
automatically generated and must be addressed when prescribing medications to
treat conditions (e.g., depression). Such alerts, which typically address
potential adverse reactions ranging from life threatening to minor reactions,
are based on population studies and are not patient-specific. Current EHR alerts
also only advise what "not to do" and do not offer guidance (representing a
significant knowledge gap) as to "what to do" (e.g., which alternative
medication(s) should be considered instead). As a result, clinicians spend
substantial amounts of time dealing with unhelpful EHR alerts (contributing to
high work stress and burnout) and employ a costly "trial-and-error" approach to
selecting drugs. Clinicians need a technology interface that facilitates care -
one that seamlessly provides an estimated likelihood of efficacy and adverse
drug reactions of a given medication for a particular patient. A "patient-
specific drug EHR alert" would advance patient care (faster remission from
depression), foster shared decision-making between clinicians and patients (more
information readily available to individualizing therapy), and reduce worker
stress and risk of burnout (improved human-technology frontier by improving EHR
usability). This project is of significant public health importance given that
new drugs are discovered at unprecedented rates and clinical evidence continues
to accumulate showing that several genetic tests developed to individualize
therapy have improved patient outcomes and demonstrated significant savings in
healthcare costs. Education activities include a curriculum development for a
new course on fundamentals of machine learning and genomic medicine. The
researchers will also involve undergraduate and underrepresented community in
the proposed research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of
this project is to facilitate the integration of machine learning-based
predictive analytics into EHR systems that use genomic and clinical data to
tailor therapy for patients. The following objectives help achieve the
overarching goal: (1) Develop a multi-task machine learning model that can
simultaneously predict efficacy and associated adverse reactions to drug
therapy, using patient's genomic, clinical and sociodemographic data. Different
predictive approaches such as task clustering and task relation will be explored
to provide the best predictive performance. This technology is enabled by the
use of patient data from Mayo Clinic Biobank and clinical trials, and will be
validated in a prospective patient cohort in routine practice at Mayo Clinic's
Rochester and Florida campuses; (2) Conduct a "system usability study" to
demonstrate that "patient-specific drug response profile" (i.e., efficacy and
adverse reactions) improves EHR usability, which translates into reduced work
stress, and perceived added value by clinicians; and (3) Establish clinician
perceptions of added value in genomic technologies designed to individualize
therapy, thereby characterizing facilitators and barriers of genomic-tailored
EHR drug alerts. As a case study, this project will focus on antidepressant
drugs used to treat major depressive disorder, leveraging data from over 10,000
patients in the Mayo Clinic Biobank.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.