* 2041654
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Aging phenotypes and the senescence associated secretory phenotype in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,12/31/2023
* James Higham, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2023
* USD 24,258.00

Aging is associated with biological, physiological, and functional changes that
reflect evolutionary trade-offs in energy allocation across the lifespan. This
project uses a non-human primate model to examine age-associated gene expression
changes and to investigate the relationship between these changes and age-
related phenotypic decline. This doctoral dissertation project advances
knowledge about senescence and life history in primates and has the potential to
aid in the development of novel life-extending therapies by identifying
alterations in organ-specific gene expression that occur across the lifespan,
not just in old age. The project supports a female graduate student in
laboratory, bioinformatic, and statistical training. She also serves as an
educator through her continued involvement in high school programs that provide
students from underserved communities with mentoring and research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life history theory posits that evolved
trade-offs between early-life growth and reproduction and later-life somatic
maintenance are responsible for the timing of life history events. However, the
molecular mechanisms underlying these evolved trade-offs are not fully
understood. Cellular senescence and the proteins secreted by senescent cells
(the senescence associated secretory phenotype, SASP) are predicted to be
responsible for modulating these life history trade-offs on a molecular level.
This project tests the hypothesis that SASP factor expression changes with age
and is associated with aging phenotypes in non-human primates. The investigator
will generate cross-sectional, tissue-specific transcriptomic data that will be
used to characterize changes in SASP expression with age, sex, and tissue type.
The researchers will then calculate measures of age-related phenotypic decline
to evaluate whether changes in SASP expression are associated with aging
phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.