* 2041126
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Production, Perception, and Acquisition of New Dialect Features by Speakers Moving Between Two Regions
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Jennifer Nycz, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2022
* USD 11,235.00

When speakers of different dialects interact, their specific dialect features
may change over time. The motivation for such changes can be due to many
interrelated developmental, linguistic and social factors. This doctoral
dissertation improvement research grant-funded project will investigate new
dialect acquisition by mobile people relocating between two regions, one urban
and characterized by a prestigious dialect, and one rural, whose dialect is
stigmatized. Studies of dialect contact have been rare in comparison to studies
of language contact, but such studies provide key opportunities to understand
the processes of language change and the outcomes of contact situations broadly.
This study will contribute new knowledge about how people are capable of
learning and using new language forms and how speech sounds and words are
represented in the mind. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Language samples from
participants in each region will be collected according to gender, age, and
length of residence in the new region. These and other social characteristics
such as age of arrival, education level, occupation, social network, and
language attitude will be examined for their possible effects on dialect
acquisition. Each mobile speaker will take part in four activities: a
conversational interview, reading a list of sentences, words, and minimal pairs.
Importantly, by having an interview about the participants' experience growing
up in their hometown and their experience in moving to a new region, this study
can examine how participants vary their speech according to different topics.
Transcriptions of interviews and associated audio files will ultimately form the
basis of a corpus which will be shared with other researchers who are interested
in the study of second dialect acquisition and variation within the studied
language. This corpus will also be of value for related purposes, such as for
forensic linguistics. Finally, by observing how both first dialect and second
dialect features are used, this study will examine how speakers use linguistic
features to craft identity-related meanings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.