* 2041553
* I-Corps:   On-farm production of nitrogen fertilizer from air, water, and renewable electricity
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2021
* Thomas Jaramillo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of nitrogen fertilizer on-farm from air, water, and renewable
electricity. The $78 B global fertilizer marketplace is served today by this
process through a complicated and expensive supply chain to the world’s 4
billion acres of farmland. Once on the farm, the fertilizer is applied in bulk,
and more than half of it is lost to gas emissions and runoff, potentially
damaging downstream ecosystems and poisoning nearby water supplies. The aim of
this proposed technology is to offer an alternative method to produce
environmentally sustainable fertilizer. The proposed system uses solar panels as
an environmentally friendly power source, and applying fertilizer slowly instead
of in bulk mitigates the problems with runoff and gas emissions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
plasma reactor powered by renewable electricity that converts air and water into
nitrates in an aqueous solution. For the past 115 years, fertilizer has been
produced using the Haber-Bosch process and now produces nearly one billion tons
of carbon dioxide emissions every year. The design of the proposed technology is
modular, decreasing the costs and allowing use in remote areas and developing
nations. This proposed technology produces nitrogen fertilizer on-site
intermittently using the power from the solar module and the inputs of air and
water. This technology is tightly integrated with the solar array and the farm’s
irrigation system to provide growers with on-demand fertilizer. Preliminary
studies indicate that the proposed plasma reactor technology appears to be an
economically and environmentally sustainable nitrogen fixing
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.