* 2041372
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Considering the effects of disfluent speech on children's sentence processing capabilities and language development
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Toben Mintz, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2024
* USD 18,074.00

Many verbs can occur in different sentence structures. For example, some
ditransitive verbs — verbs that have both a direct and an indirect object, like
"give" — are flexible as to the object ordering, as in sentences like "Jill gave
the duck a cracker" and "Jill gave a cracker to the duck." The tendency for a
verb to occur in one structure more frequently than another is called verb bias.
Listeners use verb bias to anticipate how a sentence will progress. However, how
a sentence progresses may go against verb bias and violate listener's
predictions. Inaccurate predictions need to be revised in order to match the
intended meaning of a sentence. Children under eight have immense difficulty
with revising predictions. This difficulty is linked not only to the
misinterpretations of sentences but also to the delayed acquisition of passive
sentences and sentences with relative clauses. This dissertation project
investigates whether preschoolers can use disfluencies in a speaker's utterance
(e.g. thee uhh) to anticipate structures that go against verb bias, and whether
using disfluencies in this way can facilitate language development. The
relationship between children’s cognitive development and the use of
disfluencies will also be explored. Gaining insight into these questions will
advance our understanding of children's language development, language
processing, and the impact of cognitive development on these processes.
Furthermore, the results of this project will have implications for developing
targeted language interventions in cases of developmental language delay.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will use behavioral and computational
methods to address these questions. Behavioral studies will measure children's
expectations for ditransitive sentences with and without disfluencies by using
eye-tracking procedures. Children's cognitive development will be measured
through a well-validated cognitive flexibility task. Throughout the behavioral
studies, the expectedness of the ditransitives will be manipulated within and
across sentences. A computational cognitive architecture model incorporating
disfluencies as a cue for low probability structures will then be used to map
children's developing understanding of ditransitives and will be validated
against data from the behavioral studies. This model will be used to conduct
rigorous examination of subtle and fine-grained interactions between language
specific and general cognitive mechanisms. In future work, the model can be
applied more broadly to study the development of children's language processing
abilities and to design targeted and tailored language
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.