* 2041233
* Collaborative Research: SBP: Understanding the Cultural and Psychological Roots of Inequality Maintenance: Omissions of Native Americans
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Laura Brady, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 593,719.00

Compared to other racial groups, Native Americans (the Indigenous Peoples of the
United States) face disproportionately negative outcomes across many
consequential domains of life, including education, income, housing, and
criminal justice. Social psychology helps to understand how biases such as
stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination contribute to Native Americans’
disparate outcomes. This research team has identified another distinct form of
bias that undermines Native Americans’ opportunities and wellbeing: biases of
omission. Biases of omission refer to the ways in which Native Americans are
written out of public consciousness. For example, research demonstrates that
relative to other groups, mainstream television and news media rarely include
Native People or discuss Native issues. Americans are also taught relatively
little -- and largely inaccurate -- information about Native Americans. As one
example, the majority of history curricula in American schools discuss Native
Peoples only in pre-20th century contexts, rendering invisible the 5.2 million
Native Americans currently living in the United States. The research in this
project documents the scope and psychological impact of Native omissions, and
explores how non-Native Americans justify those omissions. Studies also examine
the motivational underpinnings of the relation between justifications of Native
omissions and non-Natives’ national esteem, and test the efficacy of
interventions that offer potential for improving Native peoples’
wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project explores both the scope of biases
of omissions of Native Americans and the psychological processes that perpetuate
these biases. The research is based on the observation that a core cultural
narrative of the United States is that of an exceptional, morally superior,
equitable, and meritocratic society. Yet Native Peoples’ historic and
contemporary experiences in the United States, including state-sanctioned
violence and discrimination arising from the country’s settler colonial origins,
contradicts these core cultural narratives. It is therefore hypothesized that
Native omissions arise from a desire among non-Native Americans to protect these
core cultural narratives and to maintain national esteem -- a sense of
attachment to and pride in one’s nation. Three lines of studies test the tenets
of this theoretical framework using large samples of Native American
participants coupled with samples of non-Native adults from across the United
States. The first phase of research documents the scope and psychological impact
of Native omissions, including assessments of how and in what domains Native
People experience omissions in U.S. society and the effect of omissions on
individual and community wellbeing. Additional studies explore how and to what
extent non-Native Americans justify omissions documented by Native participants,
and whether justifications of Native omissions play a culturally protective role
for non-Natives. The final phase of research examines the efficacy of
acknowledging Native omissions as a means of improving Native peoples’ wellbeing
by examining whether acknowledgements (vs. justifications) of Native omissions
by mainstream U.S. institutions can enhance Native Americans’ individual and
collective wellbeing. The program of research aims to expand the psychological
literature by laying the theoretical groundwork for understanding an
understudied form of bias and by shedding light on the experiences of Native
Americans -- people who are vastly underrepresented in psychological theory and
research. The project also documents and helps to change the psychological
processes that perpetuate social inequalities, particularly those experienced by
Native Americans, thereby contributing to the science of broadening
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.