* 2041426
* EAGER: Web Adventures Interactive: Innovative Online Activities as Effective Tools for Broadening Participation in Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Anne Papakonstantinou, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,997.00

This project will accomplish the exploratory groundwork needed to create Web
Adventures Interactive (WAI), a set of interactive educational game websites, to
study the effectiveness of the interactive features on science learning,
motivation, and interest in science careers. This project is funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT) careers. The Web Adventures
Interactive will replace the original Web Adventures developed through federal
grants in the late 90s to mid-2010s. The unprecedented need for virtual science
tools makes it vital to redevelop Web Adventures using new technologies and new
interactive features. Over the years, Web Adventures have served millions of
students and teachers from across the globe with overarching goals of (1)
increasing students' science and health knowledge, and (2) inspiring science-
related careers. The transformed version, WAI, provides a great opportunity to
study the effectiveness of these new features and to conduct fine-grained new
investigations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In addition to preserving the original
Web Adventures goals, WAI's overarching goal is to increase three student
outcomes: (1) science learning (forensics, microbiology, and neuroscience), (2)
motivation for science fields, and (3) awareness and interest in science careers
through new and innovative featuresâ€”including social interaction and engagement,
teacher/parent monitoring and assessment of student progress, and further
customization options for teachers/parents. A full redevelopment of Web
Adventures requires some initial work to be performed including the creation of
an archival website (Phase 1) and design and testing of the new infrastructure
(Phase 2) with several additional innovative features including social
interaction, and detailed analytics regarding game-play characteristics. The new
infrastructure will be beta-tested with at least 1,000 middle and high school
students to investigate (1) how WAI impacts the three student outcomes; (2) how
students' behavior (time-spent, sequence followed, self-exploring versus guided,
answering prompted questions etc.) relate to the three student outcomes; and (3)
how new features of WAI (i.e., social interactive features and teacher/parent
monitoring and connectivity tools) affect behavior and impact the three student
outcomes. Students will be given pre-and post-surveys (for motivation and career
interest) and assessments (for science learning) that will provide research
data. Data analytics and data-mining will also be conducted and included in data
analysis. These empirically-tested interactive educational games will be freely
and publicly available on a website hosted by the Rice University School
Mathematics Project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.