* 2041101
* NSFDEB-NERC: Collaborative Research: Wildlife corridors: do they work and who benefits?
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2024
* Andrew Gregory, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2024
* USD 86,106.00

In recent years, governments have begun to connect parks and other large natural
areas by conserving wildlife corridors – swaths of semi-natural land intended to
allow the free flow of animals between natural areas. The hope is that the
connected areas will sustain large, genetically diverse populations and
ecological processes, such as pollination and seed dispersal. But there is
little science to guide how wildlife corridors are put into practice and to
minimize their costs, including costs of restricting human uses of the land. How
many and what types of fences, roads, pastures, gardens, and buildings can be
permitted in the corridor? How wide do corridors need to be? Do some wildlife
species use corridors more readily than others? Most of what we think we know
about corridors comes from small experiments on 3-acre patches of habitat
connected by 100-ft-wide corridors with no human activities nearby, and using
animal presence or movement to measure corridor effectiveness. This study will
involve corridors and patches 100 times larger, and in landscapes with various
human activities nearby. Furthermore, this project will use genetics instead of
animal presence or movement as a better way to measure how well corridors work.
By these innovations and by measuring responses of multiple species, this study
will help scientists understand corridor effectiveness. It will also help
society implement corridors that are effective while minimizing all sorts of
costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use large corridors and habitat
patches that have been stable for 50-200 years, so that genetic patterns reflect
the influence of landscape pattern. Each landscape contains a corridor
connecting two natural patches and two types of reference conditions, namely two
patches lacking a connection that are about the same size and interpatch
distance as the connected patches, and an intact natural area containing two
sampling locales with similar size and spacing. The study will use 20
independent landscapes to quantify how corridor traits affect gene flow, and
will use non-flying mammals as focal species because they are strongly affected
by fragmentation. The research team hypothesizes (1) a strong non-linear decline
in success (gene flow) with corridor length, reflecting the skewed distribution
of dispersal distances within species; (2) success will drop steeply as corridor
width falls below a threshold, with the threshold determined by species traits;
and (3) species that are bigger, are habitat specialists, or have greater
dispersal abilities (relative to brain size or reproductive rate) will benefit
more from corridors. Testing these hypotheses will allow generalization to a
wide range of mammal species not included in this project. We will use highly
flexible Random Forest models to answer the overarching question: What landscape
traits (e.g., corridor width, degree of human disturbance) and species traits
(mobility, affinity to particular land cover types) are associated with
effective corridors?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.