* 2041666
* EAGER: Joint Hazard Mitigation in the Era of COVID-19:  Implications for Engineered Structures and Services
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Julio Ramirez, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 307,824.00

Much emphasis during the response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has rightly
been on traditional public health efforts at controlling it; however, less
prominent but no less vital is the role of the built environment itself in both
amplifying and suppressing the effects of COVID-19. In the former case, this
includes densely-packed, highly centralized physical work spaces, while in the
latter this includes adaptive use of decentralized physical work spaces (such as
private homes) or virtual ones (as for online learning). The prospect of co-
occurrence of natural hazards (such as hurricanes, tornadoes and earthquakes)
during the COVID-19 regime is likely to strain and possibly confound ongoing and
future response efforts. Accordingly, this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) will explore the role of engineered structures and services
within the built environment in order to improve efforts to prevent pandemic
joint hazards from becoming societal disasters. This will require basic research
in exploring new theories, methods, data and technologies for supporting
mitigation, together with collaborations with multiple organizations, including
the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure and its
components (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). This project will contribute to
NSF's role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the
National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop and disseminate a research framework and corresponding
research agenda to support improved understanding of the role of the built
environment in mitigating or amplifying risks associated with pandemic joint
hazards. Case study data will be collected and analyzed, leading to an initial
research framework. The research agenda will be developed with close cooperation
from a broad and diverse set of researchers and practitioners in the hazards
domain, resulting in a set of fundamental methodological, empirical and
conceptual challenges around this topic. The projectâ€™s potentially radical re-
examination of contemporary notions of hazard mitigation and performance-based
engineering, as well as its engagement of new interdisciplinary approaches to
understanding the relationship between physical and virtual facilities/services
in mitigating pandemic joint hazards, represents a high-risk endeavor falling
well outside the intellectual boundaries of current civil infrastructure and
natural hazards research. The results of this work are expected to spur new
lines of inquiry in various branches of engineering, potentially informing
advances well beyond this project. Ultimately, this project's holistic and
contextualized approach will contribute to the design of a more equitable,
functional and safer built environment, well suited to a future that is likely
to be marked by highly disruptive pandemics occurring jointly with other
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.