* 2041700
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evolution of the forelimbs of suspensory primates
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Jeffrey Spear, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2022
* USD 6,439.00

Biological adaptations are often observed to have evolved multiple times within
a group of species. This phenomenon may be related to the occurrence of
particular co-occurring traits within a group of species that make the evolution
of some adaptations more likely than others. Among primate groups that use
suspensory locomotion, this pattern of movement seems to have evolved multiple
times independently. This doctoral dissertation project investigates how
covariation among biological traits within the forelimbs of primates affected
the trajectory of their evolution. The project contributes to an emerging
understanding of how covariation of traits impacts the evolution of new body
plans, in particular the evolution of humans’ distinct form of upright walking.
In addition to training a graduate student, this project generates a large
dataset that can be used to train undergraduate and high school students in
study design, statistics, and computer coding. The doctoral student plans to
publish short, public-oriented video abstracts of this project’s results,
creating a direct link between active scientists and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies how changes in the way
biological traits covary can affect the trajectory of evolution, potentially
making specific adaptive suites more common in certain clades while inhibiting
their evolution in other groups. The investigator plans to collect 3-dimensional
data on the forelimb bones of primates from across the order, use evolutionarily
informed statistics to identify traits that are associated with frequent
suspensory behaviors, and examine how these traits covary in suspensory taxa and
their close relatives using matrices. Different hypotheses about the evolution
of suspension in primates predict different strengths and patterns of trait
covariation in suspensory vs non-suspensory groups. The extent to which the
common ancestors of humans, chimpanzees, and other apes were adapted for
suspension is under active debate. By studying how suspension evolved in
primates, this study will contribute to our understanding of early human
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.