* 2041884
* CAREER: Efficient and Accurate Local Time-Stepping Algorithms for Multiscale Multiphysics Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Thi Thao Phuong Hoang, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2026
* USD 164,539.00

Mathematical modeling and numerical simulations of multiscale multiphysics
processes are of great importance, yet highly challenging as various processes
occur at different scales and are coupled together. The issues are more crucial
when dealing with complex large-scale systems (for example, those arising in
ocean and coastal modeling). The goal of this project is to advance the
efficiency and fidelity of local time-stepping algorithms for multiscale
multiphysics systems with application to multi-resolution simulations of large-
scale geophysical flows. The developed algorithms will efficiently capture the
wide range of scales in both space and time to produce accurate and robust
simulations of these systems over a long period of time. The research plan is
closely integrated with the educational activities of the project which include
(i) developing curricular modules in computational mathematics at the Auburn
University Summer Science Institute, an educational enrichment program for high
school students, to provide young students early exposure to applied mathematics
and inspire them to pursue a career in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM); and (ii) providing interdisciplinary applied mathematics
education and research training for both undergraduate and graduate students,
including women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the Principal Investigator will
develop accurate and effective hybrid local time-stepping algorithms based on
nonoverlapping domain decomposition: on the one hand, explicit schemes with
local time steps are used to model processes at small time scales without
suffering a severe restriction on the time step size dictated by the global CFL
condition. On the other hand, localized exponential time integrators are
employed to enable large time step sizes for processes occurring at slow speeds,
and to accelerate the computation of matrix exponentials and their products by
performing these calculations locally and in parallel. Three main research
objectives will be pursued: (i) development and analysis of nonoverlapping
localized exponential time differencing methods for stiff nonlinear equations;
(ii) study of hybrid local time-stepping algorithms for various heterogeneous
problems; and (iii) application of these algorithms to the three-dimensional
primitive equations for modeling ocean/atmosphere
circulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.