* 2041261
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Processing the Dynamicity of Events in Language
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Elsi Kaiser, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2022
* USD 15,704.00

The world is a dynamically changing place, filled with different kinds of events
('things that happen') such as peeling a potato, running, wiping a table,
throwing a ball, dancing, etc. Humans' perception and conceptualization of
events is central for theories of language and mind. This project investigates
the following questions: When a comprehender encounters linguistic input
describing an event, what information guides how a mental representation of that
event is constructed? How is information from various linguistic and non-
linguistic sources integrated to create an understanding of an event? This
project ultimately aims to shed light on the cognitive processes that enable
comprehenders to rapidly update their understanding of linguistic descriptions
of dynamically changing events. The anticipated findings of this project will
advance scientific understanding of the mechanisms that enable humans to rapidly
understand language in real time. These findings have the potential to generate
new insights into the cognitive mechanisms of predictive language processing,
which can potentially provide basic scientific knowledge beneficial for
applications such as predictive text generation, machine translation, and
language learning and teaching. This project aims to foster undergraduate
research at various levels, allowing students to acquire cutting-edge skills and
expertise in psycholinguistic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses
behavioral methods to investigate how grammatical and non-grammatical sources of
information guide comprehenders' expectations and mental representations of
dynamically changing events. Three different sources of information will be
investigated: (i) grammatical information, (ii) discourse-level information, and
(iii) information about real-world events. The investigators combine insights
from formal/lexical semantics, pragmatics, psycholinguistics, and cognitive
psychology about event representations to advance our understanding of the
relationship between the human mind and language. The results of this project
have the potential to significantly further understanding and knowledge of how
language users comprehend the dynamically changing events described in
linguistic input, in an incremental and anticipatory
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.