* 2041485
* I-Corps: Acellular 3D Scaffold for Treating Volumetric Muscle Loss
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2021
* Koyal Garg, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an implantable medical device to facilitate the regeneration of
skeletal muscle to reduce unnecessary suffering and cost from long-term
disability following traumatic muscle injuries. This device may change the
standard of care for large muscle injuries and save limbs that otherwise would
be amputated. This project will explore the translation of technologies that
restore muscle and limit disability in 65,000 annual gunshot victims; 110,000
annual open fracture victims; and 10,000 annual active duty service personnel
suffering with traumatic muscle injuries in the US. In addition, the technology
may have applications in veterinary medicine to help veterinarian surgeons
improve the quality of life for traumatic injuries in pets and livestock. There
are more than 158,000 muscle injuries in dogs alone within the US and Canada
every year. A successful entrance into the veterinarian market may provide
additional safety and efficacy data for a future FDA clearance for human use.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a 3D biomaterial that will
enable surgeons to treat large muscle injuries and improve functional outcomes.
The proposed device is an extracellular replacement therapy to facilitate
functional and aesthetic healing of skeletal muscle injuries. The proposed
technology is based on proteins normally found in developing muscles, and a 3D
porous structure that allows cells to attach while filling the entirety of the
injury. The mechanical properties physically prevent the wound from collapsing
on itself, and the interconnected porous structure allows for cellular
infiltration of remaining skeletal muscle cells and immune cells. The product is
designed to be shelf stable and fit within a surgeon’s pre-existing surgical
routine. A single device may be cut to fit the specific defect and return the
muscles' natural contour. Previous studies have shown an improvement in muscle
function by 52%.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.