* 2041738
* Collaborative research: Integrating tectonics, surface processes and paleobiodiversity using numerical and observational approaches
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Brian Yanites, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 298,510.00

Mountains across the globe are biodiversity hotspots for many different groups
of plants and animals; however, the deep-time relationship between mountain
building and biodiversity remains elusive and requires collaboration between
biologists, paleontologists, and earth scientists. This project will focus on
numerical models that couple processes of mountain growth and erosion with
species movement and evolution. The project will make predictions about how
mountain biodiversity is generated, maintained, and preserved over long
timescales, and then use the fossil record to test and improve those
predictions. To achieve multidisciplinary collaboration, project activities will
include online tutorials and workshops at major scientific meetings that present
the numerical modeling toolkit to a broad audience of ecologists, geologists,
and biogeographers. The toolkit is highly flexible, enabling a wide range of
researchers to address complex questions spanning earth sciences and
evolutionary biology. This project will support the research of three female
early-career scientists at the faculty, postdoctoral, and PhD
stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project links a novel state-of-the-art
numerical model with observational data to bridge our understanding of
topography-biodiversity relationships over geologic time. By simultaneously
modeling mountain uplift, the formation of climate gradients, land-surface
erosion, biotic evolution and dispersal, and preservation, the model will
simulate how dynamic landscapes influence biodiversity and the long-term
preservation of that diversity in the fossil record. Model predictions will be
iteratively tested with modern and fossil data, focusing on the well-known
record of mammals in western North America. Geological information from regional
sedimentary, tectonic, and paleoclimate records will further inform and test
model results. The project will establish collaborations across different
disciplines and use these connections to answer long-standing questions in
evolutionary biology and disseminate knowledge to a multidisciplinary audience
through interactive coding workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.