* 2041892
* Structure and motion of the inner core from dense arrays
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* John Vidale, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 470,000.00

The inner core, the 1000-km-radius solid metal ball at the center of Earth
embedded in the liquid metal outer core, is a subject of fundamental interest
and public fascination. The freezing of the outer core to build the inner core
powers Earth’s magnetic field and so refinement of inner core structure and
motion will shed light on the convective geodynamo in the outer core and thus
the generation of the fluctuating magnetic field, which has affected evolution
and protects life on Earth. This project will focus several large arrays of
seismometers to image the fine structure in the inner core in an effort to
deepen our understanding of its processes. This award will support a graduate
student and post doctoral scholar, and includes international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earth’s inner core (IC) is a central but
poorly understood frontier. Understanding its structure, motion, and history all
pose formidable challenges. Temporal changes and roughly hemispherical structure
of seismic velocity variation, anisotropy, thickness of the upper isotropic
layer, and attenuation have been estimated, yet interpretation of these
observations has so far been incomplete and often contradictory. The
investigators will use refined beam-forming techniques, applied to 1970s data
from the Large Aperture Seismic Array (LASA), the modern Hi-Net and China Arrays
(CHArray), and several smaller arrays to explore the distribution of fine-scale
IC heterogeneity. The proponents aim to beam-form with dense arrays to map and
characterize IC regions with strong heterogeneity to interpret the structures
and track their motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.