* 2041474
* Conference: Science Museum Futures
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2020,01/31/2022
* John Falk, Institute for Learning Innovation
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 01/31/2022
* USD 90,000.00

Upon entering the STEM learning landscape, science museums enjoyed marked growth
in public utilization and impact. However, since the turn of the century,
reductions in visitor numbers, aging infrastructures and pedagogical approaches
have made many in the sector question how these institutions might best evolve
to stay relevant in a changing world. Although there have been numerous
discussions around re-thinking practices and even some movement towards
actualizing much of this rhetoric, overall, most institutions have largely
continued business as usual. Meanwhile, the COVID-19 pandemic introduced
additional challenges and created an important inflection point for science
museums, a moment when all can and should seriously address not just the
immediate future, but also the longer-term future of the next decade and beyond.
This convening will meet this opportunity by virtually bringing together 50-60
diverse (expertise and role, background, demographics, geography) thoughtful
STEM learning professionals to collaboratively re-imagine the future of the
science museum community, in particular the particularly vulnerable small to
medium size science museum sector. Participants will be asked to think
strategically (rather than just tactically) about how science museums in the
coming decade(s) can fulfill their STEM learning missions while truly serving
the needs of all segments of their communities; particularly those who have been
historically under-represented. The project will involve participants in an
8-step process involving pre-meeting readings, online discussions, large and
small-group meetings, written and online dissemination efforts; with
opportunities for local and national input throughout. The Science Museum
Futures project represents an opportunity for the science museum community to
seriously and collectively address its future; not just the very short-term
future, but the longer-term future of the next decade and beyond.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To remain an important part of the STEM learning
landscape, the future demands that science museums re-think how they fulfill
their STEM education roles in four key areas: 1) Understanding – facilitating
STEM learning so all users can more clearly understand how an understanding of
science and technology supports both a healthier and richer life; 2) Future
Actions – supporting evidence-based solutions to challenges that currently face
every community; 3) Social Cohesion – making it possible for all sectors of
society to experience STEM learning as a natural an integral part of their
family, group and community’s heritage and life experience; and 4) Physical
Security – ensuring that all users have opportunities to gather (physically or
virtually), interact, explore and learn STEM within a safe, healthy, anxiety-
free and restorative environment. Going forward, science museums will need to
re-envision how all four of areas can be addressed, not just individually, but
collectively as core, interdependent goals. To ensure broad applicability and
inclusion, diverse community voices and responses will be integrated throughout
the process through a series of online focus groups and conversations with both
members of the science museum community and the wider public science museums
seek to serve. The Science Museum Futures project will create an initial Science
Museums Futures Action Plan that will provide science museum practitioner’s with
new approaches, processes and tools designed to enhance the ways they support
STEM learning. All materials will be both vetted and disseminated with the aid
of project partners through on-line webinars, focus groups, blog posts on social
media such as LinkedIn and Facebook, conference presentations and organizational
newsletters. This project seeks to help initiate an on-going effort to support
science museums, allowing them to rethink and reshape their STEM learning
offerings in ways that ensure that they are increasingly relevant and central to
the lives of ALL members of their communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. One of AISL’s
five priority goals is to invest in projects that seek to build infrastructure
and/or capacity in the field, including efforts supporting collaborations,
connections, and professional networks within and across sectors of informal
STEM education. This project is also supported by the Education and Human
Resources directorate's Accelerating Discovery in Education efforts to enable
research in fundamental topics addressing persistent issues in the learning and
teaching of STEM content as well as frontier topics that envision STEM learning
environments of the future, push the boundaries of the use of technology in
learning, and examine how learning will change because of advances in technology
and developments in Industries of the Future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.