* 2041470
* Modeling and Control of a Roll-to-Roll Manufacturing Process for Dry Transfer of Two-Dimensional Materials and Printed Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Wei Li, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 12/31/2023
* USD 463,172.00

This award will support research in dynamic systems and control of a
manufacturing process, contributing to fundamental science and emerging domestic
industries. Roll-to-Roll (R2R) dry transfer is a critical process in
manufacturing flexible electronics, hydrogen fuel cells, organic solar cells,
and two-dimensional (2D) materials. The goal of R2R manufacturing is to enable
faster production of better products and to benefit from economies of scale.
Although it is expected to be the future production method for a variety of
next-generation products, R2R manufacturing suffers from technical challenges
that prevent it from being widely adopted in industry. These challenges include
control of roller dynamics, mechanics of delamination, on-line monitoring,
diagnosis, and quality control. The goal of this research is to establish a
modeling and control framework for R2R manufacturing, specifically focusing on
an R2R dry transfer process, to achieve optimal system performance in real-time
operation. The research will enable the design and manufacturing of complex
printed electronic products and improve the quality of large-scale transferred
2D material. The research will be multidisciplinary, involving dynamic system
modeling, control theory, advanced manufacturing, and materials science. It will
help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research and contribute
to maintaining US leadership in advanced manufacturing through technology
advancement and STEM workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will investigate dry peeling mechanics and a reversible system convexification
method for real-time process control. A new convex model predictive control
methodology will be developed to enable reversible convexification, a property
that is critical for evaluating control design and conducting informed system
reconfiguration. The R2R dry transfer process is a high-order switched system.
Research on the stability and optimal performance of such a system will lead to
important advancements in switched-system control theory. Control algorithms
developed in this research will be able to handle the complexity of the system
and be simple enough for real-time implementation. The research will
significantly advance the state of the art of R2R manufacturing and enable a
low-cost and high-throughput production method for flexible electronics and 2D
materials. The methodologies to be developed in this research will find a wide
range of applications in manufacturing processes and other complex engineering
systems that involve nonlinearity and high-order switched-system
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.