* 2041861
* SBIR Phase I:  A near real-time analyzer for MRSA screening and diagnosis of MRSA infections
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Siu-Tung Yau, RAPIDECT INC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project are significant. The prevalence of multi-drug
resistant organisms (MDROs) or superbugs, which include S. aureus and
methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), is one of the greatest threats to public
health. Annually in the United States, over 2 million people acquire MDRO
infections, leading to at least 23,000 deaths. Further, MDRO infections has been
recognized as co-infections of COVID-19 that complicates the therapeutics of the
pandemic disease in the healthcare environment. The analyzer will lead to fast
containment and rapid diagnosis of MRSA and S. aureus infections. When its
capacity is expanded to include other MDROs, the analyzer will allow clinicians
to significantly enhanced treatment efficacy, leading to decreased morbidity and
mortality, reduced costs of treatment and hospital stay, reduced prevalence of
MDROs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will address the long time-to-result of current MRSA testing
technologies. The current culture-based diagnosis of bacterial infections
requires 16-48 hours to produce results. The long diagnosis-time leads to
overuse of broad-spectrum antibiotics (BSAs), resulting in under-treatment,
severe side effects, morbidity and mortality as well as the development of
MDROs. The culture-free analyzer will complete the diagnosis in 120 minutes. The
analyzer will allow clinicians to limit the use of BSAs and start using narrow
spectrum antibiotics in the early stage of treatment to enhance efficacy and
reduce the prevalence of MDROs. The goals of the project are: (1) To construct a
prototype analyzer, which will provide simultaneous diagnosis on multiple
samples in 120 minutes, and (2) To conduct a small-scale characterization of the
clinical performance of the prototype with clinical samples to establish its
credibility as a clinical diagnostic technology. The prototype analyzer will
consist of a multi-channel signal acquisition electronics console and detection
plates. The detection plate will contain an array of bacteria-specific detection
electrodes and will be inserted into the console and operated by the console for
measurements. The analyzer will detect MRSA in clinical samples and distinguish
MRSA from S. aureus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.