* 2041337
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2021 Programming Languages Mentoring Workshop at POPL (PLMW@POPL)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Stephanie Balzer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2023
* USD 23,400.00

This award seeks to support U.S. student participation in the Programming
Languages Mentoring Workshop (PLMW), being organized as part of the ACM SIGACT-
SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL), the premier
conference on programming language theory. The event is in Copenhagen, Denmark
in January 2021. This award specifically supports students from underrepresented
groups and gives priority to US citizens and permanent residents to attend the
mentoring workshop in addition to the POPL conference. The impact of the award
relates to broadening participation in computing, providing opportunities for
students to receive mentoring from leading researchers, and building the next
generation of researchers and knowledgeable practitioners with expertise in
programming languages theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students attending the PLMW
workshop with support from this grant will hear eminent researchers in the field
talk about the latest trends in the field, and get one-on-one mentoring from
these speakers and other mentors in research and pursuing their career
aspirations. The connections formed at this event will help create lasting
connections between researchers and students, thereby shaping emerging
innovations in computer programming languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.