* 2041748
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Implications of bacterially driven cross-kingdom chemical interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Kristen Whalen, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 374,267.00

Over evolutionary history, microbes have evolved in close association with
larger, more complex organisms, often driven by the mutually beneficial exchange
of nutrients. Advancements in analytical techniques have revealed that many
host-bacterial interactions are tightly regulated by small molecules, acting as
chemical messengers. Yet, connecting how these interactions at the cellular
level translate to impacts on whole communities and ecosystems remains an
ongoing challenge necessitating cross-disciplinary collaboration. A newly
emerging picture suggests that marine bacteria are not passive in their
interactions with hosts such as algae; rather bacteria actively mediate the flow
of organic matter depending on how they deploy their chemical arsenal. The
assembled interdisciplinary team will develop new methods to track and translate
complex chemical signals between a model algal host and associated bacteria. New
methodologies in fluorescent biosensors will quantify bacterial production of
chemical signals at the cellular level, whose release manipulates host
physiology. How the host responds to the chemicals will be assessed by measuring
changes in the host's proteins, RNA, and metabolites. This work supports the
training and mentoring of underrepresented/underresourced postdoctoral and
undergraduate trainees in themes bridging the chemical, biological, and
environmental sciences. Four postdoctoral investigators will participate in
course-based undergraduate research experiences with Haverford faculty with the
goal of building supportive scholar-teacher mentoring networks with students and
providing training in equitable and inclusive course design so that the scholars
becoming more reflective, engaged, and effective teachers. All four PIs will
develop conference-based experiential workshops to provide career
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbes have emerged as key players in marine
systems where they form complex relationships with eukaryotic phytoplankton.
These interactions range from symbiotic to pathogenic and are tightly regulated
through the dynamic exchange of small molecule chemical messengers that shape
communities and influence the biogeochemical fate of oceanic nutrients. Efforts
to elucidate the exchange of chemical signals and decipher the environmental
drivers of bacterial-phytoplankton interactions are limited and met with
substantial technical challenges. Recently, two chemical messengers,
tetrabromopyrrole (TBP) and 2-heptyl-4-quinolone (HHQ), both produced by the
globally distributed marine gamma proteobacterium, Pseudoalteromonas, have been
identified to govern the physiology of its associated, bloom-forming single-cell
algal host, Emiliania huxleyi, with contrasting modalities. Experiments outlined
in this study are poised to tease apart the metabolic landscape defining this
model host-bacterial symbiosis, and detail when and how chemical messengers
induce host metabolic reprogramming resulting in ecosystem level consequences.
Three synergistic aims will be accomplished: in the first, TBP and HHQ
production and uptake will be measured in response to nutrient variability and
HHQ production will be captured at the single-cell level using biosensors. In
the second aim, experiments will reveal metabolic cross-talk by establishing the
metabolomic and proteomic response of E. huxleyi to both P. piscicida and HHQ,
while tracking P. piscicida uptake of E. huxleyi-derived metabolites. In the
third, experiments will investigate if HHQ prevents E. huxleyi viral entry using
electron microscopy, accounting for an earlier observation that viral-induced
mortality of E. huxleyi is stalled in the presence of
HHQ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.