* 2041107
* Delineation factors governing production of multi-component cytokines in clinical grade cells
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Michael Diehl, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/29/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Mammalian cells can produce therapeutic molecules known as biologics. Biologics
can be used to treat cancer, auto-immune disorders and infectious viral disease.
This project will address critical gaps in the ability engineer mammalian cells.
These gaps limit cell therapy applications where cells are delivered to specific
disease sites in the body in order to facilitate local biologic production. New
methods to engineer clinical-grade cells for these types of applications will be
developed. Complex biologics that are composed of multiple protein complexes
will be the engineered products of these cells. Undergraduates, especially those
from underrepresented minorities, will be trained through participation in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of this project are to identify
and develop biosynthetic routes to circumvent bottlenecks that limit the
secretion levels of fully-bioactive macromolecules. Multi-fragment, pro-
inflammatory cytokines and clinical-grade cell lines will be used as model
biologic and cell platforms. Protein expression will be manipulated precisely to
identify bottlenecks that affect cytokine synthesis and heterodimerization.
Multiple-gene manipulation strategies will be used to modulate the expression of
additional genes in order to probe downstream secretion bottlenecks. Processes
of particularly interest are proteolytic protein processing, folding, and
vesicular trafficking. These experiments will test the overarching hypothesis
that maximized secretion of multi-fragment proteins requires precision multi-
gene translational control combined with the upregulation of multiple,
downstream effector proteins along the secretion pathway. Engineered cells will
be encapsulated in biopolymers. Their secretion stability and robustness will be
evaluated. The extent to which these changes are linked to endoplasmic reticulum
driven unfolded protein responses (UPR) is of primary
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.