* 2041859
* UNS:  Integrated assessments of urbanization impacts on building energy use for urban energy sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Yuyu Zhou, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/29/2024
* USD 315,581.00

The current rate of urbanization, coupled with anticipated growing energy demand
in the future, makes the need for science-based information and knowledge on
urban energy sustainability challenging and promising. This project focuses on a
systematic analysis of compound urbanization impacts on building energy use. The
overall goal of this project is to improve understanding of the role of
urbanization in influencing building energy use for developing region-specific
strategies to mitigate growing energy demand. By integrating capabilities of
geospatial and integrated assessment modeling to address challenges of urban
energy sustainability, this research has the potential to improve the practices
relevant to urbanization and building energy use at the large scale and will
contribute to the next generation of sustainable urban systems
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four specific tasks to achieve the overall goal:
(1) to examine and project coupled impacts of urbanization on building energy
use at three levels, including population redistribution (regional level), urban
density change (city level), and urban heat island growth (local level); (2) to
develop a state-of-the- science building energy modeling framework that can
systematically quantify and evaluate the compound impact of urbanization on
building energy use; (3) to investigate the role and implication of urbanization
and other key factors (e.g., technology improvement) in mitigating growing urban
energy demand for region-specific strategies of urban energy sustainability; and
(4) to develop a new innovative course in urban sustainability, to expose
students (especially underrepresented) to environmental science with the aim of
enhancing their interests in pursuing a career in science, and to engage general
public and relevant stakeholders for a broad dissemination of findings. This
project aims to advance knowledge and understanding of compound urbanization
impacts on building energy use by answering fundamental questions: (1) to what
extent can urbanization influence building energy use with the consideration of
coupled effects at three levels? (2) what will be the relative role of
urbanization in influencing building energy use compared to other factors (e.g.,
technology improvement)? and (3) how will the influence and role of urbanization
vary over space/region? The modeling framework will serve as a prototype in
coupling often independent methods/models together with scenario analyses to
explore complex problems of urbanization impacts. It will help to create a means
to mitigate growing energy demand and to inform policy and practical
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.