* 2041556
* RAPID: The Impact of Being Policed Under Threat
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Lars Johnson, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 199,537.00

This project advances scientific knowledge of how contextual stressors shape
police behavior and, in turn, indirectly affect community members’ collective
life and work outcomes. To do so, it investigates institutional, situational,
and psychological factors that are associated with law enforcement in heavily
policed communities. Moreover, this project provides racioethnic comparisons
among members of urban area communities to better understand the differential
impact of policing behaviors. A potential benefit of this project would be to
help account for previously documented racial differences in community health
and job performance. Results will draw attention to the spillover effects of
police-community relations to public and private organizations embedded within
these communities, potentially increasing the urgency of organizational leaders
to take action to support more effective police-community partnerships for the
good of the labor force and society. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary aims are
to: investigate (1) how job insecurity, media attention, reform efforts, and
consciousness of the “racist” stereotype among law enforcement shape patterns of
policing in Black communities; (2) how patterns of policing behavior, in turn,
impact psychophysiological health, well-being, and experiences of discrimination
within Black communities; and, (3) how adverse community outcomes spillover to
the civilian work domain to affect Black employees’ workplace performance.
Timely data collection will allow this project to produce: (1) a multi-level
understanding of the impact of external stressors on policing and community
outcomes, (2) a framework for understanding the joint officer-community
experience, and (3) recommendations for policing and organizational policy that
align the joint experiences of officers and community members. Using a mixed-
method approach, the project will incorporate thematic interviews of public
officials, self-report police and community data, secondary analysis of public
data, and secondary accounts of policing behavior scraped from the internet.
Findings will inform theories on stress, identity, the work-life interface,
experiences of discrimination, and organizational
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.