* 2041294
* Annual REU Site Intersection of Linguistics, Language and Culture Conference
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Isabelle Barriere, Molloy College
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 58,364.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The NSF REU ILLC annual 2021 and 2022 conferences will
coincide with and complement the 2nd Cycle of the NSF Research Experience for
Undergraduates Site 'Intersection of Linguistics, Language and Culture' (ILLC)
housed by Molloy College, Long Island and CUNY Brooklyn College, both in New
York. The conferences aim at increasing diversity among emerging researchers and
among the projects undertaken by future researchers and professionals in
linguistics and speech-language-communication sciences. They will involve five
components: (i) undergraduate projects by members of cultural, ethnic and
linguistic groups underrepresented in higher education, with a focus on novel
findings in their language/language varieties, and on STEM-based innovative
methodologies and explanations of broader impacts; (ii) participation of high
school students so that they discover linguistics and the research areas and
professions associated with linguistics, before they enter college; (iii)
empowerment of undergraduate and high school students, especially members of
groups underrepresented in higher education, to become emergent scholars and
valued members of higher education institutions in the process of the
organization of the conference; (iv) dissemination of the conference oral and
poster presentations during and beyond the conference through two complementary
platforms: open-access publications of proceedings and video presentations; (v)
recognition and valuing of college and high school participation and work
through the competitive awarding of travel expenses and prizes. The proposed
conferences will disseminate novel findings that reflect the U.S. and world
cultural, ethnic and linguistic diversity and that are needed to advance the
field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed conferences will have three sets of
broader impacts including (i) the clinical, educational and technological
implications of the findings that emerge from the projects conducted by the NSF
REU ILLC site fellows and the poster presenters, (ii) the increase of diversity
of the workforce among researchers and professionals in speech-language-hearing-
communication sciences, (iii) the increase of knowledge in the general
population of the significance of linguistics, the fact that it is a STEM-based
discipline and that various professional sectors exhibiting rapid growth value
both linguistic training and the ethnic, cultural and linguistic heritage of
minority students from groups underrepresented in higher
education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.