* 2041577
* SBIR Phase I:  Implementing AL-enhanced Machine-Learning for Advanced Electrochemical Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Daniela Blanco, SUNTHETICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 06/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to demonstrate feasibility of machine-
learning (ML)-guided experimental campaigns that predict, assess, and optimize
electroorganic transformations with small experimental datasets. Companies
across the chemical industry have pinpointed electrochemistry as a promising
avenue for the implementation of more sustainable and energy-efficient
manufacturing processes. However, the large cost and effort required in new
process development hinders the implementation of electrochemical technologies.
ML predictive algorithms can be a powerful tool to accelerate the development
and optimization of more sustainable chemical processes, but repeatedly require
large amounts of experimental data to train the models. These large datasets are
often unavailable and expensive to obtain, which significantly limits the use of
ML in the chemical industry. The project will advance future manufacturing by
enabling the development of new and more sustainable chemical production routes
using 50% less experiments, ultimately unlocking the manufacture of new
molecules, medicines, and materials in societal applications. Moreover, by
reducing the number of experiments required, the technology will significantly
lower emissions and resource consumption in the
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project introduces a ML platform
capable of guiding experimental campaigns and data collection to enable accurate
predictions of reaction behavior with the smallest possible datasets. The
approach relies on the combination of chemical engineering and ML knowledge to
overcome the optimization limitations found within each field. It will be
validated using the electrooxidation of p-methoxytoluene as a model reaction and
will elucidate the fundamental limitations and strengths of ML predictive models
capturing the complexity of physical systems with small
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.