* 2041928
* I-Corps: Solution-Processed, High-Quality Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) Films for Perovskite-Based Tandem Solar Cells
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Dawen Li, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of new solar cells. Lightweight and flexible solar panels are
attractive because of high power output, and easy transportation and
installation for a given space. Currently, such solar panels on the market offer
efficiencies of only 15%. The goal of the proposed technology is to provide a
light-weight solar panel with high power output and long lifespan that also may
reduce operational cost in electricity or generate excess electricity. This
project will explore applications for residential, agricultural, and other
users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a solution-processed, high-quality transparent electrode for perovskite-based
tandem solar cells. In perovskite-based tandem solar cells, transparent indium
tin oxide (ITO) thin films are employed to serve as the top contact and/or
interconnecting layer between top and bottom sub-cells. To realize low-cost
fabrication of perovskite solar panels through roll-to-roll printing in an
ambient environment, room-temperature solution-processed ITO is desirable.
However, with commonly used hotplate annealing, ITO thin films are subjected to
high temperatures for long durations, up to several hours at a time, to attain
high-quality film. Since a hotplate heats all stacking layers simultaneously,
the flexible substrates and perovskite absorber layer may be damaged because of
the limited temperature resistance. The proposed technology uses photonic
irradiation to achieve rapid and layer-specific annealing for transparent ITO
film without damaging the underlying stacking layers. Unlike hotplate heating in
which each layer shares the same temperature via thermal conduction, photonic
treatment may selectively supply energy to a specific layer through photon
absorption. The capability to achieve high-quality solution-processed ITO
enabled by rapid and layer-specific photonic annealing paves the way for large-
volume manufacturing of perovskite-based tandem solar cells by high-speed roll-
to-roll printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.