* 2041995
* CAREER:Entanglement in strongly interacting quantum liquids and gases
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Adrian Delmaestro, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2023
* USD 80,927.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award will support
research and education aimed at developing new theoretical techniques and high-
performance computer software that enable the exploration and measurement of
quantum properties of interacting quantum gases and liquids of atoms at low
temperatures. The laws of quantum mechanics are fundamentally responsible for
limiting the speed and efficiency of current computers by imposing a minimum
physical size for their logical components. However, the same laws can be
exploited to bring about exponentially faster computation and secure
communication by harnessing quantum entanglement as a resource for information
processing applications. Entanglement is a purely quantum property of a system
that has no analog in our everyday experience. It reflects connections between
the properties of a quantum system's parts, even after the parts become
physically separated. For example, a measurement of a specific property on one
part will instantly determine the outcome of a measurement of the same property
on a physically separate part. The PI will investigate the feasibility of using
quantum systems that can be easily produced in modern laboratories as sources of
entanglement that can be exploited for future quantum technologies. All software
developed as part of this project will be made available to the community on
public repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In tandem with the research projects,
the PI will drive increased enrollment in post-secondary science programs at the
University of Vermont by engaging with a diverse group of high-school students,
with a focus on students from low-income families. The PI will participate in
the Upward Bound college preparation program, and provide pedagogical lectures,
science career counseling, and summer research internship opportunities to local
high schools. To address the fact that Vermont is the only state in the country
not offering a Ph.D. degree in physics, this award will allow the PI to design
graduate courses on quantum computing, and spearhead a grassroots strategic
planning committee to advance the development of graduate physics programs in
the state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports research and education aimed at developing high-
performance computer simulation tools that will be used to determine the amount
of entanglement that can be extracted from strongly interacting quantum liquids
and gases. By quantifying this quintessentially nonclassical correlation
property in experimentally accessible phases of quantum many-body systems, their
feasibility and potential as an entanglement resource for quantum information
processing protocols will be evaluated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
the PI will focus on: i) providing quantitative comparisons with nascent
experimental measurements of the entanglement entropy across the Mott insulator
to superfluid transition of ultracold atoms in optical lattices, aiding in the
design of future searches, ii) discovering the amount of operational
entanglement in superfluid helium-4, a tabletop macroscopic quantum phase, iii)
exploring entanglement scaling in systems with long-range interactions and
deformed spatial boundaries, which have implications for the discovery of
universal, and potentially transformative, emergent physical phenomena. The
quantum Monte Carlo algorithms and open-source software developed during this
CAREER project will allow for the measurement and optimization of quantum
entanglement in a large class of ab initio Hamiltonians describing interacting
particles in the spatial continuum. These capabilities may contribute to
accelerating the design and construction of next-generation quantum
technologies. All software developed as part of this project will be made
available to the community on public repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
tandem with the research projects, the PI will drive increased enrollment in
post-secondary science programs at the University of Vermont by engaging with a
diverse group of high-school students, with a focus on students from low-income
families. The PI will participate in the Upward Bound college preparation
program, and provide pedagogical lectures, science career counseling, and summer
research internship opportunities to local high schools. To address the fact
that Vermont is the only state in the country not offering a Ph.D. degree in
physics, this award will allow the PI to design graduate courses on quantum
computing, and spearhead a grassroots strategic planning committee to advance
the development of graduate physics programs in the state.