* 2041340
* Collaborative Research: Ultrasensitive Nucleic Acid Sensing Tools Based on Cas Assays and Solid-State Nanopores
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* MinJun Kim, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 02/29/2024
* USD 287,403.00

The urgent need for rapid, inexpensive, and convenient methods to detect viruses
has been clearly evidenced by the onset of Covid-19, which caused the death of
over 2 million prople worldwide from mid November 2019 to mid January 2021, and
continues to take its toll on human life. The 2020 Nobel Prize winning
CRISPR/Cas technology, which can be used to rapidly detect DNA sequences in any
living organism, offers a promising approach. This approach has been pursued by
many companies, but none to date has been able to match the sensitivity of the
“gold standard” test (real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)), which
requires 4-6 hours for completion and costs ~$100 per test. Thus the goal of
this project is to develop a method for SARS-CoV-2 (the virus responsible for
COVID-19) detection that is faster, cheaper, more sensitive, and more convenient
than the methods presently used for SARS-CoV-2 detection. The project’s goals
will be achieved by integrating CRISPR/Cas assays with cutting-edge
technologies. Limitations of existing systems will be addressed using a number
of advanced analysis tools, advanced devices, artifical inteligence, and novel
nanomaterial probes to design an integrated nanopore-microfluidic device for use
in point-of-care (POC) settings that is ASSURED (affordable, sensitive,
specific, user-friendly, rapid and robust, equipment-free, and deliverable to
end users). Succesful development of this sensor platform will offer a wide
range of other uses, as the principles behind it may be applied to other
applications that are not related to SARS-CoV-2. The project creates excellent
opportunities for interdisciplinary research, as it combines biochemistry,
nanoengineering, photonics, and medicine. Outreach programs related to this
exciting project will be offered to K-12 schools, attracting young minds and
inspiring them to pursue science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a highly
sensitive and reliable nucleic acid sensing tool based on CRISPR/Cas assays for
SARS-CoV-2 detection. The research will reveal the cleavage activities of Cas
enzymes on a variety of composite nanomaterial reporter designs. Solid-state
nanopores will be optimized for reading the cleavage patterns of nanomaterial
reporters in the Cas assays using a deep neural network to classify the cleavage
signatures. Solid-state nanopore readout provides single-molecule quantification
and also identifies molecular signatures within the translocating molecules,
which has significant advantages over the standard readout methods of today
(fluorescence, paper-strip, colorimetric, and electrochemical readout). Once the
cleavage activities are understood, a variety of reporters whose cleavage
patterns correspond to specific target sequences will be designed.
Identification of the cleavage products will enable the development of an
integrated nanopore-microfluidic device for use in POC settings that will
demonstrate simultaneous nanopore and fluorescence readings of cleavage products
in multiplexed CRISPR/Cas assays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.