* 2041364
* I-Corps: Development of a rapid point-of-care test for coronavirus (COVID-19) and antibody testing
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Jin Montclare, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a rapid point-of-care (POC) diagnostic test for COVID-19 based on
a lateral flow assay (LFA). The goal is to decrease community spread of
infection and help mitigate the negative economic impacts of world-wide
pandemics. The proposed diagnostic may allow for universal access to testing of
both coronavirus infection and immunity via protein-protein interactions with
virions and antibodies at once as compared with using a polymerase chain
reaction (PCR)-based test that relies on time-consuming reverse transcription of
RNA to detect the virus only. The consensus among public health experts is that
safely emerging from a lockdown will require regular testing of millions of
Americans. Current testing technologies are limited due to a large percentage of
false negatives (up to 20%). Additionally, access to coronavirus and antibody
testing is limited in low resource settings that lack reliable electrical
services, running water, and diagnostic devices and personnel to operate them.
Although testing capabilities are increasing among currently employed
technologies such as at-home nasopharyngeal sampling, the creation of a rapid,
simple POC test has not been addressed. The proposed technology may decrease
community spread of infection and help mitigate the negative economic impacts of
the COVID-19 pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the translation of a lateral flow assay (LFA) diagnostic COVID-19 test, akin to
a pregnancy test, that will report the presence of both the virus and its
antibody in patient samples. Because LFAs employ capillary force on a polymeric
strip with detection zones, they are easy-to-use, eliminate the need for
specialized equipment, and may be carried out as a single step, reducing the
amount of sample handling. Using commercially available computational software,
detector proteins with high sensitivity and high specificity have been designed.
Preliminary experimental results confirm the high sensitivity and computational
results confirm high specificity. DNA constructs are concurrently under
development with optimization of LFA test strips. For precise, rapid and large-
scale loading, the requirements for aa multiplex lateral flow test strip (MLFTS)
process design from a commercially-available, drop-on-demand printer that will
accommodate the protein designs and facilitate scale-up and manufacturing will
be evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.