* 2041918
* EAGER: Condensation-based Capture and Quantification of Microdroplet-transmitted Viruses
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Constantine Megaridis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The recent COVID-19 outbreak that rapidly spread to become a global pandemic has
exposed a critical need for advancing the science and methodology of recognizing
airborne pathogen threats (e.g. aerosolized or droplet-carried viruses) in the
built environment. This EAGER project contributes to the technological
development of the capability to derive real-time quantitative information that
is needed to curtail disease spreading indoors. The research incorporates
fundamental principles of multiphase fluid transport, microfluidics, biochemical
detection and molecular biology, and combines them as a first step towards
designing portable, virus-sensing devices for assisting not only in the present
COVID-19 pandemic, but also in future outbreaks of this and other airborne
pathogens, whether viral, bacterial, or fungal. Such devices would be well-
suited for pervasive use in health care facilities, sports arenas, schools,
theaters and other places of public gathering, to monitor the sudden appearance,
presence and transport of novel viruses, all critical for avoiding spreading of
infection and decease outbreaks. Moreover, such devices would be of immense
value in real-time environment surveillance, which would be of the essence after
the economy re-opens. The work involves a graduate student and a minority
postdoc who aspires to be a future academic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objective of the research is to combine expertise in multiphase fluid flow and
particle transport with established DNA amplification and characterization
procedures, with the ultimate goal a portable, reconfigurable sensing platform
that collects airborne pathogens in their natural (wet) state and quickly
quantifies their presence in the built environment. The research features
atmospheric condensate collection in well-controlled laboratory environments and
subsequent DNA amplification and characterization techniques to produce
quantitative data on the presence and transport characteristics of airborne
pathogens (e.g. SARS-CoV-2 or other viruses) in indoor spaces. The approach has
the advantage of being flexible and reconfigurable, in as it can be adapted to
any viral threat that can be carried through the air.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.