* 2041384
* RESEARCH-PGR: Predicting Gene-Specific Functional Contributions to Maize Reproduction: A Machine-Learning Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2025
* John Fowler, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 02/28/2025
* USD 729,876.00

From a biological perspective, the success of flowering plants is intimately
tied to the process of sexual reproduction, facilitated by flowers and their
products, the male pollen and the female embryo sac embedded within the flower.
In agriculture, primary products such as grain and fruit rely on the success of
sexual reproduction. In particular, the ability of pollen to transmit sperm
cells to the embryo sac is critical to the production of the next generation of
seeds. In maize, the focus of this project, environmental stressors such as high
heat can lead to loss of pollen viability and subsequent crop disruption. This
project will utilize a novel imaging and automated computer vision system
(EarVision) coupled with a large set of easily assayed mutants to measure the
contributions of hundreds of genes to maize pollen function. Quantitative and
computational approaches will analyze available genome-scale data to help
predict gene function during maize reproduction and build an improved
understanding of the pollen genetics of this crop plant. The project will inform
approaches directed towards multiple agricultural goals such as improving crop
resilience or controlling germ line activity. In addition, the project will
educate students at high school, undergraduate, and postdoctoral levels in plant
genetics and quantitative scientific skills via outreach through summer camps
and inclusive research projects.

This project targets the two cell types of the male gametophyte, vegetative and
sperm cells, for a data-driven, systems-level investigation of genes underlying
their biological functions using mutational interrogation as a test of gene
function. Taking advantage of the haploid nature of pollen and a large set of
fluorescently-marked insertional mutations known as Ds-GFP lines
(acdsinsertions.org), the project will employ an innovative automated
phenotyping approach to generate measures of gene-specific contributions to
pollen fitness for several hundred genes. Machine learning and statistical
approaches will be used to analyze the resulting quantitative dataset,
developing integrative models to relate omics-scale datatypes, such as genome,
transcriptome, and proteome data, to the loss-of-function phenotypic outcome for
specific genes. The optimal model will be used to predict pollen phenotype from
genotype, and subsequently be validated via indirect and direct tests. The
project will also develop appropriate statistical methods to exploit the high-
content images generated via the phenotyping system, to address hypotheses
relating how altered pollen function can influence patterns in the progeny
population on the maize ear inflorescence. The project brings together three
Oregon State University faculty members with complementary expertise to support
its transdisciplinary approach: in plant genetics and development, in statistics
and systems analysis, and in machine learning and computational biology. The
project will train a postdoc in transdisciplinary application of computational
and quantitative approaches to a biological question as well as undergraduate
researchers in either genetic or quantitative approaches in biology in
collaboration with the Oregon State STEM Leaders Program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.