* 2041047
* Collaborative Research: The Chemistry of Riboflavin Biosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/02/2020,07/31/2023
* Audrey Lamb, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 07/31/2023
* USD 387,193.00

Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) is essential in all organisms, facilitating biological
reactions that include cellular energy production, photosynthesis, DNA repair
and response to oxidative stress. With this award, the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Chemistry Division provides funding to Dr. Graham Moran
(Loyola University Chicago) and Dr. Audrey Lamb (University of Kansas) to study
the ways enzymes function to in the critical biosynthesis of riboflavin. This
collaborative project will systematically determine detailed molecular
structures of and chemical steps catalyzed by these enzymes. The basic science
knowledge learned here may provide strategies for the development of
antimicrobial drugs. The experiments are the foundation for the training of
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers at these two institutions.
In addition, Drs. Lamb and Moran collaborate to co-write articles for the
American Society of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology magazine ASBMB Today.
These OpEd-style articles provide guidance on professional development that may
strengthen the scientific community and promote
inclusivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is undertaken to define
the structure-function relationships of the enzymes of riboflavin biosynthesis
(specifically RibA, RibB, and RibD). Riboflavin biosynthesis includes five
enzymatic activities that are unparalleled in nature. This pathway has been
studied in sufficient detail to establish the chemical transformations performed
by each enzyme and the salient characteristics of the enzymes. The focus of this
research is to define the mechanisms of the unusual deformylation reactions of
RibA and RibB and the unconventional multi-activity of RibD. The kinetic and
chemical mechanistic work (in the steady and pre-steady states) are supported by
structural biology investigations (X-ray crystallography). The results provide
valuable fundamental knowledge for the field of enzymology and future
biocatalysis research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.