* 2041789
* Discovery of Dynamic Mechanical Structures through Modeling and Analysis of Closed Chains using Homotopy-Based Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Jonathan Hauenstein, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 540,148.00

This project promotes the progress of science and advances national prosperity
and welfare, by accelerating innovation in legged robotics. The usage and
capability of legged robots has increased over the past years with applications
in industrial/construction settings and, more recently, to triage patients at
healthcare sites. Robotic limbs can be composed to incorporate closed chain
structures with potentially transformative benefits on their speed, force, and
stiffness capabilities. However, these benefits have so far not been fully
realized due to the computational complexity involved with the modeling and
analysis of the motions of closed chain structures. This grant supports
foundational research to propose, develop, and demonstrate a new class of
optimization techniques that are equipped to deal with these complexities. The
new techniques will incorporate homotopy root finding routines with the aim of
solving systems many orders of magnitude larger than the current state-of-the-
art. This research involves blending the engineering of legged robots with new
mathematical techniques. This multi-disciplinary approach will positively impact
engineering education with a unique interdisciplinary educational experience and
will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modeling of robotic limbs composed of
closed chain mechanisms is hindered by degeneracies that occur when exploring
variations in their defining kinematic parameters. These degeneracies include
workspace break-downs, locked configurations, zero link lengths, and changes in
mobility. Their existence thwarts efforts to analyze patterns of kinematic
parameters that lead to useful dynamic behaviors. To overcome these challenges,
techniques in optimization are used to discover useful mechanisms. In
particular, this project will develop new optimization techniques that leverage
the algorithms of numerical homotopy continuation. The resulting techniques aim
to gather nearly complete sets of minima in an efficient and coordinated manner
to provide both a global minimum, as well as a survey of useful structures
provided by exploring kinematic parameter variations. The research team plans to
develop the optimization algorithms and apply them to relevant robot limb
problems. The modeling and analysis techniques will be verified through
simulation, prototyping, and testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.