* 2041924
* RAPID: Advancing Museum-Community Conversations that Intersect STEM and Racial Justice
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Joanne Jones-Rizzi, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 07/31/2021
* USD 199,411.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
The goal of this RAPID project is to better understand how an informal science
education organization and its STEM resources can partner with community groups
and their expertise to support peopleâ€™s ability to understand, process, and work
toward dismantling systemic racism. The project will draw from exhibition and
programming resources that have been developed and refined over almost two
decades of engagement with the topics of STEM, race, and racism in a science
museum context. Examples of STEM programming include data and data
visualization, how biology and environment shape behavior and perception, and
the use of technology to communicate. This project will build on previously
developed relationships in three regions to design and facilitate virtual STEM-
informed activities and conversations about race in each regional site. These
activities and training will support participants to better understand, process,
and work toward dismantling systemic racism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID
project is timely given the Covid-19 pandemic and the increased awareness of the
ongoing impact of systemic racism. The project will address the following
questions: 1) What kinds of virtual STEM-informed activities allow for community
members to explore, understand, or act upon the impacts of systemic racism? What
are key features of those activities, from the perspective of participants? What
are promising changes that community members report as a result of these
activities? How are science-based resources perceived, and how do participants
perceive they are learning STEM? 2) What supports allow the regional project
group members and museum staff to collaborate successfully, and what obstacles
slow that work down? 3) How do local collaboratives define long-term success of
their work, and how can they track their progress over time? The project team
and the regional project group members bring a range of experience in community
engagement, science education programming, and informal science learning
research. The project will develop this new knowledge for the informal science
education field and other local stakeholders through qualitative and
participatory research and virtual STEM-informed activities that are responsive
to the changing needs of community members. The project will begin in August
2020 as the ability to understand the research questions requires immediate
collection of data. Because of the essential nature of this type of research for
the informal STEM learning field, the team plans to analyze data and start
initial dissemination by the fall of 2020 with additional data collection,
analysis, and dissemination continuing as the project
progresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.