* 2041683
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Multi-scale movement behavior in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Andrea Baden, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 25,140.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Movement is a fundamental aspect
of primate life, as it is key to survival, reproduction, adaptation, and
evolution. At fine scales, movement affects individual survival and reproduction
through its role in foraging behavior, predator avoidance, and mate acquisition,
while larger scale movement can influence local adaptations and speciation via
its role in dispersal, population connectivity, and gene flow. This doctoral
dissertation project investigates how fine and large-scale movement decisions in
primates reflect spatial and temporal variability in their environment. The
research provides important insight regarding human land use and its effects on
primate movement, providing local reforestation practitioners key information to
help direct their conservation efforts. Moreover, the project strengthens
research infrastructure and contributes to the education and training of
students, including individuals from groups underrepresented in STEM, and the
general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To evaluate environmental impacts on
ruffed lemur multiscale movement, this project has two main objectives: (1) to
assess how fine-scale movement varies through time and along an ecological
disturbance gradient at four research sites; and (2) to examine how historic and
contemporary environmental variation in the broader region explains large-scale
movement and dispersal in the species. The investigators quantify fine-scale
environmental differences across the disturbance gradient by using botanical
surveys, monitoring monthly food availability, and assessing three- dimensional
forest structure with drones. Investigators track lemur movement at each site
with GPS collars; this information lets investigators identify aspects of forest
structure (e.g., tree canopy cover and connectivity) that influence lemur
habitat use. Large-scale landcover, land change, and forest structure is
quantified with botanical surveys and classification of satellite images. The
investigators use population genetic assessments to quantify lemur dispersal
patterns throughout the region, followed by landscape genetic techniques to
identify which environmental variables drive dispersal patterns in this species.
Overall, this project clarifies how environmental variation and habitat change
have influenced and continue to influence fine- and large-scale lemur movement
and habitat use. Therefore, the insights derived from this project provide
foundational information by which to evaluate environmental drivers of primate
evolution at multiple levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.