* 2041140
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Human-centered, integrated mobility for disadvantaged communities in the San Diego region
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Henrik Christensen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

Access to transportation has a significant effect on the quality of life for a
region’s residents by shaping access to jobs, education, housing, services, and
recreational opportunities. Unfortunately, years of auto oriented transportation
policies and investment decisions have left many low income and minority
neighborhoods with limited access to social and economic opportunities. In
partnership with the San Diego Association of Governments (SANDAG), San Diego’s
regional transportation planning agency, and several Community Based
Organizations (CBOs), this project will address these shortcomings with a Human
Centered Design (HCD) approach to integrate mobility services in disadvantaged
communities. In Stage 1, the project will assess the challenges and feasibility
of an integrated mobility service with several representative communities.
Working with CBOs, the project team will deploy HCD techniques such as day-in-a-
life interviews, real-world observations, questionnaires and wearable sensors in
several disadvantaged communities. Working with SANDAG, the project team will
employ data-driven methodologies including the analysis demographic data,
transportation services data, survey data and transportation modeling in these
same communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's primary research
objective is to assess the integration of these techniques and their utility in
understanding of the needs of disadvantaged communities and in formulating
solutions that are both responsive and feasible. In Stage 2, the project will
implement an integrated mobility pilot in one of these communities that is
responsive to the real needs of the community, that addresses the long-term
strategic plan for transportation and sustainability in the region, and can be
expanded to other communities in the region. The project team anticipates that
the pilot will demonstrate improved access to employment, recreation, shopping,
education and public transit via the integration of mobility services including,
for example, pooled ride-hailing, neighborhood electric vehicles, microtransit,
e-scooters, e-bikes, and carshare. The project intends not only to address needs
in particular San Diego communities, but also to inform SANDAG’s planners about
the types of services, incentives, and operating models that are needed to
ensure alignment with a community’s needs as they implement a bold vision of the
2021 Regional Plan known as the “5 Big Moves”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is in response to Track A – CIVIC Innovation Challenge - Communities and
Mobility a collaboration with NSF and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.