* 2041443
* CAREER: Investigating Host Response in the Pathogenesis of FV3 (Ranavirus sp) in Wood Frogs, Rana sylvatica (Lithobates sylvaticus)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Maria Forzan, Long Island University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,145,610.00

Amphibians worldwide are experiencing unprecedented population losses, with some
scientists wondering if the earth is at the beginning of the 6th mass
extinction. Infectious diseases are a significant threat to amphibian survival.
Ranavirosis is caused by Frog Virus 3 (FV3), and causes disease and death in
wild and captive amphibians worldwide. FV3 infections of wild tadpoles often
result in die-offs of populations reaching close to 100% mortality, a rate that
significantly impacts the stability of future wild frog populations. If RV3
moves into captive amphibian populations, it jeopardized breeding programs of
endangered species. There must be an understanding of FV3’s pathogenesis (how
infection develops in the host) to mitigate ranavirosis. Pathogenesis of FV3 is
influenced by many things including: the amphibian’s immune response to
infection, and environmental factors linked to the amphibian’s life history,
such as sharing habitat with species that serve as virus reservoirs (carriers)
or living under unfavorable conditions. This CAREER award will investigate the
pathogenesis of FV3 in wood frogs, a native frog species severely affected by
outbreaks of ranavirosis. It focuses on the frog’s response to infection, the
effects of environment (temperature changes), stress, and presence carriers on
infection outcomes. This research funds basic research whose findings will
inform decisions in management of wild and captive amphibians. Training of
graduate students in this research area will also prepare the next generation of
STEM researchers for the workforce. In addition, there are outreach activities
to inform the general public about FV3 and frogs to help educate people about
current threats to wildlife.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
OVERVIEW&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is theorized that FV3 introduction into a naïve
population of wood frogs (Rana sylvatica) will result in local extinction within
5 years. The investigator’s central hypothesis is that the life history (biology
and ecology) of the host, its immune response, and the environment it inhabits
will determine the outcome of FV3 infection. The PIs previous work found that
survivors of sublethal FV3 infections (like green frogs, Rana clamitans) may
become long-term carriers of the virus. Thus, environments with green frogs may
be associated with ranavirosis tadpole mortalities in wild populations. The
proposed research will determine the pathogenesis of infection in tadpoles,
disentangle the relationship between (putatively) resistant species (green
frogs) and highly susceptible ones (wood frogs); determine if long-term carriers
develop when individuals survive infection; characterize the cellular and/or
humoral immune response to FV3 infection in adult wood frogs; and determine
whether subclinical disease provides protection to re-infection. The work will
involve experimental infections of wild-caught, lab-raised, tadpoles and adults,
determination of LD50 doses, histopathological examination of affected animals,
application of immunohistochemical and molecular labeling (in situ
hybridization) techniques to detect target cells/tissues, hematological
evaluation of cellular and humoral immune responses, and determination of the
effect of corticosteroids on those responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.