* 2041250
* Collaborative Research: BEAR-oNS: Biogenic Emissions and Aerosol Response on the North Slope
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Kelley Barsanti, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 02/29/2024
* USD 220,048.00

Climate in the Arctic is changing at a rapid pace. When vegetation reacts to
these changes, chemicals called biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOCs) can
be released into the atmosphere. This project seeks to investigate how climate
change affects the quantity and type of BVOCs released into the atmosphere and
the chemical reactions these BVOCs undergo in the Arctic atmosphere. The
investigators will accomplish their project goals through fieldwork on the North
Slope of Alaska (NSA), collection and laboratory analysis of emission and
atmospheric samples, and modeling of potential emissions and chemistry. For this
project to have broad impacts, we will engage with students at Iḷisaġvik College
(Alaska’s only tribal college), Baylor University and minority-serving
University of California-Irvine and University of California-Riverside, local
K-12 schools, and the broader scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
is an integrated field experiment and modeling project focused on quantifying
biogenic emissions from tundra vegetation and subsequent organic aerosol
production. The project activities include targeted field campaigns across the
North Slope of Alaska, laboratory analysis, and modeling. Specifically, the
project intends to (1) Measure the release of volatile organic compounds by
vegetation (biogenic VOC) under different environmental conditions (2) Model
summer chemistry of BVOCs and (3) Measure the concentrations of BVOCs and their
secondary organic aerosol products during field campaigns on the North Slope of
Alaska. This work will culminate in (4) building a predictive understanding of
how vegetation type and seasonal and climate variations across the North Slope
of Alaska controls BVOC emissions and subsequent aerosol formation. By
quantifying the relationships among physical and biological drivers for current
vegetation emissions, this project will significantly advance predictions of the
impacts of changing climate and vegetation on future vegetation emissions and
organic aerosol composition and concentrations. Finally, this research will have
broader impacts through: (1) Engaging with students at Iḷisaġvik College; (2)
Training students at Baylor and minority-serving University of California-Irvine
and University of California-Riverside; (3) K-12 outreach in local schools at
UCI; and (4) Promoting transdisciplinary discussion of the impacts of changes in
Arctic vegetation emissions on the atmosphere with a scientific
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.