* 2041496
* Impact of upper-plate splay faults on accreting-sediment stress state and on megathrust strength and fluid budgets
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Demian Saffer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 292,433.00

Earth’s subduction plate boundaries form where two tectonic plates converge.
This creates a shallowly dipping interface as one plate (the subducting plate)
descends beneath the other (overriding plate). This interface, also known as the
subduction megathrust, produces some of the largest, most destructive and
tsunamigenic earthquakes. Global examples include offshore Oregon-Washington
states, offshore Alaska (Aleutians), Japan, New Zealand, and Costa-
Rica–Nicaragua. The strength of the megathrust depends on the pore-fluid
pressure in the Earth. Forces associated with subduction tend to increase fluid
pressures at the megathrust. However, when a fault in the upper plate links the
megathrust to the seafloor (splay fault), it can establish a path that drains
excess pressures. This locally increases the megathrust strength, potentially
promoting earthquakes. A number of subduction zones with splay faults have
hosted tsunamigenic earthquakes. Additionally, splay faults transmit fluids from
the plate interface to the seafloor, facilitating the transport of chemical
species and cycling of elements. This process can potentially sustain biological
communities at the seafloor. Here, the researchers study the effect of splay
faults on the megathrust and sediments. They use numerical models that simulate
the spatial and temporal evolution of a subduction zone. The models employ
sediment-behavior laws that quantify the coupled interactions between fluid
flow, deformation, and strength. The study outcomes provide insights on the
mechanisms that govern the transition from aseismic (no earthquake) to
seismogenic (earthquake) behaviors. They help improving earthquake and tsunami
hazard assessment near subduction zones. They improve the understanding of
volatile cycling and fluid flow. This project supports an early-career female
scientist and one graduate student trained in an interdisciplinary context
between geoscience and engineering geomechanics. It integrates field
measurements, experiments, and modeling. It is funded by both the Geophysics
program and the Marine Geology and Geophysics program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the researchers develop large-strain, forward geomechanical
models. They investigate whether splay faults limit the upper plate’s strength
and lead to low differential stress and lateral heterogeneity in both horizontal
stresses and sediment strength. They test the hypothesis that drainage along
splay faults leads to heterogenous megathrust strength and mechanical properties
and enhances dewatering rates. Their modeling approach 1) captures the large-
strain evolution of a subduction system, 2) generates discrete faults, 3)
couples the full stress tensor to deformation and porous fluid flow, and 4)
simulates transient flow both along faults and in the sediment matrix. The
models are constrained using published data from field measurements and
laboratory experiments. Expected results include the full stress tensor, pore
pressure, and porosity of sediments, as they are consumed into the subduction
zone. Model outputs provide quantitative predictions of permeability, porosity
and density, elastic moduli, strength, and seismic velocity/impedance at the
plate interface, as well as seepage rates at the seafloor. Overall, the project
results provide quantitative insights on the coupled processes of faulting,
deformation, and fluid flow. More broadly, the project provides the foundation
for a technical approach to address geological systems where large strains, pore
fluids, sedimentation, and faulting interact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.