* 2041395
* CAREER: Characterizing molecular mechanisms that drive life cycle transitions in the African trypanosome
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Danae Schulz, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 05/31/2026
* USD 343,611.00

The purpose of this project is to understand how parasites adapt to different
environments as they move between organisms. The African trypanosome is an
example of one such parasite that moves between the blood of infected animals
and the tsetse fly. When a tsetse fly bites a human or a hooved animal,
parasites are transferred to the bloodstream and cause a fatal disease called
African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness). Understanding how the parasites
adapt to each environment is important for understanding the dynamics of
infection in regions where the disease is endemic. In addition, because African
trypanosomes diverged very early from other well studied model organisms,
understanding the gene regulation that occurs as parasites adapt to different
environments will shed light on how gene regulatory systems evolved. The study
of parasite adaptation in a research lab setting will provide opportunities for
first- generation high school students and first year college students
underrepresented in STEM fields to forge close connections with a research
mentor, which is important for retention in the field. Students will also be
given the opportunity to pursue open ended projects on parasite adaptation in a
classroom laboratory setting, ideally increasing their confidence and interest
in joining a research lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The trypanosome (T. brucei)
genome is organized into large polycistronic transcription units of functionally
unrelated genes. No DNA sequence-specific transcription factors have been
identified, nor are there obvious promoter sequences. Histone modifications also
differ substantially from other eukaryotes. The lack of sequence specific
transcription factors in T. brucei have led some to hypothesize that they harbor
a ‘primitive’ version of the histone code. Despite these differences,
substantial transcriptome reprogramming is required to facilitate the huge
changes in morphology and metabolism that occur as parasites cycle between the
tsetse fly vector and the bloodstream of infected mammals. The molecular
mechanisms that drive these large- scale changes in the transcriptome are poorly
understood. The premise of this research project is that chromatin interacting
bromodomain proteins act as key modulators of transcriptome reprogramming in
parasites adapting to a new host. This premise will be investigated by 1)
determining whether bromodomain proteins are required for maintenance of the
midgut transcriptome in insect-stage parasites using RNA-seq, 2) characterizing
the changes in bromodomain protein occupancy that occur during parasite
adaptation from the bloodstream to the insect stage using CUT&amp;RUN, and (3)
determining the knockdown phenotype of candidate genes proximal to areas of
dynamic bromodomain protein occupancy as parasites transition from the
bloodstream to the insect stage. This knowledge is expected to highlight
differences in gene regulation in a eukaryote that diverged early from better
studied model systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was cofunded by the
Symbiosis, Infection and Immunity Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.