* 2041242
* RAPID: The Changing Nature of Work: Dynamic Reconfiguration and Visualization in the Context of Covid-19 Contact Tracing
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,04/30/2023
* John Hollenbeck, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 04/30/2023
* USD 219,051.00

COVID-19 cases in the U.S. now total over 3.5 million with over 138,000 deaths.
The infection has also had a profound negative effect on the United States’
economy, and it has been estimated that two months of shutdown costs the overall
economy over $2 trillion. We are often presented with the difficult choice of
either sacrificing the physical health or the financial health of our citizens.
This could be a false choice, however, if the nation were able to quickly
identify, isolate and treat the specific locations where the virus was most
prevalent. Contact tracing is one potential solution to this dilemma. The
purpose of this research is to examine the degree to which an organizational
redesign intervention centered around collaboration and multiteam systems,
accompanied with a new social network-based visualization tool, can increase the
speed, accuracy, and meaningfulness of contact tracing work. This would allow a
surgical approach to mitigation, instead of a nation-wide shutdown, thus
facilitating an adaptive and efficient system that would allow economic activity
to take place in locations where there is not an unacceptably high level of
threat to public health. Findings from this project will contribute to both the
health and well-being of our society, as well as to our financial recovery and
economic competitiveness in the 21st century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contact
tracing has been used with diseases such small pox, tuberculosis, measles and
HIV, but the nature of Covid-19 often makes the process as traditionally
conducted unsuitable due to the infection’s speed and scope. This project
studies the adaptation of contract tracing work to these new circumstances. We
know that many scientific, business and military organizations seeking to
increase their responsiveness have redesigned the nature of work around team-
based structures that are flexibly arranged into temporally-bound and
reconfigurable multiteam systems. These reconfigurable structures allow
organizations to execute tasks that are larger in scale and scope relative to
what can be accomplished by individuals working alone or in small teams, but
also create opportunities for quick pivots in task execution. This project will
examine the impact of this intervention using a staggered cohort research design
and social network visualization. The project will sample actual contact
tracers, creating 40 15-person multi-team systems. Each multi-team system will
include three, five-person virtual teams. The teams will be provided with a
social networking visualization tool that will convert contacts into links or
ties. The project will examine the impact of this intervention on the
performance of units, teams, supervisors and the tracers themselves. Due to the
difficulty of collecting data on (a) large numbers of comparable multiteam
systems and (b) the time-sensitive granular social networks, the data generated
by this proposal will add critically needed evidence pertaining to the
development and deployment of reconfigurable structures, with important
implications for organizational theory and for addressing organizational
responsiveness in contexts that such as extreme events, including those beyond
the current pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.