* 2041081
* Collaborative research: Listening out for variation: An investigation of mono- and bidialectal listeners in the U.S.
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2021,11/30/2024
* Janet van Hell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 11/30/2024
* USD 328,487.00

Is knowing two dialects like knowing two languages? While research has shown
that listeners typically find it easier to understand speakers of their own
dialect, a large number of listeners have lifelong exposure to multiple
dialects, making them receptively bidialectal. This collaborative project
explores the behavioral responses (speed and accuracy in understanding speech)
and neurophysiological responses (measuring brain activity when hearing speech)
of bidialectal and monodialectal adults listening to different dialects. The
project specifically studies how context impacts what bidialectal listeners do,
testing the hypothesis that these listeners switch between a flexible, but less
efficient strategy when they are unsure which dialect to expect, and a focused,
more efficient strategy when a given dialect is expected. The project focuses on
receptively bidialectal listeners who have long-term exposure to their local
dialect as well as Mainstream US English. Participants are tested in both
university and community settings using a mobile laboratory (the Brain Bus),
expanding on the typical populations used in dialect processing research and
increasing participation in neuroscience research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bidialectalism is a under-researched and under-theorized
concept in linguistics. However, the effect that long-term exposure to dialectal
variability has on listenersâ€™ cognitive representations and strategies has
implications for understanding how listeners process variation in general, and
for conceptions of bilingualism and monolingualism as involving different
cognitive architectures. By combining behavioral and neurophysiological
measures, and building on recent developments in using neuroscience measures in
speech perception, the project provides foundational insights on the cognitive
and neural bases of bidialectal communication. The project manipulates dialect
expectations in two different ways (using visual cues to talker-identity in one
experiment, and preceding sentence accent in another), and to different degrees
(strong vs. weak vs. no dialect expectations), to examine how generalizable
context effects are, and to better understand where listeners draw boundaries
between dialects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.