* 2041092
* I-Corps:  Handheld electric toothbrush with built-in vacuum and a collection reservoir to reduce aspiration risk
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Vivek Kumar, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a powered toothbrush with built-in suction to decrease aspiration
risk during brushing. Pediatric, geriatric, and NPO (nothing by mouth) patients
are at high risk for aspiration during toothbrushing, which may cause lung
infections. Additionally, it has been recognized that a suction device
potentially may minimize the spread of oral pathogens. Current products that aim
to reduce aspiration risk by suction are bulky, either brush or vacuum (but not
both simultaneously) and have exterior collection bag or use vacuum suction
lines, which limit the use. An all-in-one portable device may be suitable for
broader use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a device for use in dental cleaning that is a handheld electric
toothbrush with built-in vacuum and a collection reservoir. Numerous studies
have established the benefit of electric toothbrushing, and also have shown that
concomitant aspirates cause lung infections. Using a vacuum while brushing has
not been addressed outside of the dental clinic/in-patient services. The
proposed design uses a disposable head with a hole to allow evacuation of fluids
from the oral cavity. An in-built pump and waste compartment differentiate
enable simultaneous brush head cleaning and suction or in-device fluid
collection. This proposed device provides a multi-purpose power toothbrush
incorporating an integrated high-vacuum functionality into a (battery) powered
toothbrush, providing for effective removal of saliva, debris, and fluids during
brushing. The removal of these potentially harmful and infectious materials aids
in the prevention of aspiration-related respiratory disease and potentially may
reduce disease transmittal through aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.