* 2041425
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: Resilience and Adaptation to Coastal Change Across Virtual Communities (C2-Virtual-C)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* David Corbett, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2022
* USD 119,310.00

This REU Pilot will contribute to developing an interdisciplinary, systems-level
understanding of the interplay between the environment and society in coastal
regions using a Team Science approach. The project will host REU students at
East Carolina University, Clemson University, and the University of Puerto Rico
at Arecibo to investigate and document how human actions positively or
negatively influence coastal resilience in the face of extreme weather events,
sea level rise, and population growth. The project includes important training
elements in Team Science that will prepare students to effectively address
problems in interdisciplinary work and graduate research settings, build their
ability to communicate science to the public, and take a systems perspective on
solving societal challenges. The Team Science focus of this REU is on remote
collaboration between student researchers. The professional development
activities and use of virtual collaboration tools to support Team Science
emphasized in the project will therefore also engage students in working across
geographic and cultural boundaries. These skills will prepare the students to
participate in research when direct contact between research team members is not
possible, including situations such as the current pandemic where isolation is
due to health concern and not just geographic or cultural factors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be recruited from universities across the
Carolinas and Puerto Rico through PR-LSAMP and partnerships with HBCUs and 2yr
Colleges to reach a wide population with varying demographic backgrounds and
limited access to research opportunities. REU Students will pursue research
projects across a range of interdisciplinary areas that drive the evolution of
environmental and social systems. Systems science concepts will integrate
projects across the REU, enabling students to identify and understand how
dependencies between earth science and other disciplines impact society. Team
Science and virtualization of collaboration efforts will engage REU participants
in (1) online cohort building and preparatory activities over the spring prior
to the REU, (2) an intensive week-long training bootcamp, and (3) seven weeks of
team-based research where students are divided between the three host
institutions. Professional development activities will be structured to enable
the students to overcome geographic and cultural barriers to collaboration,
thereby providing them a unique skill set to pursue global change research as an
effective interdisciplinary team member. The project will conclude with a
student Symposium where regional stakeholders will participate and view student
research videos developed using science communication strategies to engage the
public in their research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.