* 2041002
* I-Corps: Ceramic Membrane Systems for Produced Water Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,01/31/2023
* Seokjhin Kim, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a large-scale membrane system that will be constructed to
separate salts from produced water in a more energy efficient manner. Produced
water is water trapped in underground formations that is brought to the surface
along with oil or gas. The membrane system is expected to purify produced water
for commercial applications such as fracking or agriculture depending on the
needs of the community. The outcomes of the project will translate technical
knowledge to enhance the sustainability of produced water in many municipalities
and industries in an energy-efficient way. Using the proposed technology,
produced water treatment solutions may be provided to the 900,000 oil and gas
wells in the United States. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based
on the development of a ceramic membrane filtration system to clean produced
water. Disposal of salty and oily produced water in injection wells is not a
sustainable solution because it is costly and induces seismic activity. There is
a critical need for new methods to treat produced water in a cost-effective way.
Addressing this need will require a comprehensive, multidisciplinary approach
and the ceramic membranes may offer a chemically-robust treatment option by
reducing replacement and cleaning costs. The novelty of the project is in using
hydrophilic ceramic membranes to reduce the impurity concentrations in produced
water. The innovation of the proposed technology lies in the membrane
fabrication technique. The necessary setups will be installed at the site for
the treatment of produced water. The program is expected to define the
requirements needed to produce an energy-saving scaled-up membrane system for
cleaning produced water to levels suitable for reuse. A successful demonstration
of the program has the potential to increase water supplies and reduce
operational costs, energy consumption, and environmental impacts of produced
water management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.