* 2041006
* Aspire's Inclusive Faculty Framework Professional Development Series Building DEI Capacity in the INCLUDES National Network to Broaden Participation in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Travis York, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2021
* USD 91,099.00

As our nation faces new and persistent challenges, university faculty and
administrators, higher education leaders, and disciplinary and professional
societies are all grappling with the need to build skills to transform teaching
and overall institutional practices in ways that are more inclusive and
equitable. The Aspire Alliance, co-led by the Association of Public &amp; Land-
grant Universities (APLU) and the University of Wisconsin, Madison, has created
Aspire’s Inclusive Faculty Framework (IFF) which provides opportunities for
higher education professionals to acquire skills through three domains:
understanding identity, intercultural awareness, and relational competencies.
These domains, and the knowledge, skills, and attitudes associated with them,
comprise a transferable set of inclusive practices that are applicable across
the many roles faculty play within their careers (e.g., instructor, advisor,
mentor, colleague, leader).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Aspire
Alliance will host six, 1.5-hour synchronous, online seminars and develop a
facilitation guide that will support participants to create ongoing local
initiatives to further explore diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) in STEM.
The Professional Development Series, will bring together topic experts, members
of the broader NSF INCLUDES Network, other NSF initiatives, as well as
disciplinary and professional societies, to build DEI capacity through a
Community of Practice (CoP) model of regular interactions of people sharing a
passion and learning together. This capacity building professional development
approach has emerged from the development of Aspire’s Inclusive Faculty
Framework (IFF). The IFF flips the traditional faculty development workshop
model, which tends to focus on a single faculty role, to instead provide
opportunities for higher education professionals to acquire skills framed in the
context of understanding identity, intercultural concepts, and relationships
applicable across all the roles faculty play in their careers. The series will
begin in the Fall 2020 and conclude in Winter 2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.