* 2041312
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Tracking alternatives: Experimental investigations into focus and scalar inference
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Ming Xiang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2023
* USD 13,773.00

In human communication, conversational participants not only use language based
on their knowledge of sound patterns, word meanings, and grammar, but they also
reason about and draw inferences from their interlocutors’ language use. That
is, speakers communicate more than just the literal content of the words they
say; and conversely, listeners make inferences beyond what is literally said by
their interlocutor. There exist multiple well-known linguistic phenomena in
which the meaning conveyed by a sentence depends on things that are relevant,
but were not explicitly mentioned. These relevant things that were left unsaid
are called alternatives. This project will investigate how alternative-sensitive
phenomena are understood by hearers, and how they are processed in real time by
the human mind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project investigates
alternatives evoked in semantic computation (e.g. in the lexical semantics of
focus-sensitive expressions such as only) and pragmatic reasoning (e.g. in
scalar inference). The first research goal is to develop experimental paradigms
to track the alternatives that are evoked in these two empirical domains. To do
so, the project will utilize the psycholinguistic reflexes of alternatives and
alternative-sensitive expressions – building on paradigms used in existing work
on focus and focus alternatives. Second, it is an open question how and to what
extent context constrains the space of relevant alternatives. This project will
therefore also investigate the effect of context on the activation of focus and
scalar alternatives. A series of experiments using offline behavioral judgments
tasks, cross-modal semantic priming, and visual world eye-tracking will be
conducted. The general logic of the experiments will be to track the activation
of (focus or scalar) alternatives upon encountering a target: a focused element
or weaker scalar term. In both empirical domains, we will first look at the
effect of local context (i.e. sentence-level properties), and then at the effect
of broader discourse context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.