* 2041484
* Upgrade of Research Equipment for the UNM Volatiles Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Tobias Fischer, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 208,049.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). It will build scientific infrastructure at the
University of New Mexico (UNM) to enable the measurements of the composition of
the noble gas helium in volcanic emanations and thermal springs. Currently there
are very few laboratories in the US that have the ability to make these
measurements in volcanic gases. The noble gas helium is used in the geosciences
as a messenger of information from deep in the Earthâ€™s interior. Changes in the
composition of helium emitted from volcanic vents and thermal springs have been
shown to signal the arrival of new magma into a volcanic system or the
accumulation of gas pressure that can lead to volcanic eruptions. This project
focusses on the helium composition emitted from the Valles Caldera in New
Mexico, a super volcano that produced a massive eruption about one million years
ago. This volcano still hosts a large magma body at depth and a system of
thermal springs in the crater. Samples will be collected at these springs
throughout the caldera and compared to recent earthquake and imaging studies to
understand better the dynamics of the Valles Caldera volcanic system. What we
expect to learn from the project can then be applied to other more active
volcanic systems to improve our ability to forecast volcanic eruptions to save
life and property. The project also supports education of traditionally
underrepresented groups in the geosciences by offering a 4-week seminar on the
topic of helium in the earth sciences and a field trip to a nearby helium plant
that extracts this valuable commodity for commercial uses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focusses on an upgrade of the UNM Volatiles
Laboratory to enable the analysis of noble gas isotopes in gas samples from
volcanic and hydrothermal systems. The electronics and vacuum system upgrade
will significantly expand our current analytical capabilities which are limited
to the relative abundance analyses of major and trace gases by gas
chromatography and quadrupole mass spectrometry and to carbon stable isotope
analyses by infrared isotope ratio spectrometry. The immediate application of
the upgraded laboratory will be to collect and analyze a large number of gas
samples from Valles Caldera, New Mexico to constrain the mantle volatile input
into the magmatic-hydrothermal system through space and time. The helium isotope
data collected for this purpose will be correlated spatially with newly acquired
seismic tomography data to elucidate the dynamics of the magmatic system under
the caldera. A temporal sampling program of gas discharges from the Valles
Caldera system will enable us to develop models that can eventually inform
processes leading to volcanic eruptions and improve our understanding of
volatile sources (crustal versus mantle) in large caldera systems. Our broader
impact activities include the teaching of an undergraduate seminar on the
utility of helium isotopes in the Earth Sciences as well as helium as a resource
in modern society. The seminar will target traditionally underrepresented
students from UNM branch campuses and offer the opportunity to visit a helium
plant to see first-hand the process of extraction of this valuable natural
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.