* 2041968
* I-Corps:  Air Quality Monitoring Based on Digital Inline Holography
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Lei Feng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to define the
requirements for the development of a new generation of indoor air quality
monitors based on digital inline holography (DIH). The physical pollutant
monitoring segment in the global air quality monitoring market is around $1
billion and is projected to grow rapidly amid and after the COVID-19 pandemic.
The proposed DIH monitor may identify pollutant types in addition to pollutant
counts and size distribution. The proposed DIH sensor also has a compact design
that may be used as wearable/portable devices or that may be easily integrated
into filtration systems both in home and automobiles for smart control. The
proposed technology may be further expanded for monitoring and characterization
of particles in a broad range of applications, including monitoring: outdoor
airborne particles, particles suspended in water, particle characterization in
atomization and sprays, particle processing, and high throughput cellular
analysis in biomedical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
explores the translation of machine learning-based digital inline holography
(DIH). A highly compact 3D imaging sensor may perform real-time, in situ
measurements of size distributions, shape, concentration, and other physical
properties of particles (e.g., droplets, bubbles, dusts, cells, etc.) from 200
nm to ~1 mm. The proposed technology may serve as a platform technology that may
be applied to monitor air quality. The DIH sensor may be used to monitor a wide
range of airborne pollutants including physical pollutants (e.g., smoke, smog,
dust, etc.) and biological pollutants (e.g., pollen, dust mites, house dust,
animal dander, etc.)distinguishing particulate pollutants types based on
particle shapes. At the conclusion of the project, the goal is to identify the
requirements for air pollutant monitoring applications and the need for this
technology in the broader particle diagnostic
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.