* 2041400
* SBIR Phase I: Automated In-Situ High-Resolution COVID-19 Wastewater-Based Epidemiology
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Joyce Wong, FLUIDION US Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project addresses the monitoring needs
via wastewater-based epidemiology of current and emerging viruses that pose high
risks to public health. With the rapidly evolving nature of the pandemic
situation and the recent emergence of the coronavirus variants, one common
concern is that the virus variants are more contagious than their predecessors,
and will likely spread quickly within communities without early detection and
warning. Other concerns are that future mutations may not be covered by existing
vaccines, in which case early monitoring through high resolution wastewater-
based epidemiology will become one of the only effective means of providing
early alerts of the presence of such mutated virus variants within local
communities. With a wide adaptation of the proposed instrumentation by
municipalities, large and small communities such as college campuses and senior
care facilities, the project enables the early detection and monitoring of the
current coronavirus and its variants during the pandemic. The technology can
also be extended to other emerging viruses with risks of community spread in the
years to follow, not only in wastewater but also in widespread environmental and
recreational water quality monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
is a highly-optimized reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (RT-qPCR) approach for in-situ sampling and analysis, and the
realization of a corresponding instrumentation platform that is applicable to
the early detection and monitoring of different viruses, including the current
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2), its variants, and other emerging viruses. The proposed
technology aims to reduce the time-to-result compared to current wastewater-
based epidemiology approaches while minimizing cost and logistics. The effort
will include the testing of several protocols that are amendable to adaption for
automated in-situ SARS-CoV-2 measurement, followed by the selection and
optimization of the most suitable one. The protocols will be subsequently tested
and validated using spiked samples, along with appropriate positive and negative
controls. The approach will implement, for the first time in an automated
device, the latest advances in molecular biology protocols, such as extraction-
free single-step RT-qPCR. The project strives to achieve the first in-situ RT-
qPCR available, with the potential to completely revolutionize the fields of
wastewater-based epidemiology, general environmental testing and source
tracking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.