* 2041982
* Collaborative Research: Atmospheric Formation and Implications of Secondary Organic Aerosol from Glycols and Glycol Ethers
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Christopher Cappa, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 35,092.00

The goal of this research is to improve the representation of volatile chemical
products (VCPs) within models that predict the formation and transport of fine
particles in the atmosphere. The use of VCPs such as consumer products,
pesticides, paints, and surface coatings can result in the emissions of volatile
organic compounds (VOC) that lead to the formation of ozone and secondary
organic aerosol (SOA). The results of this research will provide policymakers
with better information to make informed decisions to mitigate the air quality,
climate, and human health impacts from aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the PIs plan to perform chamber experiments to comprehensively
characterize the gas- and particle-phase oxidation products from the
photochemical oxidation of glycols and glycol ethers. This research will advance
knowledge about the fate of VCPs in the atmosphere and help to: (1) understand
the role of carbon number, molecular structure, and NOx on atmospherically
relevant formation of SOA from glycols and glycol ethers; (2) elucidate the
composition and formation pathways for gas- and particle-phase products from
photooxidation of glycols and glycol ethers; (3) determine the chemical
mechanisms and parameterizations needed to represent SOA and ozone formation
from VCPs in atmospheric models; and (4) identify the contribution and influence
of VCP emissions on the SOA and oxidant burden in the urban atmosphere using a
chemical transport model (WRF-Chem).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists in this
project will partner with the Outreach and Education Center at Colorado State
University to develop and share hands-on STEM kits for educators and middle
school students to learn about atmospheric chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.