* 2041303
* Broadening Participation at The Conference on the Mathematical Theory of Deep Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Adam Charles, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 01/31/2024
* USD 20,000.00

The Conference on the Mathematical Theory of Deep Learning (DeepMath) is a
unique annual meeting dedicated to a truly cross-disciplinary approach to a
fundamental understanding of the deep learning methodologies that are
revolutionizing machine learning both in academics and in industry. This grant
aims to broaden participation at DeepMath; a meeting where diverse researchers
across backgrounds and disciplines come together to develop a fundamental theory
of Deep Learning, and by proxy other large, distributed learning systems. The
central philosophy mirrors how neuroscience began with a mix of physicists,
biologists, psychologists, engineers, and mathematicians all interested in the
same quandary. By definition, the foundation of such an effort is in broadening
participation and maximizing diversity and inclusion to create a truly
egalitarian effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant funds new programs aimed at
ensuring that our community is accessible and welcoming to those from under-
represented groups through (1) fellowship awards, (2) speaker costs (travel and
lodging), and (3) broadcasting live streaming and video hosting to broader
research community. Specific programs include outreach via targeted advertising
and inclusion of members of these groups in the organizing committee, travel
grants, childcare grants for economically disadvantaged researchers, and plans
for a future mentorship programming collaboration with LatinXinAI and other
professional organizations. Assessment via questionnaires and demographic data
will determine which efforts succeeded most to continually refine these programs
for future years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.