* 2041972
* CAREER: Tunable topological states in twisted van der Waals heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Matthew Yankowitz, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2026
* USD 396,188.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The way in which electricity flows through a
material depends critically on its constituent atoms and their precise
arrangement. For example, although graphite and diamond are both composed purely
of carbon atoms, the former is a metal whereas the latter is an electrical
insulator. Each atomic layer of graphite consists of a perfect two-dimensional
lattice of carbon atoms called graphene. Synthetic materials can be created by
stacking a small number of graphene sheets atop one another with precise lattice
alignments and twist angles, thereby controlling the arrangement of all of the
constituent carbon atoms. These structures host novel electronic properties that
are dominated by strong interactions amongst the electrons and other quantum
mechanical effects. This project investigates new device architectures in which
multiple sheets of graphene are carefully stacked and twisted in previously
unexplored ways, and additionally develops experimental techniques to
dynamically control the properties and functionality of these novel quantum
electronic devices. The success of this project may lead to the development of
new quantum technologies for low-power electronics and quantum information. The
project integrates educational, training, and mentoring opportunities for
students in the rapidly growing field of quantum nanotechnology, including a
hands-on summer outreach activity for high school students and research
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Stacking and
twisting atomically thin van der Waals crystals atop one another can lead to the
emergence of flat electronic bands with nontrivial topology. These systems host
novel correlated topological states of matter that can be dynamically tuned
within a single device. The objective of this project is to discover new
correlated topological states in an assortment of structures assembled by
stacking mixed-and-matched sheets of monolayer, bilayer, or trilayer graphene
with controlled interfacial twist angles. This research utilizes low-temperature
electronic transport in order to probe the quantum anomalous Hall effect that
arises in these structures owing to the emergence of orbital magnetism and
topological Chern insulator states. Furthermore, this project employs a
combination of hydrostatic pressure, electrostatic screening, and electric field
tuning in order to achieve dynamic control of the Chern number â€“ the quantized
topological invariant characterizing the system. Developing new Chern insulators
with large and tunable Chern number presents opportunities for creating future
energy-efficient devices with dissipationless charge transport, as well as for
potential quantum computing applications. The research project and associated
outreach activities train a broad range of high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students in state of the art techniques in quantum
nanoelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.