* 2041788
* EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Advancing Cybersecurity Education to Human-Level Artificial Intelligence
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Fariborz Farahmand, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,777.00

All sectors of the national critical infrastructure are expected to apply secure
artificial intelligence (AI) in their daily operations, and benefit from AI-
based decision-making tools and AI-human systems. These outcomes require a
thorough understanding of human behavior in different environments. However, for
mathematical convenience, existing cybersecurity education approaches assume
humans always make rational decisions. Important factors, such as confounding
variables, are often ignored. In addition, there is an emphasis on learning to
conduct correlation and association analyses, and insufficient attention paid to
learning causation analysis. This project will develop and evaluate educational
modules that will prepare a new generation of engineering and computer science
(CS) students to develop realistic computational models of decision-making. The
proposed activities will advance cybersecurity education from association to
causation analysis and contribute to the goal of achieving human-level AI.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address two fundamental challenges in
cybersecurity, privacy, and AI education. First, the project will investigate
how engineering and CS students can be prepared to learn cybersecurity and
privacy behaviors computationally. Students will learn to apply advanced AI
methods to develop realistic computational models of decision-making that
address both affective and cognitive processes. Second, the project will seek to
understand how causal (vs. correlative) models in cybersecurity and privacy can
be developed. The project team will provide opportunities for students to
develop causal networks vs. traditional correlation networks. Course modules
based on this research will be implemented and evaluated in existing advanced
undergraduate/graduate courses at the Georgia Institute of Technology. The
project will assess the impact of these modules on students' understanding on
the role of AI in addressing cybersecurity and privacy issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by a special initiative of the
Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to foster new, previously
unexplored, collaborations between the fields of cybersecurity, artificial
intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.