* 2041436
* CAREER: Main-Group Element Catalysis Enabled with Outer Functional Spheres of Molecular Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Jianbing Jiang, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 03/31/2026
* USD 690,184.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Jiang of the University of Cincinnati will create metal-free catalysts
for carbon dioxide reduction and organohalide dehalogenation. The development of
inexpensive and robust catalysts is an important step towards efficient
production of chemicals and remediation of environmental pollutants.
Traditionally, expensive and rare elements are employed to prepare the catalysts
for small molecule conversion due to the high reactivity of the rare elements;
however, these systems suffer from toxicity, low abundance, and high cost. In
this project, the catalytic activity will be enhanced through the modification
of molecular environment around the catalytic active site. Professor Jiang will
actively engage a diverse group of underrepresented students in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines and the general
public in outreach activities focused on chemistry of sustainability. In
addition, Professor Jiang's group will develop and maintain an interactive,
open-source website for foot-of-the-wave analysis, a powerful technique for
evaluating the performance of electrocatalysts. The construction of the website
will start soon and be integrated into Professor Jiang's research website for
easy access by the community. The results of the proposed research will
contribute to the achievement of energy-efficient conversion of abundant small
molecules such as carbon dioxide and halogenated pollutants into value-added
products, which is both scientifically challenging and strategically important
for our society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore under-developed
main-group element catalysis and aims to provide both mechanistic insight and a
rational design framework concerning the roles of structural flexibility, pKa,
and the size of outer functional spheres in the catalytic activity of tailored
3-dimensional molecular architectures. The proposed study focuses on using
bifunctional ligands with redox activity along with outer functional spheres to
compensate for the fact that main-group elements lack outer shell d-orbitals.
Specifically, Group15-based catalysts using porphyrin ligands with a diverse set
of outer functional spheres will be designed, synthesized, and evaluated for
carbon dioxide reduction and organohalide dehalogenation. The catalytic
performance of the main-group element-based catalysts will be compared to
current transition metal-based counterparts. A combination of solution- and
surface-based techniques, in conjunction with density-functional theory
calculations, will be used to identify reaction intermediates and help elucidate
the catalytic mechanism. This research seeks to enrich the understanding of how
interactions between redox-active ligands with outer functional spheres and
Group 15 elements can be used as a strategy for bond activation, and how the use
of a ligand with an outer functional sphere enables Group 15 element
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.