* 2041914
* CAREER: The solution structure of lanthanide-extractant complexes across liquid-liquid interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* David Cantu, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2026
* USD 455,937.00

Rare earth elements, including lanthanides, are vital to clean energy, defense,
and consumer technologies, such as smart phones, wind turbines, lasers, guidance
systems, and medical contrast agents. For most applications, specific
lanthanides are needed in near-purified form. The purification process requires
separating the elements from each other. The separation is particularly
challenging due to the chemical similarity of the rare earth elements and thus
requires substantial amounts of solvent and energy. Efficient rare earth
separation processes are needed to ensure a reliable, sustainable supply of rare
earth elements for the United States. Liquid-liquid, or solvent, extraction is
the separation process by which most rare earth elements are obtained. The
effectiveness of solvent extraction to separate rare earth elements lies in the
selectivity of extractants, or ligands, to bind a particular rare earth element.
Enhancing ligand selectivity and extraction capacity for particular lanthanides
will improve the efficiency of the separation. This project seeks to resolve the
structure of lanthanide-ligand complexes in solution and determine the mechanism
by which ligands transport lanthanides from the aqueous to organic phase in
solvent extraction. The connection between molecular structures and mechanisms
at aqueous-organic interfaces with the extent and rate of rare earth solvent
extraction will be determined. This CAREER project will incorporate rare earth
separation research into an undergraduate chemical engineering separation course
and will expand efforts to promote chemical engineering in Nevada high schools.
The educational and outreach components of the project aim to bridge graduate
student research and chemical separations instruction, introduce undergraduate
students to the concepts of rare earth separations, and strengthen the chemical
engineering workforce development pipeline in support of Nevadaâ€™s continued
expansion toward technology-based employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With joint
support from the Interfacial Engineering program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), this project intends to generate
fundamental knowledge to determine the connection between lanthanide-ligand
complex structures in solution with their relative aqueous-organic solubility
(separation extent), as well as to resolve how ligand structure affects the
transport mechanisms of lanthanide ions (separation rate). The selectivity of
most current lanthanide extractants can be improved because it is based on size
exclusion alone, and lanthanide ion size differences due to contraction are
small. This project will investigate multi-acidic ligands as lanthanide-specific
extractants, leveraging their tunable binding strength arising from multiple
protonation sites. A combination of ab initio molecular dynamics simulations
with spectroscopy measurements will resolve lanthanide-ligand complex structures
in aqueous and organic phases at varying protonation states. Binding specificity
is necessary but not sufficient for effective lanthanide extraction; therefore,
the transport of lanthanide ions across the aqueous-organic interfaces will be
investigated as well. Classical molecular dynamics simulations with rare event
simulation techniques will generate free energy profiles of lanthanide-ligand
complex transport across aqueous-organic interfaces, which will be used to
determine relative aqueous-organic solubilities and mechanisms of ligand-
mediated lanthanide transport across aqueous-organic interfaces. Extraction
measurements will be performed as well to verify predictions. Structural,
mechanistic knowledge of lanthanide solvent extraction is limited, especially
for multi-acidic ligands whose protonation state change with acidity. It is
expected that the work in this project will identify the molecular
characteristics that could make multi-acidic ligands selectively bind particular
lanthanide ions and transport them to the organic phase. More broadly,
structures in solution are understudied in liquid-liquid separations, and
structural and mechanistic insights can lead to fundamentally understanding
structure-function connections in solvent extraction, an important unit
operation with a need for higher selectivity to improve efficiency and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.