* 2041401
* Exploring the Molecular Mechanisms of Symbiosis Stability in Reef-Building Corals
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Crawford Drury, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 723,890.00

Coral reefs are dramatically declining worldwide due to a combination of
threats, the most significant of which is thermal stress due to climate change.
Unusually high temperatures cause a breakdown of the symbiosis between the coral
host and its algal symbionts, resulting in an event called “bleaching,” named
for the characteristic white appearance of corals. Bleaching events are becoming
more frequent and intense, and often result in coral mortality, ultimately
compromising the structure and function of reef ecosystems. The molecular
mechanisms responsible for coral bleaching are unknown, and the goal of this
proposal is to identify such processes. The experimental and molecular work in
this project will be supported by internships of Hawaiian students, which is a
Broader Impact. Also, a Marine Biology Mentoring Program for female high school
students will be developed, which will helps participants understand tangible
pathways toward a career in science. Coral reefs are vulnerable habitats
identified by domestic and international organizations as conservation
priorities. Reefs provide important ecosystem services and coastal protection to
people around the world. This work will identify the molecular mechanisms of
coral bleaching, information that can help identify new ways to stop coral
bleaching. This project serves the NSF mission because it promotes the progress
of science. Since coral reefs are important for tourism, this research also
advances the nation’s prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
define the molecular mechanisms contributing to coral bleaching to identify the
causes of, and resilience to, bleaching. The project uses a framework in which
‘pre-conditioned’ Pocillopora acuta are used to examine short-term changes in
thermal stress at the molecular level that will help define signaling pathways
(e.g., NF-KappaB, MAP kinases) involved in the breakdown of symbiosis.
Concurrently, existing genomic and transcriptomic data from known Montipora
capitata colonies with a range of ‘fixed’ thermal tolerance will be mined for
genomic candidates which influence thermal tolerance. These two datasets will
provide targets for a recently developed siRNA knock-down of genes of interest
in corals, thereby fortifying correlative and descriptive studies with
experimental phenotyping via reverse genetics. Preconditioned P. acuta,
thermally tolerant M. capitata and any successfully manipulated corals will be
evaluated for DNA integrity during each experiment to describe the cellular
outcomes of bleaching and potential consequences of ‘improved’ bleaching
tolerance via human intervention. These aims will be supported by summer
internships for local students and by a Marine Biology Mentoring Program that
increases diversity in stem by providing hands-on experience in field and
laboratory settings for female high school students. This work will deepen our
mechanistic understanding of the coral-algal symbiosis and develop tools to
analyze, compare and diagnose thermal tolerance, which are critical for the
long-term persistence of reefs and the ecosystem services they provide. This
project is jointly funded by the Symbiosis, Infection and Immunity Program, and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.