* 2041897
* EAGER: Computer Progress and Economic Prosperity
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Neil Thompson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 06/30/2022
* USD 359,772.00

Besides contributing to U.S. productivity, information technology (IT)
improvements have been an important source of competitive advantage for U.S.
firms. This research project explores alternative sources of information
technology improvements that could drive U.S. economic prosperity in the future,
and identifies research and policy interventions that would be needed to
generate the improvements. The work combines techniques and content from two
fields – computer science and empirical economics. It applies new expertise, and
incorporates novel disciplinary and interdisciplinary perspectives. Many of
these analyses will also be the first of these types to be done, fulfilling the
EAGER goal of being exploratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project identifies
opportunities for computer productivity improvement as the contributions from
Moore’s Law ends, focusing in three specific areas: hardware, algorithms, and
software.&lt;br/&gt; - Recent roadmaps developed by the International Roadmap
for Devices and Systems (IRDS) and the Heterogeneous Integration Roadmap (HIR)
propose domain specialization as the alternative driving force for hardware
improvement. However, specialization also fractures the semiconductor market,
undermining the economics of chip production. The hardware component of this
project will examine how much specialization would be economical.&lt;br/&gt; -
The President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology has claimed, based
on case studies, that algorithms are more important than hardware for computer
improvements. The PI has recently created a first-of-its-kind census of
algorithm progress, and shows that such rapid improvements only happened in a
limited number of areas. The algorithm component of this project would map how
algorithms are being used, to understand how much algorithm progress is
benefiting users, who is benefiting, and how much this is changing over
time.&lt;br/&gt; - Machine learning (ML) has been producing substantial
benefits. However, much of this improvement has come from deep learning, an area
where economics could impact future gains. Continued progress will require
either better software performance engineering or new, more-efficient machine
learning techniques. The software/ML component of this project will explore the
potential for these approaches.&lt;br/&gt;Overall, this EAGER project will fill
an important gap in understanding of the technical, economic, and policy
implications of various approaches to computing and IT productivity improvement,
and provide a better understanding of the connections between scientific
advances, industrial policies, and economic progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.