* 2041872
* CAREER: From Analysis to Practice: Landscape-driven Optimization Algorithms for Deep Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Anna Choromanska, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 02/28/2026
* USD 312,018.00

Deep learning (DL) is a major driving force of tech industry, where it is used
for a plethora of problems such as image, speech, and video recognition, image
segmentation, and natural language processing. DL is also increasingly more
often used in physics, medicine, and chemistry, among other disciplines.
Training a DL model in any of these applications requires solving a mathematical
problem whose properties are poorly understood. Consequently, existing DL
training methodologies are sub-optimal and consume a large amount of resources,
time, and money. Our limited understanding of DL compromises the progress of all
public and private sectors that rely on DL technology, and limits its deployment
in new applications. This project aims at overcoming this limitation by
describing universal properties of DL systems that hold across a variety of DL
models and data sets. The acquired knowledge will be used to develop a new
generation of training strategies that are tailored to the DL setting and are
efficient, accurate, and scalable. New algorithmic tools will have a strong
impact on a wide range of applications and can be leveraged by US public and
private entities to shift to significantly more powerful computational learning
platforms in various areas of their AI-based businesses that require the
processing of large and complex data. Broader impact activities of this project
include (a) graduate and undergraduate curriculum development, (b) summer
research opportunities for high-school students via NYU Applied Research
Innovations in Science and Engineering program, and (c) knowledge popularization
via NYU Tandon ECE Seminar Series on Modern AI, organized by the investigator,
that is open to universities, high schools, and industry, and that is streamed
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is a multi-level approach
to explore the principles of DL optimization and generalization, and to develop
new generation DL optimization tools. First, the researchers will seek to
understand the relationship between the geometric properties of the non-convex
DL loss landscape and the generalization abilities of DL models. Next, the
researchers will characterize the training trajectories of common DL optimizers.
These studies will be essential for developing landscape-aware DL optimizers.
The obtained optimizers will be parallelized in order to be compatible with the
architecture of the computer clusters that are typically used to train large-
scale DL networks on massive data. The new parallel optimizers will accommodate
dynamic allocation of computational resources during training and will be able
to process extremely large data batches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.