* 2041813
* I-Corps:   Noninvasive detection of bladder cancer using ringing modality of atomic force microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Igor Sokolov, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a noninvasive diagnostic test to detect and monitor the presence
of bladder cancer and to assess its grade. In the U.S. alone, there are 800,000
survivors living under the fear of a high chance of recurrence (50-80%) from
bladder cancer. The majority of the patients require an in-office invasive
monitoring procedure repeated every 3 to 6 months. This procedure yields high
lifetime costs, pain, and possible complications from trauma to the urethra,
which leads to a low patient compliance rate (&lt;40%). The proposed technology
will provide seamless integration into the standard of care for patients who
undergo regular standard cytology as part of their follow-up appointments. The
goal is to provide a noninvasive, rapid, reproducible, high accuracy test that
is easy to perform and interpret.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a combination of an advanced imaging modality and
machine learning methods to process those images for the detection of bladder
cancer. The imaging modality utilizes the so-called ringing mode of atomic force
microscopy (AFM), which provides high-resolution images of the surface of cells
extracted from a patientâ€™s urine. Processing these images through machine
learning algorithms permits the assignment of a diagnostic score, which will
help urologist/oncologists to monitor recurrence and progression of the cancer.
The method may seamlessly be incorporated into the existing clinical practice,
by using cells currently examined in cell cytology. Cytology testing is a
noninvasive procedure that suffers from low accuracy when detecting cancer.
Preliminary results have shown that the proposed technology may have a much
higher accuracy (94%). This accuracy exceeds even the currently used standard of
practice, an invasive optical examination of the bladder
(cystoscopy).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.