* 2041741
* EAGER: Information Theory: From Classical to Quantum
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Richard Blahut, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 75,000.00

The proposal focuses on the emerging area of quantum information theory, which
is expected to play a major role in understanding the fundamental performance
limits for quantum computation, quantum cryptography, and quantum networking.
The PI will perform research activities that will allow him to bridge these two
topics. The results of the research will be published in a book that will serve
a broad range of students, researchers, and practitioners who are interested in
this important area. The research will provide an alternative perspective on the
quantum information theory, which will be of high intellectual value. It will
help connecting Physics and Information theory in a new way and will make
advanced physics concepts accessible to engineering students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal focuses on the emerging area of quantum
information theory, which is expected to play a major role in understanding the
fundamental performance limits for quantum computation, quantum cryptography,
and quantum networking. The project will advance our understanding of
semiclassical wave/photon models as well as their applications in the
engineering practice. The research will lead to the characterization of the
channel capacity of various modulation formats for semiclassical/quantum
channels. The project will lead to a seamless theory that encompasses classical
information theory, semiclassical information theory, and quantum information
theory under a single umbrella anchored by the concepts of energy and phase. In
addition, our understanding of this relationship will lead to new topics in
information theory with application to telecommunications, and new topics
relating to the many applications of quantum theory. The results of the research
will be published in a book that will serve a broad range of students,
researchers, and practitioners who are interested in this important
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.