* 2041597
* Building Capacity, Generating Knowledge, and Fostering Community to Define and Disseminate What Works in STEM Teacher Preparation for High-Need School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Travis York, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 3,485,220.00

The project aims to serve the national need of advancing research about and use
of evidence-based practices in STEM teacher preparation programs, particularly
to prepare teachers who can support student success in high-need school
districts. This project will build on and extend the efforts of the Advancing
Research &amp; Innovation in the STEM Education of Preservice Teachers in High-
Need School Districts (ARISE) network. This network connects Noyce Principal
Investigators, and the teachers they prepare, and stakeholders outside the Noyce
community who are engaged in advancing and using teacher preparation research.
The project will use a three-pronged strategy: building capacity,
generating/curating knowledge, and fostering community. Building capacity
activities will focus on research and evaluation, and will include proposal
preparation webinars and workshops, evaluator and faculty capacity-building
workshops for better research/evaluation data, cultivation of next generation
researchers, and a feasibility study regarding a shared database across Noyce
projects. Generating/curating knowledge activities will identify in gaps in
research literature and practice, and produce publications and related user-
friendly research agenda. In addition, blogging about implications of recent
research, commissioned papers on critical topics, and a STEM teacher recruitment
working meeting will further research generation. Project activities for
fostering community towards a culture of evidence will include enhancement of
aaas-arise.org and maintenance of nsfnoyce.org; ARISE Community Content Webinar
Series featuring multiple expert perspectives; and 2021, 2022, and 2023 Noyce
Summits for up to 650 attendees each.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the
American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) responds to the
pressing need to engage in collective work to transform teacher preparation into
a more evidence-based profession. Thus, the proposed activities are designed to
build on research and dissemination efforts to intentionally build capacity,
generate knowledge, and foster community towards what works in STEM teacher
preparation for high-need school districts. This project will connect the Noyce
Principal Investigators to, and build a wider research community in support of,
teacher educators, practitioners, and education researchers. Building on the
work of the NRC committees, NASEM Teacher Workforce panel, NSF Principal
Investigators, AAAS ARISE Initiatives, and related efforts, this project seeks
to provide resources, tools, and community for current and prospective
researchers who seek to expand the research base on STEM teacher education
programs and professional development. Teacher education programs that are
currently pursuing or may be inspired to pursue evidence-based changes in STEM
teacher education and leadership development programs will benefit from these
resources, tools, and community. This project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.