* 2041600
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The influence of the social environment on the infant skin microbiome
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Melissa Manus, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2023
* USD 25,192.00

The skin microbiome — the collection of microorganisms that live on the surface
of the human body — plays a critical role in regulating the immune system, yet
little is known about how infants first acquire skin microbes in early life.
Since microbes are transmitted between people, and human infancy is highly
social, interactions with caregivers may be a critical component of infant skin
microbiome development. This doctoral dissertation project examines how infant
social networks and specific interactions between infants and their caregivers
influence the diversity of microbes living on infants’ skin. Results of this
project shed light on the understudied relationship between social behaviors and
the infant skin microbiome, as well as laying the foundation for future studies
that connect early life microbial exposures to particular physiological
outcomes. Study participants, including mothers and other caregivers, will
receive personalized reports based on research results, including information
about their social networks as well as the structure of their skin microbiome
and how it compares to that of their infant. This project also contributes to
enhancing diversity and inclusion by training undergraduate students from groups
underrepresented in STEM research in skin microbiome laboratory methods and
statistical analyses. The project also has public health translational potential
with respect to infant wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike other great apes,
human mothers rely on additional caregivers, such as grandparents and older
siblings, for long-term assistance with infant care. Common infant care
practices, including holding and carrying, promote direct skin-to-skin contact
between caregivers and infants, suggesting opportunities for skin microbes to be
shared with infants. This project will investigate how social caregiving
influences the infant skin microbiome, with an emphasis on the microbial
similarity between the skin of infants and their caregivers. Researchers will
collect skin swab samples from infants, mothers, and additional caregivers, and
use microbial gene sequencing to characterize and compare the skin microbes
present in the samples. Caregivers will complete questionnaires that ask about
the frequency of specific practices that put them in physical contact with
infants. The researchers will use these data to generate social networks that
describe social relationships between infants and their caregivers, suggesting
potential routes through which skin microbes are shared with infants. This
project offers a novel perspective on the benefits of social caregiving to
infants, and the results will highlight the role that the social environment
plays in linking early life microbial exposures to health
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.