* 2041096
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Understanding Human Behaviors and Mental Health using Federated Machine Learning on Smart Phones
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Hai Phan, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 75,000.00

Understanding human behaviors and mental health are becoming increasingly
important for modern society. The ongoing outbreak of coronavirus (COVID-19) not
only further highlights its importance but also calls for immediate action. This
project will develop a federated machine-learning (FL) framework and application
on mobile device for understanding human behaviors and mental health. The
planned research will synergize interdisciplinary research and particularly push
the envelopes of federated learning and public health. This project will not
only provide an important and timely real-world application, health-behavior
monitoring and prediction, for the federated learning community, but also will
advance our understanding of physical and mental health through mobile devices,
and the impacts of COVID-19 to human society in a unique and detailed angle.
This project will integrate the interdisciplinary research results into courses,
and train students from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the project has two main components: 1) Data
collection and statistical analysis, and 2) Building federated learning
framework and application. In the first component, the project will collect
smartphone-based sensor data from student sub-population in both urban and
suburban areas along with other health related surveys and data. The project
will specifically analyze and determine what data collected from the mobile
phone can be the indictors and causal factors of behavior and mental health. In
the second component, the project will develop deep learning models to predict
human behaviors, physical and mental health conditions/trends over time, under
rigorous privacy protection. Specifically, the prediction models will be
developed in federated learning settings to train the model locally on the
device with differential privacy guarantees, without collecting sensor data to
the cloud. Finally, the project will develop a federated learning based behavior
monitoring and prediction application on mobile phones and will evaluate the
prototype system on the cohort of studies from first
component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.