* 2041614
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Establishment Of Social Ties In Traditional Rural Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Ann Merkle, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2023
* USD 15,661.00

The goal of this doctoral dissertation project is to study the development and
expression of social identity in past rural social groups during times of
social, religious, and political uncertainty. Previous scholarship on this topic
has focused on the role of empires and social identity in shaping urbanism,
material culture, economy, and local environment. However, the relationship
between rural and urban sites in the past is generally poorly understood. Better
understanding of how remote social groups negotiated and expressed their
identity during turbulent times can not only help understand the social
landscape of historic areas but also understand social group identity
maintenance in the present day rapidly globalizing world. How does one "read" or
understand expressions of social identity among ethnic groups as they occupy new
regions, such as in the context of global refugee crises? Increased
understanding of this topic holds potential for economy, politics, NGOs, and
much more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research asks if it is possible learn about
the social identity of those who produced an overlooked type of decorated
pottery by studying the development, change, or continuity of the pottery over
time and geography. Can one discern social signaling in their intentionally
decorated pottery? What are the messages and who are the audiences? Archaeology
and material cultural analysis tempered with social theory are important inroads
towards understanding the people who made the pottery, especially in the
framework a large and diverse collection of pottery from carefully excavated and
recorded stratigraphic contexts. The research will be conducted on hand-formed
painted pottery at museums and archaeological collections, which will then be
compared to an already-analyzed assemblage of similar pottery from an
archaeological site located in a region remote from major urban centers, yet on
an important trade route. Combining data from archaeological sites, museums, and
collections, this research will produce a dataset that will highlight the
importance of vernacular hand-formed pottery. The researcher will apply material
cultural analyses to critically address the large dataset this work will
produce. The project will develop upon new material culture analytical methods
while applying social network and statistical analysis to conduct comparative
analyses groups in order to understand how similarities and differences in
forming and decoration can reveal group expressions and affiliations at the
local and regional scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.