* 2041415
* EAGER: NewsStand CoronaViz: A Map Query Interface for Tracking the Spread of COVID-19
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Hanan Samet, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

With the rapid continuing spread of COVID-19, it is clearly important to be able
to track its progress over time in order to be better prepared to anticipate its
emergence and spread in new regions as well as declines in its presence in
regions thereby leading to or justifying "reopening" decisions. There are many
applications and web sites that monitor officially released numbers of cases
which are likely to be the most accurate methods for tracking the progress of
COVID-19; however, they do not necessarily paint a complete picture. To begin
filling any gaps in official reports, the project will develop the NewsStand
CoronaViz (abbreviated as CoronaViz) web application aimed at allowing users to
explore the geographic spread in discussions about COVID-19 through analysis of
keyword prevalence in geotagged news articles and tweets in relation to the real
spread of COVID-19 as measured by the confirmed cases numbers reported by the
authorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoronaViz users will have access to dynamic
variants of the disease-related variables corresponding to the number of
confirmed cases, active cases, deaths, and recoveries (where they are provided)
via a map query interface. They will also have the ability to step forward and
backward in time using both a variety of temporal window sizes (day, week,
month, or combinations thereof) in addition to user-defined varying spatial
window sizes specified by direct manipulation actions (e.g., pan, zoom, and
hover) as well as textually (e.g., by the name of the containing continent,
country, state or province, or county). The result is an animation and that also
supports zooming which means that users zoom in on a map they get more data
rather than magnified data as is the case in most existing systems. CoronaViz is
not restricted to COVID-19 and can be used for other diseases such as Ebola.
Having a system such as CoronaViz is useful should the COVID-19 pandemic
return.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.