* 2041878
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Advancing Reproducibility in Multi-Messenger Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Duncan Brown, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,999.00

This project advances reproducibility in multi-messenger astrophysics by
developing and sharing sustainable knowledge necessary to understand and use
published scientific results. Specifically, the project targets breakthrough
findings published by the First M87 Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) and the
Neutron star Interior Composition ExploreR (NICER) projects. Understanding how
reproducibility is incorporated in astrophysics workflows and sharing practices
in reproducible scientific software help enable open science across disciplines.
Codes, data, and workflows generated by this project enable researchers and
students at various levels of education to regenerate the same findings, learn
about the scientific methods, and engage in new science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
provides the astrophysics community with a transformative building block to a
roadmap for reproducible open science. Findings about the reproducibility
process of the EHT and NICER results are captured and disseminated through
documentation, data products, and methods used. Through new insights described
in publications, the project delivers recommendations on how results in
astrophysics can be effectively enhanced to provide reproducible, replicable,
and shareable scientific discovery. The project findings enable scientists to
reproduce published results beyond the targeted work and make the methods
visible to a larger audience including STEM students; the new understating helps
accelerate the pace of scientific discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.