* 2041327
* EAGER: Exploring Artificial Intelligence Techniques for Energy-Efficient Arrhythmia Detection and Identification in Connected Implantable Cardiac Devices
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* TAPOSH BANERJEE, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2022
* USD 286,000.00

Cardiovascular disease is one of the major causes of all human deaths. Irregular
heart rhythms or arrhythmias are one of the most common causes for
cardiovascular death. Arrhythmia-related cardiac morbidity and mortality can be
reduced by the implantation of permanent cardiac devices that are designed to
monitor the heart rhythm for serious abnormalities and to deliver immediate
therapy when necessary. In the United States, nearly 225,000 pacemakers or other
cardiac rhythm management devices (CRMD) are implanted annually. Device
manufacturers have recently started incorporating advanced features to make the
cardiac devices smarter and more connected. In the treatment of arrhythmia, the
identification of the specific nature of arrhythmia is critical. At present the
implantable cardiac devices have the capability only to detect the presence of
an arrhythmia not to identify which kind of arrhythmia. Because of this
shortcoming in current implantable devices, it is possible that they may
administer the wrong corrective measure for the type of arrhythmia. This lack of
specific treatment can have devastating consequences. Thus, energy efficient
arrhythmia detection and identification is critical to next generation
implantable cardiac devices. The results of this research work will have the
potential to significantly impact the way patients suffering from arrhythmia are
diagnosed and treated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRMDs are severely energy
constrained devices. Any new added features will drain more charge from the
battery and will reduce the battery life of the implanted cardiac devices. In
this research, the team will explore energy-efficient novel artificial
intelligence (AI) techniques for real-time detection and identification of
arrhythmia in connected smart implantable cardiac devices. Further, the
feasibility of ultra-low power hardware implementation of the developed
algorithms will be explored. The main novelty of this research lies in using
statistical models and algorithms and in using energy efficient deep neural
networks (DNNs) for arrhythmia detection and identification. The developed AI
algorithm hardware can be optimized for energy efficiency by reduction of
computation size and by reduction of number of computations. The research
results are expected to enable the cardiac device manufacturers to develop the
next generation of implantable cardiac devices capable of identifying
arrythmias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.