* 2041782
* SBIR Phase I:  Light Emitting Diode Pixel Circuit Incorporating Thin Film Electronics Based on Amorphous Metals
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Sean Muir, Amorphyx Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
new circuit for controlling micro light emitting diode (LED) and organic light
emitting diode (OLED) flat panel displays with variable refresh rate. Variable
refresh rate OLED displays are a rapidly growing area for the flat panel display
industry and they currently sell for a 79% premium over standard OLED displays.
The 2021 market for variable refresh rate OLED displays is currently estimated
to be 191 million units with an average selling price of $125, for a total
served market of roughly $22 billion. This innovation has the potential for
broad societal impact because flat panel displays are now ubiquitous, and
variable refresh rate technology enables them to reduce significantly power
consumption while improving performance. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project stems from the novel pixel control circuit being developed
to enable variable refresh rate operation of flat panel displays. This circuit
uses amorphous metal non-linear resistor and amorphous metal thin-film
transistor devices to reduce leakage current and simultaneously increase speed.
The research objectives outlined in the project are focused on the development
of a proof-of-concept prototype to demonstrate circuit performance. They include
development of a prototype layout, process flow, simulations, as well as
fabrication and testing of display prototypes. The anticipated technical result
is a simple small-area low-resolution display that demonstrates the feasibility
of the technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.