* 2041991
* STTR Phase I:  Advancing Health Equity using Interactive Condition Assessment and Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,09/30/2022
* Aziza Ismail, LITERASEED, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 09/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to build a condition assessment and
monitoring platform that leverages artificial intelligence (AI) for intelligent
decision support to expedite diagnosis and facilitate personalized therapy
solutions. Currently, patient history data is obtained verbally, and poor health
communication between clinician and patient potentially causes 78% of
misdiagnoses, resulting in 80,000 avoidable hospital deaths and $750 billion in
costs to the US economy each year. Language barriers exacerbate this situation
significantly, increasing the risk of severe and frequent adverse outcomes by
49%. Patients with cultural, language, and low health literacy are twice as
affected. The proposed work has three major technical objectives: (1) develop an
interactive visually-supported healthcare data capture user interface (UI) to
overcome communication and language barriers, (2) develop an AI-based risk
assessment engine to communicate symptoms to the provider for triage decisions,
and (3) leverage predictive analytics to recommend appropriate treatment options
and develop a visualization-based condition monitoring and management tool. The
proposed data collection and AI-powered provider decision support platform will
empower patients and providers by enhancing communication, improving health
outcomes, and reducing healthcare costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is designed for
accessibility across all levels of literacy and is language-agnostic. The
platform’s digitally-native, cloud-based approach allows it to be scalable for
widespread impact and faster impact. The frontend app captures important patient
information and symptoms before the patient exam and summarizes the patient
self-report in an easily readable format for the clinician. The clinician will
potentially be more prepared, facilitating the delivery of personalized care and
improved outcomes by avoiding misdiagnosis, errors, and complications earlier in
a patient’s journey. The AI-based model pulls structured data, such as
demographic information and symptoms from the patient self-report, and the
dataset undergoes supervised learning using historical, real-world outcomes
data. Multiple AI models will be evaluated, including classification and neural
network models, and those with sufficiently accurate performance will be
considered as inputs for ensemble learning, the final prediction output for this
project. Example outputs include patient evaluators such as consistencies within
the patient’s self-report, an estimated risk assessment score, and an
approximate diagnosis accuracy score.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.