* 2041648
* Pore-scale machine-learning modeling of flow and transport properties of carbonate rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Javier Vilcaez, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 01/31/2024
* USD 282,444.00

Carbonate rocks constitute one of the most common type of groundwater and fossil
fuel reservoirs in the USA. Design of optimum strategies for groundwater and
fossil fuel resources development is generally done through the application of
computer simulation programs where users need to input a set of flow and
transport properties of the reservoir rock. The traditional approach to estimate
flow and transport properties of reservoir rocks consists of using deterministic
model equations. This approach frequently results in large disagreement between
measured and simulated multiphase flow and reactive transport processes in
carbonate reservoirs. The complex heterogeneous pore microstructure of carbonate
rocks is reflected by stochastic (random) relationships between fundamental
petrophysical properties (e.g., porosity) and flow and transport properties
(e.g., permeability and tortuosity) of carbonate rocks that are practically
impossible to capture by deterministic model equations. The goals of this
research are (1) to develop a predictive understanding of the stochastic
relationship between the pore microstructure and flow and transport properties
of carbonate rocks, and (2) to establish machine learning models that capture
the stochastic relationship between fundamental petrophysical properties and
flow and transport properties of carbonate rocks. This research will advance
national welfare and prosperity by enabling the design of environmentally
responsible and optimum strategies to develop groundwater and fossil fuel
resources from carbonate reservoirs, and it will contribute to the education of
students on the use of artificial intelligence (e.g., machine learning)
technologies to develop groundwater and fossil fuel resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this research will be achieved by using a
novel approach that overcomes limitations regarding the relatively small number
of pore microstructures and associated flow and transport properties of
carbonate rocks that can be experimentally determined by routine and special
analyses. This novel approach consists of the construction of thousands of 3D
pore microstructures of stochastic pore connectivity honoring pore size
distribution curves obtained from nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements
and pore geometries obtained from 2D scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging.
Direct pore-scale simulations of flow and transport properties for thousands of
3D pore microstructures of the same pore size distribution and dominant pore
geometry, but different pore connectivity, as it happens in real carbonate
rocks, will make possible achieving the goals of this research by applying
statistical/stochastic principles and machine learning technologies. The focus
will be on carbonate rocks collected from the Mississippian Lime Play and
Arbuckle Group in Oklahoma and Kansas. This project is jointly funded by the
Hydrologic Sciences Program (HS) and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.