* 2041171
* Event Structure in Language and Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Anna Papafragou, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 10/31/2024
* USD 481,610.00

Humans are surprisingly adept at interpreting what is happening around them. We
are able to recognize dynamic events, the roles that various entities play in
these events and the causal and other relations that contribute to events.
Furthermore, we use language to describe our dynamic experiences in ways that
reflect our underlying event understanding. Despite the central role of events
in human cognition and language, the study of events within the cognitive
sciences has until recently remained fragmented. This research introduces novel
theoretical and empirical tools to address key questions about the nature of
events: How do we represent events in thought? How do novice (child) and
experienced (adult) communicators use language to encode event representations?
Do speakers of different languages think about events in the world differently?
The proposed research presents a new and integrated approach to one of the most
fundamental topics in the study of the mind, namely the connection between
cognition and language. Because of its deeply interdisciplinary nature, this
project offers unique training opportunities in the cognitive sciences at the
postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate level. Moreover, the project exposes
trainees to the excitement of international collaborations and fosters new
academic partnerships. The project includes outreach and mentorship activities
for interested members of the community who may not otherwise be exposed to
academic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A unique feature of the proposed
research is that it brings together two influential but separate lines of
research on the structure of events, one studying perceptual and cognitive
mechanisms of event representation, and the other focusing on the semantics of
events in linguistics. Building on these two major approaches, this research
proposes that the internal temporal structure of an event is an architectural
feature of event cognition. A planned series of experiments aims to show that
temporal event structure is computed rapidly and spontaneously during event
perception, affects further cognitive processes such as event memory, and
organizes event representations in both adults and children, and across people
who speak different languages. This innovative combination of methods and
theories allows us to explore previously hidden links between event cognition
and event language and has the potential to reveal the precise format of event
representations and their mapping to language that have so far remained
elusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.