* 2041007
* Conference: A Three-Part Series to Envision &amp; Enact an Inclusive &amp; Diverse STEM Professoriate
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2020,02/28/2022
* Kacy Redd, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 02/28/2022
* USD 99,874.00

Recent work published by the Association of Public and Land-grant Universities
(APLU) documents evidence of the experiences and barriers facing faculty,
postdoctoral scholars, and graduate students from underrepresented groups in
STEM, especially in the later stages of the pathways to the professoriate.
Nationally there have been only incremental changes, and effective, lasting
institutional and systemic transformation practices to support the success of
diversity, equity and inclusion in the academy have yet to be identified and
implemented. Systemic transformation efforts require the input of multiple and
varied stakeholders, ensuring that the responsibility for creating change is
shared by the larger collective, especially in service of broadening
participation in STEM. Such change also requires thinking in different ways
about intractable problems, centering the experiences of STEM faculty from
underrepresented groups, and creating new approaches to current practices. APLU
will convene three half-day virtual meetings to address three systemic barriers
to success for STEM faculty from underrepresented groups: (1) recruitment and
hiring, (2) faculty evaluation, and (3) institutional leadership. The convenings
will engage institutional leaders, educational researchers, disciplinary
societies, policymakers, and philanthropic funders to envision new practice and
research strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This virtual conference series is
designed to engage a broad number of stakeholders in academia to tackle the
seemingly intractable problem of a system-wide increase of STEM faculty from
underrepresented groups and the use of inclusive and equity-informed practices.
Developing a community of change agents and scholars who have co-developed and
coalesced around a common agenda for change will help to create momentum and
ensure that change is supported moving forward. Each half-day convening will be
facilitated using a design-thinking approach that centers the experiences and
perspectives of faculty, especially those faculty historically underrepresented
in STEM. The resulting deliverables and engagement or representatives from
institutions, funders, disciplines, and other organizations will serve as a
launch pad for improving STEM by identifying new strategies for implementation
and areas for research to build upon prior successes in effecting
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.