* 2041479
* Mechanism of gas depletion on super-hydrophobic surfaces in turbulent flows
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Hangjian Ling, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 313,790.00

A textured super-hydrophobic (water-repelling) surface provides an exciting
opportunity to potentially reduce the friction drag in turbulent flows, which
could lead to substantial energy-savings in the marine industry. This drag
reducing property is related to the presence of a gas layer trapped between the
liquid flow and the textured surface. Unfortunately, the trapped gas could be
depleted and carried away by turbulent flows, causing a failure of drag
reduction. The aim of this project is to better understand the mechanism of gas
depletion when the super-hydrophobic surface is subject to turbulent flows.
Ultimately, the results of this research will guide the development of passive
and active approaches to sustain the drag reduction by super-hydrophobic
surfaces in highly turbulent flows. In addition to training graduate and
undergraduate students, the education plan will provide engineering experiences
for local high-school students through University of Massachusetts Dartmouth’s
Upward Bound program and Spotlight program. Outreach activities through social
media and local museums will raise public awareness of the development of novel
drag reduction technologies in addressing energy and environmental challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanism of gas depletion on a super-hydrophobic
surface caused by turbulent flows is poorly understood due to a lack of
experimental data. This project aims to fill this knowledge gap through start-
of-the-art experimental measurements. The first project goal is to characterize
the spatial and temporal variations of the shape of gas-liquid interface in
turbulent flows using Reflection Interference Contrast Microscopy and Digital
Holographic Microscopy. The results will illustrate how the interface deforms,
vibrates, and finally detaches from the surface textures. The second goal is to
develop predictive models of the wall pressure fluctuation and the critical
condition for gas depletion. The wall pressure fluctuation, which is the main
force causing interface deformation, will be estimated based on the resolved
interface shape and the Young-Laplace equation. The velocity field in the inner
part of the turbulent boundary layer will also be measured by Holographic
Particle Tracking Velocimetry. The predictive models will consider various
factors including texture size, texture geometry, Reynolds number, Weber number,
and initial interface shape. The third goal is to evaluate the effectiveness of
hierarchical structure and gas injection for sustaining the drag reduction in
high-Reynolds number turbulent flows. The experimental results will validate the
key assumptions used in past computational simulations. The research outcomes
will advance the knowledge of the complex interplay between turbulent flows and
super-hydrophobic surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.