* 2041887
* CAREER: The Impact of Time-Pressure on Math Anxiety and Math Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Ian Lyons, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 02/28/2026
* USD 664,544.00

Numeracy and math skills among adults and children in the United States
routinely rank poorly relative to those from comparable nations. Progress in
mathematics education can be facilitated by identification and removal of
factors that impede math engagement and learning. One such factor is anxiety
about mathematics. Math anxiety predicts avoidance of math and poor math
achievement, and disproportionately affects individuals with math learning
disabilities, women, minorities, and those from lower socio- economic
backgrounds. Although substantial work has demonstrated the various correlates
and deleterious effects of math anxiety, there is much less direct evidence
about what causes it. The main goal of this research is to explore one potential
cause of math anxiety that has received relatively little research attention:
time-pressure. Time-pressure is a major aspect of math instruction and
assessment, from elementary classrooms to university lecture halls. This
research project, conducted by researchers from Georgetown University, will
address three primary questions: (1) Does time-pressure in math settings cause
math anxiety in-the-moment and, if so, are there physiological markers that
identify on whom it has the greatest impact? (2) Does time-pressure have long-
term implications for math learning, future resilience to time pressure, and
math anxiety? (3) Does exposure to time-pressure in math settings have
differential implications, whether positive or negative, depending on when in
development that exposure occurred? The project is funded by a CAREER award from
the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances the
fundamental research literature on STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will use both an experimental approach (randomized controlled trial) and
a longitudinal approach (cross-lagged longitudinal design). The investigators
will also examine three different age groups for whom time-pressure in math
settings is highly relevant, but may respond to this time-pressure in different
ways: elementary (2nd grade), middle-school (8th grade), and college students.
They will examine whether time- pressure impacts math anxiety and math
performance in-the-moment, the impact time-pressure has on math learning and
trait-level math anxiety, and whether exposure to time-pressure modulates the
reciprocal interplay between changes in math anxiety and math ability across
development. They will use behavioral as well as physiological measures of
anxiety such as cardiac activity. Together, this work has the potential to
inform decisions made by instructors about how to assess and encourage students
to practice basic math skills. More broadly, these decisions have implications
for consolidation of math skills in children and adults, changing attitudes
about math, and equality of access to STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.