* 2041215
* FW-HTF-RL: Preparing the Future Workforce for the Era of Automated Vehicles
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Shelia Cotten, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,325,489.00

As the United States transitions to automated vehicles, millions of American
jobs will be impacted directly through the replacement of workers and changes in
job requirements needed to work with and maintain automated vehicles, as well as
indirectly through changes in organizations, standards of living, and worker
well-being. The transition to automated vehicles will impact the employment
pipeline, pay for driving occupations, and quality of life for drivers. These
interrelated and potentially pervasive economic, social, and policy changes
require interdisciplinary, collaborative approaches to examine who, how, and why
workers and society will be impacted by this transition. This knowledge will
prepare organizations, workers, and policymakers for workplace changes brought
by this potentially disruptive technology and inform policy changes needed to
deal with the indirect impacts of these workplace changes on society. The long-
term goal of this research study is to prepare the current and future driving
workforce for the shift that will occur as broader automated vehicle
dissemination occurs and eventual automated vehicle saturation is seen in the
United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators draw from organizational
psychology, economics, sociology, geography, technology, and transportation
engineering to analyze who, why, and how two driving occupations (taxi/ride
hailing and heavy trucking and tractor trailers) will be affected by automated
vehicles. The investigators utilize a mixed-method approach focusing on drivers,
supervisors, and management to examine: (1) How will driving jobs change in
response to automation of vehicles and what new skills will be required? (2) How
willing and able are workers to adapt to the changing nature of driving jobs,
and will the changing nature of jobs disadvantage some groups of workers more so
than others? (3) What are the anticipated downstream impacts on drivers (e.g.,
employment trends and income inequality) in the transportation industry,
organizations, and society? Focus groups, surveys, and skill mapping techniques
will be used to identify driving occupations most at risk for displacement and
the occupations that will require extensive retraining due to automated vehicle
adoption. The skill maps and secondary occupational data will be incorporated
with technology diffusion models to estimate adoption levels across the two
driving contexts. These data will also be used to estimate economic models to
understand job loss, wage reductions, and the impact of skills changes in the
driving contexts of interest on society and income inequality. Skills maps will
be disseminated to workforce and education groups who can develop job training
and certificate programs to mitigate workforce displacement and help workers
obtain workforce training and reskilling in the age of automated vehicles.
Results of this project will be disseminated to the broader community via visits
to area high schools and a YouTube channel to share webinars and training videos
with stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.