* 2041662
* US-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: Mechanics of the Formation and Function of 2D Material Pleats
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Alan Johnson, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 530,000.00

A central challenge in fulfilling the tremendous potential of nanoscale
materials is that they are hard to control, manipulate, and mass-produce into
useful structures and devices. This is in part due to the small size, their
tendency to stick to one another, and their susceptibility to thermal
vibrations. Thus, it is important to understand the nanoscale forces behind
these effects, including adhesion and friction. The key to developing this
knowledge lies in understanding and taking advantage of the beneficial aspects
of these forces. One such case is the phenomenon of self-assembly, where
nanoscale materials organize themselves into ordered structures. This award
supports research which aims to understand how forces conspire in a particularly
striking case of such behavior: the spontaneous formation of long, folded pleats
of atomically thin, two-dimensional materials that can be seen with a simple
magnifying glass. Experiments and simulations will be used to understand what
controls and drives this process, conducted by an interdisciplinary team of
collaborators who will combine their unique and ideal expertise to tackle the
problem. The goal is to uncover the mechanical principles governing the
formation of these pleats. The work has broad scientific and technological
impact, as it focuses on the fundamental mechanics of these materials but with a
view toward controlling their assembly and construction into useful structures
and devices. The award will also support educational outreach by training
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers. This will include
mentored international personnel exchanges between the collaborators’
laboratories; engaging K-12 students and the public in outreach events; and
developing an online short course for researchers about the nanoscale mechanics
of these materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional material pleats are
long, folded structures that have been recently discovered. Their formation is
triggered by puncturing a substrate-supported two-dimensional materials like
graphene with a nanoindenter tip. This is followed by subsequent growth of a
folded ribbon of the two-dimensional material, up to 10’s of micrometers.
However, little is known about the fundamental mechanics of these remarkable
structures. While a continuum-level model has been developed that gives some
qualitative insight into pleat formation, there is no atomistic-level
understanding of the mechanisms that govern the phenomenon. This project
addresses this gap by performing an atomistically-informed investigation of the
mechanics of pleat formation and their mechanical properties once formed. Doing
this requires an effort that integrates material synthesis, nanomechanical
characterization, and atomistic and coarse-grained simulations. An
interdisciplinary team of collaborators from the US, the Republic of Ireland,
and Northern Ireland, UK will use their unique combination of expertise to
tackle this problem. The primary goal is to uncover the fundamental mechanical
principles governing pleat nucleation, growth, and interaction with the
environment. A long-term, broad impact of this work will be to establish design
principles for fabricating useful devices from the wide and growing array of
two-dimensional and thin materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.