* 2041530
* Emerging Areas of Science, Engineering, and Medicine for the Courts: A Workshop to Identify Chapters for a Fourth Edition of The Reference Manual on Scientific Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Anne-Marie Mazza, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The Reference Manual on Scientific Evidence is a primary reference source for
federal judges on questions of science in litigation. It is used not only by
federal judges, but by state judges, attorneys, legal scholars, and law
students. Its utility and widespread use is the result of the fair and balanced
presentation it provides of fundamental principles of scientific methodology in
areas likely to arise in expert testimony. Nine years have passed since the
publication of the last (third) edition of the Reference Manual, and many of the
chapters need updating to account for recent developments in science and law.
For example, chapters on forensic science and DNA identification need updating
to take into account new genetic testing techniques and methodologies, the
chapter on neuroscience must take account of new approaches for detecting neural
activity. A new edition will also need to address areas of science that have
become important in litigation in recent years, e.g., computer software;
prediction of dangerous behavior/genetic foundations of individual behavior;
eyewitness identification; and climate change. The Committee on Science,
Technology, and Law of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine, in collaboration with the Federal Judicial Center – the research and
education agency of the judicial branch of the U.S. government – have agreed to
pursue the development of a fourth edition of the Reference Manual and will
convene a workshop to review the contents of the third edition and identify
areas of science and technology that may be candidates for new or updated
chapters in a new edition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A planning committee of 6-8
members equally divided between the legal and scientific/engineering/medical
communities will be convened to plan the two-day virtual workshop. Working via
conference calls, staff and the committee will define the workshop agenda,
format, and topics and identify speakers. A rapporteur-authored proceedings in
brief for the workshop will be issued to provide information that will be useful
in the development of a fourth edition of the Reference Manual on Scientific
Evidence. The workshop will advance the proper use and evaluation of scientific
evidence in court by assisting judges in understanding scientific and technical
information, thereby strengthening their understanding of the complex
information that may be at issue in such disputes and their ability to engage in
an informed conversation with lawyers, officers of the court, court-appointed
experts, and others who seek to inform the court regarding relevant scientific
and technical information. Making the best use of available evidence helps the
judiciary ensure that all people are treated justly in the
courts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.