* 2041923
* NSF-BSF: Stress tolerance: Inheritance and regulation by diverse epigenetic mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Elizabeth Gilbert, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2026
* USD 747,833.00

This project seeks to determine how changes in the early-life (embryonic)
environment cause lifelong effects on metabolism and stress responses that are
passed on from parents to offspring in chickens. The epigenetic changes that are
responsible for inheritance of physiological resilience in response to
temperature stress will be studied in the blood and brain, and it will be
determined how these changes are inherited and how they are regulated. This work
challenges the paradigm that epigenetic marks on the DNA are erased and
reestablished at fertilization and suggests that environmental perturbations
during critical stages of development can have lasting effects on the offspring
and later generations. This research provides a framework for understanding the
mechanisms involved in heritable behaviors that do not involve changes to the
DNA nucleotide sequence. The chicken is an ideal model for this research,
because eggs can be incubated in large numbers under tightly controlled
environmental conditions, and the lack of parental involvement eliminates
potential confounding effects on development. The major theme of this research
is physiological resilience, which parallels the theme of the broader impacts:
professional resilience in a challenging environment. The targeted outcomes are
to enhance involvement of students from underrepresented groups in STEM
research. The chick is an ideal research model to incorporate into the classroom
because of the relative low cost and time investment for generating data and
completing experiments. The collaboration between Virginia Tech and the Volcani
Institute in Israel contributes to outcomes by demonstrating the importance of
diversity and international cooperation in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
embryonic environment has long-term effects on physiological functions later in
life. Embryonic heat conditioning induces lifelong (and transgenerational) heat
resilience and cross-tolerance (i.e., improved health of other systems) within
the immune and metabolic systems. Epigenetic marks are responsible for
transgenerational transmission of stress responses, challenging the assumption
that epigenetic modifications are erased in germ cells at fertilization. Some of
these changes are retained and passed down to subsequent generations. Epigenetic
modifications will be followed in three generations of chickens, from in ovo
(embryonic) heat conditioning, through life-long encounters with environmental
challenges, insemination, primordial germ cells, and normal growth of two
consecutive generations. Stress-, metabolic-, and inflammatory-related pathways
will be studied in the blood and areas of the brain responsible for regulating
such pathways, including the preoptic anterior hypothalamus and paraventricular
nucleus of the hypothalamus. Epigenetic mechanisms include DNA methylation and
interactions with histone modifications, and epitranscriptomic marks, and these
will be assessed using global (via sequencing) and loci-specific (through
nucleic acid and protein interactions) methods. The work will be performed
concurrently at Virginia Tech in the U.S.A. and the Volcani Institute in Israel,
providing robust results with chickens from different genetic backgrounds in
different geographical locations. This project will be used as a platform to
recruit students from underrepresented backgrounds into research, and will
involve training for one graduate student researcher each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.