* 2041218
* SBP: The Emergence of Social Biases in Infancy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Amanda Woodward, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2026
* USD 765,000.00

This project investigates the developmental origins of social bias. Before their
first birthdays, infants prefer people from familiar racial groups and people
who speak their native language. These biases are related to social experience:
Infants who have more contact with social diversity are less biased against
people from unfamiliar groups. The proposed studies will shed new light on the
mechanisms that give rise to infants’ social biases by innovating methods to:
(1) assess the emotional and cognitive aspects of infants’ biases, (2)
investigate the neural systems involved, and (3) identify the aspects of social
experience that may be important for establishing social bias. The findings will
provide insights into how to mitigate the negative consequences of social
biases, as well as developing new research tools for studying relations between
behavior, brain and social experience during early development. A major goal of
this project is to address the dearth of research with minority populations in
cognitive development research. Studies will involve equal numbers of infants
from minority and majority backgrounds in order to better understand how social
biases emerge across the diversity of human
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior research indicates that infants’ visual
preferences express social bias, but the cognitive and affective processes
involved, and the associated social and neural mechanisms are poorly understood.
This project addresses these open issues by bringing together an innovative set
of behavioral, neural and social measures in research with 9-month-old infants.
Across six studies, infants will be presented with people from different
linguistic and racial groups and infants’ brain activity (EEG: frontal-temporal
theta; mu rhythm; frontal alpha asymmetry) and behavioral responses (attention,
learning, imitation, and approach-withdrawal tendencies) to members of familiar
vs. unfamiliar social groups will be compared. The diversity in infants’ social
environments will be assessed via neighborhood census data and a parent survey
to assess infants’ close social networks. This research will provide fundamental
new insights into the nature of infants’ social biases and the conditions that
contribute to them. The multidisciplinary approach will inform scientific
understanding of brain-behavior-environment relations during early
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.