* 2041491
* EAGER: An Oasis for Surface Life on the Ocean of Snowball Earth
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Stephen Warren, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2023
* USD 225,000.00

There is now compelling evidence for times in the distant past when the Earth
was in a deep freeze, with ice sheets hundreds of meters thick covering the
world's oceans. These "snowball earth" episodes lasted for millions of years
during the Cryogenian period, between 720 and 630 million years ago. Somehow,
despite thick ice cover and surface temperatures 30 Celsius below zero, life
survived on snowball earth. Among the survivors were multicellular species of
algae which rely on photosynthesis and must have lived at the surface or below
ice thin enough to transmit sunlight. Given the harsh conditions it is natural
to look for refugia, special places which remained unusually hospitable due to
favorable local conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research under this award
considers the possibility that the refugia of snowball earth were bays at the
far ends of protected tropical seas similar to the Red Sea today. Previous work
by the Principal Investigators (PIs) shows that such a sea could keep out the
"sea glaciers" that covered the open oceans. But the sea would also need to be
in an unusually warm region to prevent thick ice from growing locally. The PIs
hypothesize that such warmer conditions could occur if the sea were surrounded
by bare land with a relatively dark (or low albedo) surface to promote solar
absorption. Warmer local climate could also occur due to favorable
configurations of mountain ranges around the sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work
performed here tests the protected sea refugia hypothesis using climate model
simulations configured to represent conditions on snowball earth. The
continental configuration is adjusted to include a protected sea, and the albedo
of the surrounding land is varied to determine if a darker land surface can
produce a regional climate warm enough to allow open water. Other aspects of the
configuration are also varied, such as the size of the sea and the presence of
mountain ranges around it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts due
to the importance of the problem for understanding life on earth, and it also
has implications for efforts to find evidence of life on other planets. Results
of the research are presented to the public through several outreach activities,
and the PIs use the snowball earth problem as a way to motivate K-12 students to
learn more about earth science during class visits to the University of
Washington campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Climate and Large-scale Dynamics Program (PD 06-5740) and the Arctic Natural
Sciences Program (PD 16-595).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.