* 2041333
* Identifying the Optimal Methods for Controlling Contamination Bias in Prospective Research on Child Maltreatment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Chad Shenk, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 495,508.00

Contamination in child maltreatment research occurs when members of a comparison
condition are exposed to child maltreatment prior to enrolling in a study or
during longitudinal follow-up. This phenomenon presents a serious scientific
concern, as contamination minimizes real differences in the risk for adverse
child development between child maltreatment and comparison conditions. The
current project addresses this concern by testing different methods for
detecting and controlling contamination bias in child maltreatment research.
Specifically, investigators will access existing data from independent
prospective cohort studies and examine the performance of five different
statistical modeling approaches to determine which has the optimal control of
contamination. Two bias reduction modeling approaches, propensity score and
augmented synthetic control models, will be executed with results compared
against three conventional approaches: no control of contamination, controlling
contamination by removing identified participants from the statistical model,
and controlling contamination by testing it as a covariate or moderator of risk
estimates. Investigators will then use data simulations to model the performance
of these five methods across different research conditions, including variations
in contamination prevalence, sample size, statistical power, and effect size
magnitude. Ultimately, the best performing methods for detecting and controlling
contamination in child maltreatment research will be disseminated to scientists
so that future risk estimates are more accurate, something that can better
inform child welfare policy through more reliable scientific data. While tested
within child maltreatment research, results from the statistical models
evaluated in this project will be available to any scientist conducting
observational research on exposure variables, enhancing the reliability of
scientific results across STEM domains. Finally, knowledge on how to use these
methods will be incorporated into STEM education at the University-level by
educating undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral fellows on how to control
contamination in prospective cohort studies within and outside the area of child
maltreatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contamination, when subjects recruited to a
non-exposure comparison condition have been exposed to the event under
investigation, is a methodological phenomenon in observational research that
downwardly biases effect size estimates by minimizing group differences, thereby
increasing replication and reproducibility failures. The current project will
evaluate the performance of multiple strategies for detecting and controlling
contamination bias in prospective cohort research with the child maltreatment
population. This will be achieved through secondary analysis of existing data
from the Longitudinal Studies of Child Abuse and Neglect (LONGSCAN; N=1354) and
the National Survey of Child and Adolescent Well-being-II (NSCAWII; N=5873)
cohorts, each of which are multi-wave, prospective cohort studies of child
maltreatment from birth through age eighteen. A multi-method approach of
official case reports, self-report, and caregiver-report assessments obtained
across child development will be used to maximize sensitivity for detecting
contamination and establishing its prevalence in these cohorts. Two innovative
methods for controlling bias in observational research, doubly robust propensity
score and augmented synthetic controls, will be used to control contamination
bias in each of these cohorts. Results from these two models will be evaluated
against alternative models that: 1) ignore contamination, 2) control
contamination by removing subjects from statistical analysis, and 3) control
contamination by estimating it as a covariate/moderator of child maltreatment
effects. Following statistical efficiency principles, the performance of all
five models will be benchmarked with respect to needed sample size, impact on
statistical power, and extent of bias reduction in effect size estimates. Given
the ultimate goal to identify which methods provide the most accurate estimates
under different empirical conditions, this project will also evaluate results
from all five models using simulations that both mimic the data structures of
LONGSCAN and NSCAW-II and extend out to conditions commonly encountered in
prospective cohort studies, including variations in contamination prevalence,
sample size, and effect size magnitude. These results will have broader
scientific and public impacts by: disseminating results to scientists outside
the area of child maltreatment who conduct research where contamination is
present, training the next generation of STEM scientists in the optimal methods
for detecting and controlling contamination, and providing more accurate
estimates of the risks associated with child maltreatment to better inform child
welfare policy in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.