* 2041223
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating the role of distribution in syntactic comprehension
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Jennifer Arnold, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2022
* USD 5,489.00

People encounter a variety of syntactic structures in everyday language use,
whether through reading or spoken conversation. In some cases, sentences can be
ambiguous and have more than one meaning. For example, in "The spy saw the man
with the binoculars", one interpretation is that the spy is looking through the
binoculars, while an alternative interpretation is that the man has the
binoculars. Yet, despite this ambiguity, people are still able to converge on a
single interpretation. The mechanisms behind this are still debated today as
many factors have been shown to guide comprehension. This dissertation project
will investigate how experience with an unfamiliar structure affects language
processing. Experience is thought to play a large role in comprehension,
however, despite its large role in theoretical models, there is still no direct
evidence of whether people actually keep track of distribution i.e., the
relative frequency of a target structure and competing structures. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation project investigates whether people can
implicitly acquire syntactic distributional information by directly manipulating
the relative frequency of syntactic structures while holding overall exposure
constant: the probability of an unfamiliar, dialectal structure ("The meal needs
cooked", a variation of "The meal needs to be cooked") relative to another
competing structure ("The meal needs cooked vegetables"). The dialectal
structure is mainly associated with a dialect from Western Pennsylvania, and is
unfamiliar to most people outside of this region. In a series of experiments,
self-paced reading is used to test whether a higher proportion of the dialectal
structure leads to less processing difficulty over time. The investigators also
test whether the distributional information from the verb "needs" can be
generalized to a related verb (i.e. "wants"). This project will inform theories
of language learning as it provides a stronger test of distributional learning
compared to previous studies. It also seeks to have practical implications for
optimum learning strategies for grammar and reading
comprehension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.