* 2041457
* AfroBiotech Conference: Black Lives Matter in Science, Engineering and Medicine
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Karmella Haynes, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 33,206.00

The AfroBiotech: Black Lives Matter in Science, Engineering and Medicine
conference will be held October 26-28 on a virtual platform owing to the
Covin-19 pandemic facing the world at present. The conference will highlight the
achievements of African Americans in biotechnology, inspire a new generation of
diverse biotechnology professionals and identify, communicate, and explore
current advancements in various aspects of Biotechnology. This forum organizes
African-American scientific talent from across the U.S. at a single event and
aims to enable the biotech industry to hire diverse professionals, inspire
organizers of other scientific conferences to invite diverse speakers and
inspire the next generation of diverse students and scholars to join this
community. A virtual platform that will allow for vibrant and highly interactive
virtual events that include a poster session, Q&amp;A discussions, and small
group/one on one discussion has been chosen. The conference provides forums for
scientific presentations, networking, extended discussions, presentations and is
inclusive of early-career researchers, postdoctoral associates and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the field of biological engineering is
rapidly expanding and integrating with the US and global economies the data show
that African Americans continue to be underrepresented in this scientific area.
There is also an increasing number of African Americans entering this scientific
area but this growth is still insufficient to alleviate the underrepresentation
in the field of biological engineering. This situation represents an opportunity
for the community of African American biological engineers to organize itself to
address these future opportunities. The AfroBiotech conference will create a
forum for African American biological engineers to become organized to focus on
this growing opportunity and at the same time address advances and prospects in
scientific areas pertinent to biological engineering. The conference has a
diverse agenda that is inclusive of early-career and postdoctoral researchers as
well as graduate students. The agenda accommodates sessions for networking and
extended discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.