* 2041740
* Enumerative Geometry of Hitchin Systems and Topological Quantum Field Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Olivia Dumitrescu, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2022
* USD 36,831.00

This award supports research in mathematical physics. The topological and
geometric structures of various kinds of spaces have captivated mathematicians
and physicists for many years. The current proposal lies at the interface
between algebra, geometry, combinatorics and analysis with applications to
2D-topological quantum field theory. In recent years the PI has organized
several workshops that have specifically facilitated interactions between
different research communities. The PI will continue to promote interactions
between enumerative geometry, algebra and the theory of quantization in the
direction emphasized in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project is aimed at understanding a new point of view utilizing edge
contraction operations of ribbon graphs. These operations were originally used
to give a recursion relation of the generalized Catalan numbers of arbitrary
genus. This recursion implies the DVV formula for the intersection numbers of
tautological cotangent classes on the moduli space of stable pointed curves. The
PI and a collaborator have discovered, an alternative axiomatic formulation for
2D-topological quantum field theory by edge contraction operations of ribbon
graphs. The set of rules based on edge contractions also represent the key
structure of topological recursion. The edge contraction axioms reflect both the
structure of a Frobenius algebra and the pair of pants decomposition of a
topological surface. The pair of pants decomposition of a punctured Riemann
surface was first used by Mirzakhani to give a recursion of Weil-Petersson
volumes of the moduli space of hyperbolic surfaces with geodesic boundary
components of fixed lengths. Using the multiplication and comultiplication of
the Frobenius algebra we aim at giving alternative axiomatic definition of
cohomological field theories in the same way. The goal of this project is to
study the interplay between topological recursion, Mirzakhani recursion of Weil-
Petersson volumes, the classification theorem of CohFT for semi-simple Frobenius
algebra and character varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.