* 2041835
* CAREER: Learning-Assisted Optimal Power Flow with Confidence
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2027
* Kyri Baker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2027
* USD 515,600.00

This NSF CAREER project aims to revolutionize the way electric power grids
operate by integrating data-driven techniques into grid operations in order to
reliably operate assets on faster time-scales. As more renewable energy is
introduced into the grid and as grid operations grow increasingly complex, grid
components such as power plants and energy storage must be operated on faster
time-scales to balance fluctuations in power and keep the grid operating
reliably. This project transforms the traditional optimization problems that
grid operators solve by expediting their solution time using historical data and
machine learning. The intellectual merits of this project focus on embedding the
learning-based solutions into existing grid operations using a hybrid approach,
by combining conventional optimization with machine learning. Rather than
relying on purely data-driven solutions, grid operators can have increased
confidence that the grid can continue to operate reliably under highly renewable
energy futures. The broader impacts of the project include a "learning-for-
energy" program with scholarship prizes, and publicly released datasets and
benchmarks for algorithms emerging in this area of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to traditional approximations of
these difficult problems that are typically used to address convergence speed
and success, this project proposes to leverage data to preserve more complex
relationships while maintaining extremely fast computational speeds. Multiple
"learning-assisted" algorithms will be developed to enhance various facets of
power system operations including stochastic, distributed, and AC optimal power
flow. Neural networks in particular can approximate complex functions well and
perform inference in milliseconds, but alone, are black-box solutions that may
not give grid operators the confidence to use them in real system operation.
Here, hybrid approaches that combine optimization and machine learning are taken
to determine better warm-starting points for nonconvex solvers, assist the
convergence time of distributed optimization techniques, improve convergence
success in difficult-to-solve optimal power flow scenarios, and reduce problem
complexity in stochastic grid optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.