* 2041515
* Conference: Building HSI Learning Resilience in the Face of Crisis
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Antonio Garcia, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Erika Tatiana Camacho
* 07/31/2021
* USD 49,993.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this conference aims to understand the effects of
the pandemic and its continuing impact on HSI students’ learning. As the
COVID-19 pandemic became confirmed in all 50 states in March 2020, there was an
abrupt move to fully distance learning instruction and closing of college
campuses, leading to many uncertainties for all institutions, including
Hispanic-Serving Institutions. To combat this, the proposed conference will
bring 100-150 participants into a 3-day virtual conference. All video and
related materials for sharing will be archived in the conference web page post
meeting for public access. In the current environment, the notions of
experiential, place-based, collaborative, and community centered learning
practices have been deeply challenged. Furthermore, these challenges are
predicted to have a disproportionately large impact on underserved student
populations who benefit the most from these innovative learning approaches
(generally identified as first generation, Pell recipient, Latinx, African
American, and Native American). As such, there is an urgent need to document
what is happening and develop new solutions to improve outcomes. This conference
will document the understanding of current practices to create resiliency with
an emphasis on exploring new digital tools to enhance distance learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will primarily focus on (a) Mitigating the
Digital Divide; (b) Lab, Design Projects, and Internships from a Distance; (c)
Enhancing Mentoring using Distance learning Tools; (d) Digital Learning: What
are HSI Faculty, Students, and Families of Students Saying?; (e) Use of Data
Science to Inform Nextgen Learning Software; and (f) Quo vadis?, a forum to
understand how the HSI community will plan to adapt digital tools discussed post
conference. This conference will also enable participants to: 1) collaborate
with other institutions during breakout sessions; (2) work through scenarios in
tabletop drills with other HSIs; (3) gain access to recordings of the event to
reinforce what was learned and view breakout sessions; and (4) build a community
powered by new digital tools to develop new tools and prime ideas for future
conferences, symposia, webinars, and workshops. Capacity using webinar tools
will allow synchronous access to the conference to a wider audience interested
in the conference topic. This conference will include administrators, faculty,
students, and families of students to better disseminate ideas of digital
learning tools. Attending this conference has the potential to improve the
ability of HSIs to be resilient and to bounce-back now and in the future as
faculty, students, and family will be more knowledgeable from shared knowledge
acquired during the conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve
these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.