* 2041809
* Quantum Leap Grantees Meeting 2020
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Michael Raymer, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 64,855.00

The exploitation of the inherent quantum nature of systems holds great promise
in enabling quantum technologies that far surpass our current systems. There
remain significant barriers to reaching this goal. In the area of quantum
simulation and modeling, there is a need for new quantum platforms that go
beyond our current few-qubit systems as well as the development of algorithms to
efficiently use those platforms. Development in sensing that shows quantum
advantage is just now becoming possible, opening up the possibility of quantum
sensors that can be deployed outside of the laboratory. Systems using quantum
entanglement have demonstrated quantum communication, but much work is needed on
quantum repeaters and the range of wavelengths to make such systems commercially
viable. This research in quantum information science forms the Quantum Leap NSF
Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding and controlling quantum systems is
critical to achieving the next generation in quantum computing, sensing and
communication. The National Quantum Initiative Act tasked the NSF to carry out a
basic research and education effort in the area of quantum information science.
As part of that effort, NSF has made a number of awards in quantum information
science, including the funding of three Quantum Leap Challenge Institutes. In
order to introduce these new institutes, highlight NSF efforts in this area and
facilitate communication between researchers, NSF will hold a virtual grantees
workshop in Fall of 2020. This award will enable that effort. The meeting will
be held over two days, September 29-30, 2020. It is anticipated that there will
be over 100 participants. There will be plenary talks introducing the Quantum
Leap Challenge Institutes and parallel sessions by grantees in the area of
quantum information science. These talks will range from quantum communication,
sensing, computation, simulations as well as the development of new quantum
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.