* 2041150
* HBCU Workshops on Building Capacity for Research in Computing and Data Science
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Jean Muhammad, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Rogers
* 07/31/2021
* USD 87,770.00

This project addresses the need to increase participation of computer science
faculty from historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs) in computing
research, particularly within the NSF CISE core programs. Since 2012, the NSF
has increased its efforts to broaden participation in computing (BPC) with a
commitment to “…ensure a robust computing research community, a globally
competitive IT workforce, and a computationally savvy citizenry, CISE is
committed to broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in
computing.” More recently, NSF’s commitment to BPC has included efforts to
increase the number of faculty from historically black colleges and universities
(HBCUs) conducting basic or fundamental research in the NSF CISE core programs,
which includes – Computer and Network Systems (CNS), Computing and Communication
Foundations (CCF), Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS) divisions and the
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (OAC). Despite the commitment, however,
the persistently low participation of HBCU faculty conducting research in the
CISE core programs has had a significant and detrimental impact on achieving the
NSF’s BPC goals. Therefore, efforts to build capacity for research in computing
across the HBCU landscape are critical to achieve the mission and goals of BPC.
The goal of this project is threefold: 1) to increase number of faculty
conducting research that is aligned and funded within the NSF CISE core program
portfolio, 2) to expand a network of HBCU CS faculty in a Center for Excellence;
and, 3) to expand access to research activities for HBCU undergraduates who are
preparing to pursue graduate degrees in computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve these goals, the project will leverage and expand the efforts initiated
by Hampton University by hosting two workshops. In addition to those HBCU CS
faculty who participated in workshops hosted by Hampton University last year,
the project team will identify additional faculty who are interested in
developing ideas and concepts for research in computing and data science. Over
the course of the two workshops, the project team will work with faculty to
further develop their proposal ideas in preparation for a larger meeting that
will be hosted by the American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE). During
the ASEE meeting, currently planned for the Spring of 2021, HBCU CS faculty will
be joined by their colleagues and peers from Hispanic Serving Institutions and
Native American and Tribal Colleges and will have a chance to get critical
review and feedback on their proposals while preparing them for immediate
submission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.