* 2041621
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Genetic and evolutionary determinants of the immune response in wild primates
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2023
* Jenny Tung, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2023
* USD 31,649.00

Viruses and bacteria are thought to have played an important role in shaping
primate evolution, but many open questions remain about how pathogens have acted
to change primate genomes and influence trait diversity. More can be learned
about the types of pathogens that have been most important in primate evolution,
the types of genetic variants that have arisen to deal with these threats, and
whether genetic variation in immune genes influences fitness-related traits in
the present. This doctoral dissertation project studies the regulation of genes
involved in immune defense in a wild primate system, focusing on an intensively
studied population for which demographic, behavioral, and physiological data are
also available. The doctoral student investigates how natural selection has
shaped the gene expression response to pathogens in the past, and examines
associations between immune-related gene expression variation, dominance rank,
and other physiological characteristics. The project supports student mentorship
and training opportunities, international research collaborations, and public
science engagement through museum and conference events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator measures genome-wide gene expression in
either the presence or absence of stimuli that model bacterial or viral
infection, for 160 individually recognized adult baboons. Differences in immune
responses are examined for linkages to genetic differences between baboons,
controlling for age, dominance rank, kinship, and other factors that also
influence immune function. Integrating these findings with genome sequences from
the same baboon population, the project investigates whether genes involved in
the immune response to bacteria and/or viruses have been the target of historic
or recent selection and tests whether genetic variation that influences the
immune response also affects traits that are important to current physiological
wellbeing and fitness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.