* 2041726
* CAREER: Smartglasses for All
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Emily Cooper, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2026
* USD 324,020.00

The more computing becomes integrated into the activities of daily life, the
more people rely on visual information from digital displays to accomplish their
personal and professional goals. This project aims to use perceptual science to
improve a family of emerging display technologies called smartglasses that are
wearable devices inspired by the form factor and functionality of eyeglasses but
incorporating state-of-the-art digital displays and optics. Smartglasses present
an opportunity to expand the impact and use of computing, but they also pose a
number of challenges with respect to the quality of the visual imagery and the
integration with normal vision. Overcoming these challenges is important,
because technological advances in display systems such as smartglasses can have
broad impact on the public good by facilitating access to digital information
for people with both typical and impaired vision. This project will focus on
developing perceptual insights to advance the development of emerging visual
technologies that are useful, effective, and affordable for people across a
broad range of individual differences in vision. The research will have
additional impact through close integration with outreach and teaching
activities focused on training the next generation of vision
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will exploit behavioral,
psychophysical, and computational approaches to develop insights that advance
both our basic and applied understanding of human visual perception. Customized
laboratory display and optical equipment will be used in conjunction with state-
of-the-art wearable systems to study how people perceive natural and augmented
visual stimuli. Guidelines will be developed for how best to design emerging
visual display systems that merge digital information with natural vision; these
guidelines will encompass populations of people with both typical and impaired
vision. The research activities will also advance our fundamental knowledge of
human vision by focusing on the perception of complex, binocular stimuli; thus,
project outcomes will contribute insights that hasten the development of next-
generation technologies while deepening our basic understanding of how humans
sense and perceive the natural world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.