* 2041689
* I-Corps:  Development of a wicking fiber cytometer for cell analysis applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Karen Burg, University of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to explore
applications of a device to predict cellular movement and behaviors in a
laboratory. One application is simple and rapid assessment of the aggressive
state of cancer in a clinical setting to inform treatment decisions. This could
also be used in research to study cells in order to design new treatments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
wicking fibers for use in separating cells by physical, chemical, and biological
characteristics. The fibers are currently used in non-biomedical application,
e.g., they may be found in athletic apparel and facial tissue. These fibers are
designed with certain features such as the ability to move liquids away from the
body. It also has been found that the ability of the fibers to move liquid is an
advantage in biomedical applications, both in understanding cell behaviors and
in helping assess the current state of a disease. For instance, if fibers are
placed vertically in a liquid containing normal and cancerous cells, the tumor
cells will move quickly up the fibers, while the normal cells will remain at the
bottom. More aggressive cancer cells travel up the fibers more rapidly than less
aggressive cells. This rapid differentiation allows us to better understand why
cells behave in certain ways and to harness that information to create improved
biomedical solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.