* 2041136
* EAGER: Understanding and Mitigating Misinformation in Visualizations on Social Media
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Alexander Lex, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

In a time of crisis, such as during a hurricane or a global pandemic, social
media is an important source of information for the general population. In these
scenarios, data visualizations are often used to convey information that is
critical for decision making by individuals. For example, a visualization of the
path of a hurricane can inform the affected population about the need to prepare
or evacuate; while a visualization about the prevalence of a disease in a
certain area can inform personal choices, such as limiting interactions with
others during a relevant time period. Visualizations, however, can be flawed,
which can lead to misinterpretation of the data, and, in a crisis, lead to
decisions with negative consequences. This project seeks to identify aspects of
visualizations that makes them widely shared, identify flaws a visualization
might have, and warn social media users about them. Ultimately, this project can
lead to better responses to a crisis by the general population, and contribute
to improving visualization literacy. Finally, this project will also enable the
training of two graduate students, provide opportunities for undergraduate
research, and curate material that can be leveraged by educators teaching about
visualization design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These goals will be
achieved by applying existing and novel methods, such as topic modeling and
calculating measures of social attention, to three large dataset of social media
posts related to recent crisis. Using a qualitative coding approach, a taxonomy
of design problems will be developed. This taxonomy will be used to label a
large dataset. Finally, a prototype intervention in the form of a plug-in that
warns of problematic visualizations, but also enables users to classify problems
with visualizations they encounter, will be developed. The dataset and the
annotations compiled in the course of this project will be shared publicly. The
software created will be released under a permissive, non-viral open source
license.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.