* 2041779
* Multimodal Quantum Sensing Platform for Ultrathin Spintronic Materials and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Brian Zhou, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2024
* USD 345,000.00

Advancement in magnetic sensor technologies is intimately intertwined with
progress in magnetic materials and devices. Currently, the vast sensor toolkit
for characterizing bulk magnetic materials is increasingly insensitive to nano-
spintronic devices and recently-emerged atomically thin magnets, whose signals
are too weak to be measured by conventional instruments. This project will
demonstrate a unique nanoscale magnetometer with intrinsic quantum mechanical
operation to address this timely challenge. This so-called “quantum sensor” is
based on an isolated defect in the diamond lattice, known as the nitrogen-
vacancy center in diamond. The goal is to develop novel technique and hardware
systems to incorporate these sensors into an instrument for characterizing both
the static and dynamic magnetic properties of ultrathin magnetic materials. The
enabled measurement modes will be used to elucidate the nature of the magnetic
phase transition and the interactions between magnetic atoms in novel materials,
catalyzing progress towards higher performance magnetic devices. In addition,
the project will develop a remotely accessible interface and educational
resources for K-12 classrooms to explore manipulation of single quantum states.
This hands-on exposure to quantum science for young students is expected to
nurture the eventual participation of diverse groups in careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasingly, conventional probes of bulk
magnetism, such as commercial magnetometers based on the superconducting quantum
interference device, are unable to detect the minuscule signals from atomically
thin magnets and nano-spintronic devices. In recent years, the nitrogen-vacancy
center in diamond has emerged as a superlative magnetometer capable of nanoscale
proximity to ultrathin material samples, crucial for detecting the rapidly
decaying dipolar fields from sample magnetizations. This project aims to
establish a platform technology based on nitrogen-vacancy centers for the non-
invasive probing of multi-modal magnetic properties, beyond static
magnetization, and of diverse magnetic materials, beyond ferromagnets. The
platform will demonstrate detection of dynamical magnetic fields created by both
active material excitation and thermodynamic fluctuations, as well as develop
modules for ac susceptibility and spin resonance in ultrathin samples. Advanced
quantum control sequences will extend the coherence time of quantum sensors to
achieve sensitivity surpassing commercial instruments. The unique capabilities
developed here are expected to address open questions in ferromagnetism and
antiferromagnetism in the two-dimensional limit and guide the development of
next-generation magnetic memory, spin-based transistors, and ultrathin microwave
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.