* 2041053
* I-Corps:  Diagnostic tool for Auditory Processing Disorder
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Antje Ihlefeld, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a diagnostic device for auditory processing disorder (APD).
Individuals with APD cannot communicate effectively in situations with
background sound, which is debilitating. This can lead to social isolation and
reduced employment opportunities. An estimated 25 million Americans suffer from
APD, including veterans with traumatic brain injury. However, a substantial
diagnostic challenge in audiological practice is that patients with comparable
peripheral hearing often have vastly different treatment outcomes. APD could be
a valuable addition to the list of candidate tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project explores translation of a screening device that delivers an APD
test battery via calibrated headphones, enabling patient testing of audiometric
pure tone thresholds, speech intelligibility in the presence of different types
of background sound - speech or noise, in multiple languages, gap detection, and
sound localization. Behavioral APD test batteries may be a highly cost-effective
way to screen for APD. Moreover, the device will allow testing in multiple
languages, increasing the number of eligible patients. Later, the goal is to
provide an additional, proprietary score to diagnose an individual’s
vulnerability to APD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.