* 2041889
* CAREER: Adaptive Driver Assistance Systems and Personalized Training for Law Enforcement Officers (ADAPT-LEO)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Maryam Zahabi, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 03/31/2026
* USD 394,474.00

Motor vehicle crashes are a leading cause of line-of-duty deaths for law
enforcement officers, accounting for almost 40% of officers' fatal work
injuries. They are also 2.5 times more frequent than the national average among
all occupations. The main contributors to these crashes include officers' use of
in-vehicle technologies while driving, fatigue, and lack of sufficient training
in handling high-demand driving situations that arise in law enforcement. This
project will model officers' driving workload and performance in high-demand
situations, then use those models to develop in-vehicle technology and training
solutions that adapt to officers' workload in order to reduce the risk of crash-
related harms in police operations. The models, methods, and tools developed may
also benefit other driving and training domains. The work will support the
research training of graduate and undergraduate students; further, the project
team will develop outreach materials for both law enforcement groups and K-12
teachers to help them use the work to support training and STEM education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of the project are divided into three
thrusts. Thrust 1 focuses on modeling novice police officers' cognitive,
perceptual, and motor demands while driving, using the findings of a
naturalistic driving study, knowledge elicitation methods, and cognitive
modeling software. Thrust 2 will develop and evaluate adaptive in-vehicle
technology interfaces based on a hybrid algorithm that leverages computational
cognitive performance models, machine-learning algorithms, and real-time
behavioral and physiological measures to improve officers' driving performance
and reduce mental workload and distraction. Thrust 3 will develop adaptive
driving simulation-based training based on officers' cognitive state and real-
time and offline performance measures, assessing whether the adaptive driving
simulation-based training is more effective than prior adaptive training
protocols based on operational driving performance or visual attention in
improving driving, secondary task performance, and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.