* 2041745
* Understanding the Impacts of COVID-19 Pandemic on Human Mobility, Transportation Network Redesign and System Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Wen Ye, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 458,321.00

This NSF grant will study the impacts of the coronavirus disease of 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic on existing transportation and logistics systems and
operations, the needs for transportation-system redesign, and their resilience
under future disruptions. The research will integrate models and techniques in
mathematical optimization, data analytics and epidemiology, to study how
mobility interacts with virus spread in different transportation networks. The
project will deliver an interdisciplinary framework for analyzing transportation
networks and their resilience with high modeling flexibility and policy
adaptability. The results will be built into open-source tools and online
computation/simulation platforms, so that policymakers can conveniently deploy
models developed in this project to redesign specific transportation systems,
with guaranteed resilience. The research activities are integrated with
educational and outreach activities, to extend the knowledge obtained from this
research to a broader audience, including developing new interdisciplinary
courses, organizing workshops, sharing automated data analysis tools for
studying real-world mobility and infection data, and engaging undergraduate and
graduate students, particularly female and underrepresented minority groups, in
the research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will draw from a
broad range of methodologies and approaches, including network optimization,
graph theories, statistical learning, stochastic/robust optimization and
simulation. The development, validation, and calibration of the research will
push the frontiers of transportation and critical infrastructure analysis in
three key thrusts: (1) linking and visualizing supply-demand and mobility needs
in different transit systems with infection status and lockdown policies; (2)
developing short-term and long-term solutions of transportation network redesign
to limit virus spread while satisfying travel needs; (3) analyzing the
resilience, operational efficiency and reliability of the new systems. For the
first thrust, the research will focus on predictive models for learning new
supply-demand patterns and their spatiotemporal distributions. For the second
thrust, we will use integer programing, stochastic and robust optimization
models to improve solutions by also taking into account social-distancing and
other disease-mitigation strategies. For the third thrust, we will use agent-
based simulation and uncertainty quantification methods to study system
resilience as well as cost and operational efficiency under various disruptions
(e.g., demand surge, supply shortage, or link
breakdown).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.