* 2041679
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social relationships, predation risks, and primate sleep
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Damien Caillaud, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2023
* USD 25,200.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation
research investigates how group-living primates decide where to sleep at night,
and how their choice of where to sleep influences their sleep quality. The
project considers how physical features of the environment as well as the
differentiated and multi-faceted social relationships that are characteristic of
primate group mates impact this important decision. By investigating the
consequences of this choice on sleep quality, the research provides a
comparative perspective for understanding how early human ancestors survived
night predation and obtained sufficient sleep while doing so. This project
supports STEM research capacity building at the field site as well as
interdisciplinary research opportunities to both undergraduate and graduate
students from groups underrepresented in STEM. There are plans to share products
of this research with academic and public audiences through scientific
manuscripts, public lectures, and popular-science blog contributions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like other savannah-dwelling primates, baboons seek refuge
at night in trees and on cliffs to mitigate the risk of nocturnal predation.
When choosing a spot in which to sleep within the nighttime refuge, baboons face
not only a heterogeneous physical environment that could create asymmetries in
the perceived quality of sleep spot alternatives, but also a variable ecological
context and dynamic social environment that could further modulate the
preferences and availability associated with each sleep spot. Despite
substantial research interest, practical limitations have prevented a systematic
investigation of how primates navigate this critically important, yet complex
decision-making landscape. This project combines traditional field methods in
primatology with the latest technological advances to overcome practical
limitations, allowing investigators to (1) characterize baboons’ sleep spot
preferences; (2) assess how individuals update their sleep spot choices in a
dynamic social environment; (3) determine whether acquiring a preferred sleep
spot translates to a measurable benefit for sleep; and (4) test how the
perceived risk of predation affects sleep spot decision-making dynamics and
sleep quality. The project uses methods in field primatology to describe the
group's social dynamics, 3D laser scanning to assess metrics of sleep spots,
thermal imagery and convolutional neural networks to track baboons' decisions
throughout the night, accelerometry to evaluate sleep quality, and predator
playbacks to manipulate the perceived risk of predation. By examining these aims
using olive baboons, the collaborative and interdisciplinary research informs
discussions of how early human ancestors may have made complex decisions when
they were most vulnerable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.