* 2041459
* From Active to Smart Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Cristina Marchetti, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2025
* USD 532,200.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education to study emergent behavior in active matter. Active
matter is a term coined to describe collections of self-powered entities, such
as birds, living cells, or engineered microswimmers, that take energy from the
environment to spontaneously organize and produce coordinated motion. An example
which is studied in this project is a bacterial suspension. Each individual
bacterium is an active particle that propels itself though a medium by consuming
nutrients. A dense swarm of bacteria behaves collectively as a living fluid and
can self-organize in complex geometric patterns, exhibit swirling turbulent-like
motion, or ``freeze” into a solid-like biofilm – a bacterial aggregate like the
tartar that forms between our teeth. This type of emergent behavior, where a
collection of many interacting entities exhibits large-scale spatial or temporal
organization in a state with novel macroscopic properties, is familiar in
inanimate or passive matter, for example the transition from water to ice as one
lowers the temperature. However, it acquires a new unexplored richness in active
systems that are tuned not by an external knob, such as the temperature, but by
energy generated internally by each individual.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project combines theory and numerical simulations to address several open
questions in active matter physics. The first aim is understanding the role of
so-called non-reciprocal interactions in controlling the assembly of active
systems. A fundamental physics principle is Newton's third law which establishes
that interactions among two entities are reciprocal: for every action there is
an equal and opposite reaction. But this law is often seemingly violated in
active matter and in biological and social contexts. By quantifying how non-
reciprocal interactions drive the assembly of new dynamical states of matter,
this project aims at identifying new pathways for materials design. The second
aim of the project is to exploit geometry and confinements to harness the
turbulent-like flow of active fluids. The specific system studied is an active
fluid composed of proteins extracted from living cells that flows spontaneously
with no externally applied forces, exhibiting swirling chaotic motions similar
to those observed in turbulent fluids. The PI will collaborate with experimental
colleagues at UC Santa Barbara to control and direct such flows, with
applications to the design of microfluidic devices in mind. A third aim is
inspired by the observation that most bacteria swim in viscoelastic fluids that
can both flow like water or resist deformations like a solid depending on how
quickly they are stirred. The PI will examine the role of viscoelasticity of the
suspending fluid on the collective behavior of bacteria, which is of great
importance in the formation of bacterial biofilms. The last goal underlying the
research will be to understand the deep connection between wave propagation in
active systems and a special class of robust excitations seen in certain
engineered mechanical materials and in quantum systems, with the goal to
formulate the rules that allow robust signal propagation in active and
biological matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To lead to fundamental advances in
physics, the proposed research will help enable strategies for the design of new
smart materials and will have impact on other fields, from biology to
engineering. It will serve as a framework for the training of undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers at the interface of physics,
engineering, and biology, and contribute to&lt;br/&gt;the development of a
diverse STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research and education to combine
theoretical continuum models and numerical simulations to address a number of
open questions in active matter physics. The research will be organized around
the following specific objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying the role of
nonreciprocal interactions, memory, and feedback on the emergent behavior of
active matter. Using simulations and continuum theory, the PI will examine how
non-reciprocal and time-delayed interactions affect the emergent behavior and
the nature of phase transitions between active states of matter, and examine the
properties of these states. Specific focus will be on mixtures of active
colloids, where effective non-reciprocal interactions are mediated by chemical
reactions in the fluid, and to aggregation in Myxobacteria. This work will lead
to a predictive theoretical framework for quantifying the role of non-
reciprocity in active self-organization, with relevance to biological contexts
from evolution of bacterial species to regulation of gene expression in
morphogenesis, and with implications for swarm intelligence, and
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exploring the role of topological excitation in
active matter. In active systems the combination of activity and dissipation
naturally leads to the emergence of non-Hermitian dynamical operators. This
suggests a possible correspondence between linear wave in active systems and
topologically&lt;br/&gt;protected boundary states in nonreciprocal metamaterials
and quantum system. Building on her previous work, the PI will explore this
connection to identify modes that could serve as conduits for robust information
transmission in active and biological matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exploiting
topology, geometry, and active interfaces to harness and direct active flows and
the organization of active matter. Through a collaboration with
experimentalists, the PI will investigate the interfacial properties of active
nematics and the use of geometry and of spatial and temporal modulation of
activity for controlling active flows. This work will be rooted in experiments
aimed at facilitating active materials design and provide fundamental advances
in the understanding of liquid-liquid phase separation of active structured
fluids, a question of great current relevance in cell
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exploiting medium viscoelasticity for simultaneous
control of the spatial and temporal organization of active suspensions. The PI
will examine the role of viscoelasticity of the suspending medium in mediating
effective inertial dynamics of active agents and time-delayed interactions, with
specific focus on bacterial suspensions, where viscoelasticity is important in
controlling biofilm formation. The PI expects that the research will engender
fundamental advances in nonequilibrium statistical physics , open new strategies
for the design and assembly of active and reconfigurable materials, and develop
theoretical models relevant to biological processes, from wound healing to
cancer invasion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has an educational component
aimed at training students and postdocs with robust quantitative skills and
expertise in soft-matter and at the interface of physics and biology, and
emphasis on promoting a diverse and inclusive research environment. The PI will
continue to play a significant role in the profession through the organization
of conferences and advanced schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.