* 2041182
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Morphological biodistances as indicators of slave trade migration histories in the African Diaspora
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2023
* Valerie DeLeon, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2023
* USD 26,615.00

Millions of people were displaced due to slave trade during the 15th – 19th
centuries. These systems profoundly influenced population dynamics as enslaved
people were transported thousands of miles from their homes and experienced
restricted social life and mobility in enslavement. This doctoral dissertation
project examines skeletal morphology of these enslaved people and their
descendants to understand how certain biological groups formed and changed over
time, explores gene flow and other evolutionary processes that may explain how
the biological variation is distributed, and investigates patterns of biological
relatedness that may not be reflected in historic migration data. The project
supports the doctoral training of a student from an underrepresented group in
science, a multi-point research collaboration, outreach with community members,
and student mentoring. The project also develops curricula and seminars in
collaboration with the University of Florida’s College Reach Out Program to
increase postsecondary admission and completion for students from groups
historically underrepresented in STEM research.

This project’s theoretical framework is rooted in stochastic microevolutionary
expectations and diaspora studies. Microevolutionary processes such as
population stratification are inferred from the premise that gene flow, rather
than natural selection, is the main influence on observed biological patterns.
Further, interpretations gleaned from the project derive from slave trade
history, where European nations directly influenced the gene flow of the
diaspora populations that formed across the Atlantic. The project asks two
central questions: (1) What African and Afro-descendant diaspora groups show
high biological relatedness as estimated by cranial morphology, and how do these
data identify evidence of gene flow not otherwise described by historical
migration data? and, (2) Given the social and legal restrictions that created
physical separation among enslaved persons, do diaspora groups show stronger
evidence of population stratification and genetic isolation than African groups?
To investigate these questions, this project applies geometric morphometric
methods to collect 3D landmarks from adult human cranial remains and uses these
data to statistically analyze within-group and between-group variation in
cranial morphology. Data will be collected from twenty-one sites, comprising
cranial remains of 805 adult African descendants. These samples represent a
variety of regions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.