* 2041649
* EAGER: Storage-Based Logic Built-In Self-Test with Magnified Test Data
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Irith Pomeranz, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

New technologies for manufacturing of electronic chips give rise to new defect
mechanisms and increase the prevalence of defect occurrence. At the same time,
applications such as automotive systems impose stricter requirements on
reliability. Detecting the occurrence of defects is critical to the reliability
of electronic chips, and the correct and safe operation of the many products
that use them. Test sets used for manufacturing testing of electronic chips need
to be comprehensive in their ability to detect and diagnose defects, but at the
same time, satisfy cost constraints related to their storage and test
application time. Each test needs to be utilized to the maximum to detect as
many defects as possible of as many different types as possible to ensure that a
cost-limited test set is able to achieve reliability goals. Such a test set is
referred to as a focused test set, and is the subject of this project. The
project will prepare students for the challenges of designing and manufacturing
reliable electronic chips in current and future technologies, which is critical
to the many US industries that rely on electronic chips. The PI will provide a
role model and encourage women students to pursue degrees in the field of
electrical and computer engineering. Through internship opportunities, students
will get comprehensive training with both academic and industrial
depth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To manage the complexity and variability in defect
behaviors, fault models are used as abstract representations of defects, and a
comprehensive set of tests targets the detection of faults from different
models. However, faults from different models have similar tests, and the added
value for defect detection diminishes as additional fault models are considered.
Two complementary directions will be explored in this project for generating
focused test sets. (1) Different fault models are used for providing
comprehensive defect coverage. However, if faults of all types are considered
equally important, a large number of tests results, and they are not all
necessary for detecting or diagnosing defects. Instead, different faults should
be used as complements of each other. The problem that will be considered in
this project is how to partition target faults into subsets with similar (but
not identical) detection conditions, and similar (but not identical) tests. A
procedure for generating a focused test set will select non-similar
representatives from each subset as targets for test generation, and thus
produce tests that are well-utilized for defect detection and diagnosis. (2) In
a basic test data compression scheme, each stored test is used for applying one
test. Earlier works showed that the same stored test data can be used in more
than one way to apply more tests. This allows the volume of test data to be
reduced. The new observation that this project will utilize is that applying
more tests based on the same stored test data is useful for improving the
quality of a focused test set.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.