* 2041165
* Mode-locked THz QC-VECSELs
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Benjamin Williams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/29/2024
* USD 481,950.00

This research addresses the challenge of making terahertz semiconductor laser
sources that emit electromagnetic waves with frequencies between 2 and 5 THz
(i.e. wavelengths between 60 and 150 microns). The terahertz frequency range is
relatively underdeveloped part of the electromagnetic spectrum, which resides
between the infrared and microwave. In past research, this team demonstrated a
new laser architecture that addressed the challenge of how to generate high
power THz light simultaneously with high beam quality, known as the THz quantum-
cascade vertical-external-cavity surface-emitting-laser. The goal of this
research is how to adapt this laser architecture to create a so-called “mode-
locked” terahertz laser. In such a laser, instead of emitting steady continuous
light, the laser would emit a series of extremely short high-intensity light
pulses at regular intervals. While mode-locked lasers are ubiquitous in the
visible and infrared wavelengths, they have proven very difficult to implement
for terahertz lasers. Work will focus on several approaches to adapt the
vertical-external-cavity surface-emitting-laser approach, including coaxing the
laser to emit many wavelengths at once, controlling the speed of propagation of
all of these various wavelengths within the laser cavity, and introducing a fast
“saturable absorber” switch into the laser cavity to encourage these various
wavelengths to travel in lock-step so that they all constructively interfere to
create a short pulse. If successful, this research would result in a new
terahertz source for applications in the fields of astrophysics, atmospheric
science, biological and medical sciences, security screening, illicit material
detection, combustion science, antiquities, waste-sorting, next-generation
wireless communications, and non-destructive evaluation. As a part of the
project, the research will train graduate and undergraduate students, and will
support recruitment and retention of underrepresented minorities to engineering
through participation in a targeted research project course.&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this proposal is the development of
active and passive mode-locked terahertz quantum-cascade lasers that emit
picosecond pulses based upon the metasurface vertical-external-cavity surface-
emitting-laser (VECSEL) concept. Two primary schemes will be investigated:
active mode-locking in which the gain metasurface is modulated via
radiofrequency (RF) electrical injection at the round trip frequency, and
passive/hybrid mode-locking where a fast saturable absorber is used with
optional RF loss modulation. The enabling component of the VECSEL is a
reflectarray metasurface made up of sub-wavelength antenna-coupled microcavities
loaded with laser gain material; this creates an active amplifying mirror which
serves as one mirror in an open cavity. The intellectual merit in the proposed
work lies in the use of the metasurface VECSEL architecture to investigate mode-
locked terahertz lasers. Such a configuration gives the possible of engineering
the metasurface to achieve broadband gain and dispersion compensation;
furthermore the external cavity allows power combining for high-power output
along with control of the cavity repetition rate. Additionally, the external
cavity will allow integration of a fast saturable absorber, which can be
separately optimized to have a fast recovery time while the quantum-cascade
active material is optimized to have a long gain recovery time. The broader
impacts are addressed at several levels including undergraduate and graduate
research experiences, dissemination of results, technology advancement, and
outreach to underrepresented minorities. Outreach will specifically occur
through development of research projects for a course designed for the
recruitment and retention of underrepresented minority first-year engineering
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.