* 2041585
* Regulation of nutrient homeostasis by the CBL-CIPK calcium sensor-kinase network in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Sheng Luan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 01/31/2024
* USD 967,423.00

Plant growth requires a balanced supply of mineral nutrients but today’s soil is
often deficient in essential minerals such as nitrogen, phosphorus (P), and
potassium (K+). Crop production heavily relies on use of fertilizers but
excessive fertilizer use is costly, endangers environmental health, and it is
not sustainable because some essential minerals (e.g., potash and phosphorus
rock) are limited natural resources. As an alternative strategy, breeding plants
with new traits enabling them to grow in nutrient-imbalanced soil, has become a
global focus for long-term solution to sustainable agriculture. To achieve this
goal, we need to understand the molecular networks that allow plants to respond
and adapt to the constantly changing status of mineral nutrients in the soil. In
other words, we need to know how plants maintain the homeostasis of mineral
nutrients when soil contains too much or too little of specific minerals. This
project will address the genetic and molecular mechanisms underlying plant
adaptation to soil nutrient availability, thereby establishing the knowledgebase
for breeding crops with little need of fertilizers, thus supporting sustainable
agriculture. The research will have an additional impact on undergraduate and
graduate education through major courses the principal investigator teaches at
the University of California, Berkeley and through independent research programs
in his laboratory. The NSF project will also enhance the efforts that focus on
local high schools to encourage students underrepresented in science to pursue
higher education and explore biology research as a career option. A summer
workshop for high school students has been ongoing for ten years and will
continue under this project. Graduate students-led effort “CAL Students for
Minority Success” outreaches mainly Hispanic students in the local high schools
on general science education. Summer research training of URM students through
Biotech Partners will also continue. This combination of activities will help
promote success in education for these students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants
constantly monitor nutrient status in the soil and maintain nutrient homeostasis
by controlling ion transport across the plasma membrane (for uptake) and
tonoplast (for storage and remobilization). However, the signaling mechanism
linking nutrient status in the soil and membrane transport in plants is largely
unknown. The principal investigator’s laboratory discovered the CBL-CIPK calcium
signaling network that functions in a number of cellular pathways including
nutrient sensing. Their NSF-supported studies connected the CBL-CIPK signaling
mechanism to the regulation of transport activities at the plasma membrane and
vacuolar membrane (tonoplast), the two most important sites for nutrient
homeostasis in plant cells. Experimental evidence also emerged for new signaling
crosstalk, at the early stage of nutrient sensing, between the CBL-CIPK modules
and other signaling kinases and phosphatases. The proposed research will pursue
these exciting new leads with the following specific objectives: 1. To identify
the molecular mechanism by which CBL-CIPK regulates the activity of
K-transporters in the vacuolar membrane. 2. To identify the transporters
targeted by CBL-CIPK signaling modules for vacuolar Mg sequestration. 3. To
understand the early events of low-K response that activates CBL-CIPK modules.
4. To examine the functional relationship between the CBL-CIPK modules at the
plasma membrane and those at the tonoplast. The research will benefit from the
unique expertise of the PI group in the model plant systems that are amenable to
patch-clamp and cell biology analysis in combination with genetic and
biochemical approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.