* 2041984
* CAREER: Developing efficient and scalable bioinformatics methods and databases to analyze the adaptive immune repertoires of vertebrate species
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Serghei Mangul, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 03/31/2026
* USD 433,997.00

Recent advances in high-throughput technologies have led to the broad
applicability of immunogenomics in studying the adaptive immune repertoire.
These technologies are capable of generating large-scale datasets that can be
used across a wide range of biological domains, including immunology. The
project will provide systematics computational resources for understanding the
mechanisms and evolution of adaptive immune systems. This will be achieved by
delivering robust and easy-to-use open-source software as well as empirical
results in form of easy-to-use databases assembled by applying proposed
bioinformatics methods on diverse and large-scale genomic datasets. The project
will facilitate collaborations across disciplines and will bring together
researchers and students from computer science, life science, and
bioinformatics, leading to stronger interactions across these communities.
Additionally, the project will develop an interactive educational platform for
learning and training in big data analytic techniques using python-based
interactive notebooks. The online platform will be specifically tailored towards
students with limited prior exposure to computational sciences. The platform
will be made available at the national level for faculty and students enrolled
at teaching-focused institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will develop efficient and scalable bioinformatics methods for improving current
V(D)J reference databases and characterizing T and B cell receptor repertoire
across a variety of vertebrate species. Specifically, the project will develop
1) robust and scalable methods to assemble V(D)J alleles from next-generation
sequencing data, 2) accurate and robust species- and strain-specific methods to
assemble B and T cell receptor repertoire from next-generation sequencing data.
Additionally, the project will enrich existing immunogenomics databases of V(D)J
alleles and receptor sequences across various vertebrate species by applying the
developed methods across hundreds of thousands of samples. To promote the
dissemination of obtained results, the assembled immune receptor sequences will
be shared as an easy-to-use database with a rich set of functionalities. The
developed database will allow life science researchers to systematically compare
somatic events that give rise to receptor variation in vertebrate species and
provide novel insight into the evolution of adaptive immunity. Results of the
project can be found at https://github.com/Mangul-Lab-USC/immune-repertoires-
vertebrate-species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.