* 2041463
* 2018 Waterman Award
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Kristina Olson, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 712,828.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) named Dr. Kristina R. Olson, Associate
Professor of Psychology at the University of Washington as the 2018 Alan T.
Waterman Award recipient. Dr. Olson is recognized for her innovative and
creative research that bring together the methodology of two distinct
disciplines: social cognition and cognitive development to study the origins and
development of biases in young people. She innovatively applies a basic science
approach to questions that had been predominantly studied from a clinical
perspective. This has had a transformative impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among
her many notable discoveries, she found that children believe people have what
they deserve -- they see groups with fewer resources as deserving fewer
resources. Moreover, Olson's research also found the mere existence of
inequalities can cause children to develop prejudices and biased behaviors. In
2013, she organized and began leading a 20-year longitudinal research study of
early childhood gender development. The study currently follows more than 1,000
children aged 3-12 from 45 U.S. states. The project will enable researchers to
track social and behavioral influences on health, and evaluate the importance of
childhood identity and the support children receive to lifelong health and well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Olson is the recipient of several awards,
including: the Association for Psychological Science's Janet Taylor Spence Award
for Transformational Early Career Contributions (2016), Fellow, Association for
Psychological Science (2016), Davida Teller Distinguished Faculty Mentor Award
(2015), SAGE Young Scholars Award (2014), the International Social Cognition
Network's Early Career Award (2014), Fellow, Society for Experimental Social
Psychology (2009), and NSF Graduate Research Fellowship (2005).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Olson received the BA degree in Psychology and
African-American Studies from Washington University - St. Louis in 2003, and the
PhD degree in Social Psychology from Harvard University in 2008. She began her
faculty career at Yale University as an assistant professor (2008 - 2015),
before joining the University of Washington's Psychology
Department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.