* 2041505
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling the role of chemo-mechanics in all solid state batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Kelsey Hatzell, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 07/31/2024
* USD 314,193.00

Transportation accounts for 28% of energy-related greenhouse gas emissions in
the United States. Currently, only 1% of the transportation sector employs
electricity. Advanced energy storage systems are necessary for rapid adoption of
electric vehicles. Energy dense batteries are paramount for decarbonization of
transportation and grid applications. Replacing traditional graphite anode
materials with lithium metal may provide a pathway for increasing the energy
density of a lithium-ion battery. However, lithium metal batteries suffer from
consumptive side effects which limits its cycle lifetime and charge time.
Recently, there has been renewed interest in using a solid electrolyte with
lithium metal anodes. A solid electrolyte can act as a barrier for unwanted
physical and chemical decomposition that leads to unstable electrodeposition
(e.g. dendrite and filament growth). This proposal intends to explore the role
chemo-mechanics has on electrodeposition stability in all solid-state batteries.
This project aims to engage high school, undergraduates, and graduate students
in a diverse array of research and educational opportunities. Educational
outreach through a range of organizations will aim to disseminate the research
findings to the greater Princeton, Philadelphia, and West Lafayette
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental nature of this research seeks
to uncover the nature of lithium electrode kinetics at solid-solid interfaces
for next generation energy dense solid-state batteries. Interface kinetics are
well understood at soft interfaces (solid-gas and solid-liquid) common in many
electrochemical energy conversion and storage applications. These interfaces are
readily accessible with a range of different electroanalytical and materials
characterization probes. Less is known regarding electrode kinetics at solid-
solid interfaces where fundamental charge-transfer mechanisms can be affected by
chemo-mechanical processes. This project aims to understand the nature of
charge-transfer reactions at buried solid-solid interfaces via combining
advanced in situ synchrotron techniques, electrochemistry, and meso-scale
modeling. The project will explore lithium metal/garnet-type Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO)
solid ion conductor electrolyte configurations. Synchrontron characterization
data will be made available via the open source NanoHub platform hosted by
Purdue University. Advanced understanding of lithium electrode kinetics will aid
in device and materials design strategies for safe, energy-dense, and long
lasting energy storage systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.