* 2041692
* Conformations and Dynamics of Modular Redox Enzymes via Site-Specific 2D Infrared Spectroscopy
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Changjian Feng, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 651,450.00

Proteins need to move in order to function, but scientists still know very
little about such motions. This research will allow Dr. Feng to develop a modern
research tool in his own laboratory to identify how proteins move when
performing specific functions. Such an empowering technique is currently lacking
at the home organization. Since the University of New Mexico is a Hispanic
Serving Institution, this award will provide frontline research opportunities
that are rarely made available to their underrepresented minority students. The
project will also provide unique research opportunities to outstanding students
from other institutions, to ensure a diverse scientific workforce that remains
engaged in active, cutting-edge research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deciphering
protein dynamics is a pressing challenge at the forefront of efforts to
understand the underlying mechanisms of electron transfer, a fundamental process
in biology. This project focuses on conformational dynamics of nitric oxide
synthases (NOS), large, modular enzymes. NOSs are important because of the
pivotal roles of nitric oxide production in diverse signaling processes. One
hallmark of NOS is its multi-domain architecture with highly flexible tethers,
allowing for dynamic, regulated interdomain electron transfer. The NOS enzyme
has been extensively investigated, but due to an intrinsic complexity, involving
not only dynamics, but also partner protein binding and posttranslational
modification, a comprehensive picture of how it is regulated remains lacking.
Quantitative insights into both the large-scale domain movements and the more
localized dynamics in the docked state are necessary to provide mechanistic
details. This Transitions project will enable the PI to forge a new direction in
studying the docked state conformations and dynamics via site-specific 2D
infrared (IR) spectroscopy. When combined with the spatial precision provided by
site-selective labeling with IR probes, the approach will enable unprecedented
study of the conformations and dynamics in the NOS docked states with high
spatial and temporal resolution. The objective of this multidisciplinary project
is to achieve residue-specific characterizations of structural dynamics of the
NOS docked states and delineate their contributions to function. As NOS is a
paradigm signaling system, the results will have a broad-reaching impact. The
proposed approach will also provide a blueprint for studying other complex,
dynamic protein systems in which its function is gated by conformational control
of electron transfer between domains. This project thus represents an exciting
next step in studying structure-dynamics-function relationships in multidomain
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.