* 2041643
* CRII: SaTC: Preempting Physical Damage from Control-Related Attacks on Smart Grids' Cyber-Physical Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 08/10/2020,05/31/2022
* Hui Lin, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2022
* USD 148,664.00

Control-related attacks are a severe threat to cyber-physical systems (CPSs)
such as smart grids, because they can introduce catastrophic physical damage by
using malicious control commands crafted in a legitimate format. While current
research efforts have focused on detecting malicious commands that lead to
physical damage, the investigator proposes to preemptively prevent the damage by
disrupting and misleading adversaries' preparation before they issue the
malicious commands. To achieve this objective, the proposed work includes: (i)
characterizing dependencies between normal activities from both the cyber and
physical domains in smart grids; (ii) determining a network spoofing paradigm to
disrupt adversaries' knowledge of smart grids by injecting network packets on
behalf of nonexistent computing nodes; and (iii) crafting decoy measurements to
mislead adversaries into designing damage-free attack strategies. The proposed
work will use software-defined networking (SDN) to prevent physical damage in
smart grids without changing the grids' physical infrastructure. With the wide
use of SDN in different CPSs, this work may serve as the basis for future
research that extends to the broader domains of CPS and Internet-of-Things,
which connect devices from different applications, such as smart health and
smart home. Since CPS companies are upgrading their cyberinfrastructure with
advanced network technologies, this work has promising applications in real
utility environments to increase their resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work has the potential to transform current passive detection methods
into preemptive approaches that disarm adversaries with misleading information.
This work includes the following thrusts: (i) Development of interdisciplinary
methods to identify dependencies between activities from the cyber and physical
domains by combining data analytics and system specifications. Driven by real
data collected from deep-packet network monitoring enabled by the Bro network
analyzer, these methods will reveal the thorough operational logic of smart
grids by integrating knowledge from different disciplines. (ii) Creation of an
SDN-based platform to determine a network spoofing paradigm that resembles
normal activities. By establishing interactions between the Bro network analyzer
and SDN network controllers, the investigator will use the modeling of system
activities to inject network traffic that is statistically indistinguishable
from normal traffic to prevent adversaries from learning the true system
configuration, without affecting legitimate applications. (iii) Creation of an
algorithm to craft decoy measurements that mislead adversaries. To craft the
application-layer payload of the spoofed packets, the investigator will model
adversaries' attack preparation procedure as an optimization problem and thus
determine decoy measurements that will mislead adversaries into designing
attacks that target nonexistent components to thus induce little if any physical
damage. (iv) Validation of the proposed preemptive approach using a cyber-
physical testbed that integrates real SDN-enabled switches and power system
simulations driven by real operational data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.