* 2041598
* Challenges and Opportunities for Electronic Design Automation in the Next Decade
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Xiaobo Hu, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 43,308.00

Electronic design automation (EDA) is a key enabling technology for the advances
in information processing that we are enjoying today. EDA has provided
fundamental design principles and tools empowering the exponential increase of
the number of transistors on an integrated circuit chip over the past 50 years.
Without EDA, it would not have been possible for billion-transistor chips to be
a reality! However, the field of EDA is facing some unique challenges. On one
hand, physical limit of transistor scaling limits future exponential growth in
transistor density. The exorbitant cost of integrated circuit fabrication and
the excessive complexity of EDA tools make it difficult to bring design
automation innovations to practice. On the other hand, the recent rise of
machine learning and artificial intelligence applications and emerging
architectures and technologies calls for more customized solutions to designing
electronic systems. This project seeks to support a workshop, titled Challenges
and Opportunities for Electronic Design Automation in the Next Decade, aims to
assemble a diverse group of leading researchers, from both academia and industry
in the field of EDA, to discuss strategies as well as tactics in tackling the
challenges in EDA. The workshop organizers will make a concerted effort to
invite women, minority and other underrepresented groups to participate the
workshop. Some invited speakers and panelists will be from these groups. The
workshop will address key issues related to curriculum design for training the
next generation EDA researchers, development of special training programs for
graduate and undergraduate students, and collaboration between academia and
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project and the associated workshop will
explore answers to overarching questions including but not limited to (i) what
are the high-risk and high-return research topics, (ii) what other adjacent
fields that EDA research should aggressively seek collaboration with, (iii)
where the scientific findings should be disseminated in order to have the
greatest impact given the interdisciplinary nature of EDA research, and (iv)
where the research funding should come from and how it should be distributed to
encourage more transformative research. A final report will be produced and
disseminated in a premier journal in the EDA field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.