* 2041622
* Collaborative Research: Extreme Thermal Transport Events in Supersonic and Hypersonic Shock Wave-Turbulence Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Danesh Tafti, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 04/30/2024
* USD 251,864.00

High-speed flows near or exceeding the speed of sound causes intense aerodynamic
heating, which requires sophisticated thermal protection systems. The high
temperatures combined with extreme flow events, such as shock waves and
turbulence, reduce the life of propulsion devices, such as gas turbine engines,
high performance aircraft aero-engines, scramjets, rockets, lift-off and reentry
vehicles, among others. The project will address complex thermal transport
processes during the interactions of shock wave and turbulence with the goal of
enabling safer and more reliable aero-propulsion engines. Fundamental
understanding will be promoted, along with training, teaching, and learning by
means of parallel education/outreach components, such as incorporation of
findings in graduate education, and presentations in symposia and conferences.
Women, minority students, and undergraduate students will also participate, as
well as both teachers and students from local high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to improve the understanding of thermal
turbulence transport by considering: (a) effects of shock wave mode, angle,
orientation, and strength, and the sources and modes of shock wave unsteadiness
which alter thermal transport and surface heat transfer, (b) the means whereby
shock wave unsteadiness alters and propagates into subsonic boundary layer
regions to affect near-wall thermal transport mechanisms and surface heat
transfer, (c) effects of the strength and relative size of shock wave induced
separation on thermal transport, (d) effects of shock wave compression heating,
viscous friction heating, and conversion of kinetic energy to internal energy on
thermal transport, and (e) resulting alterations to turbulence and scalar
fluxes, second order turbulent quantities, and coherence and time lag
distributions. Unsteady motions of different types of shock waves and unsteady,
spatially-varying surface heat transfer and thermal transport will be considered
through a coordinated experimental-computational study. A newly developed
supersonic wind tunnel system will be employed, along with large eddy
simulations, to provide detailed flow and thermal field characteristics. Crucial
causal relationships will be clarified through understanding of: (i) associated
thermal transport characteristics, (ii) spatially-dependent and frequency-
dependent coherence and time lag between events at different flow conditions,
(iii) highly-resolved experimental visualizations of unsteady flow features from
which quantitative flow information will be determined, and (iv) spatio-temporal
flow and thermal field-data from numerical
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.