* 2041440
* Collaborative Research: Programming Non-Linear Waves in Compliant Mechanical Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Katia Bertoldi, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 05/31/2024
* USD 413,695.00

Enabled by developments in the additive manufacturing of engineered systems with
unprecedented levels of compositional and structural complexity, there have been
major advances in architected materials that possess exciting mechanical
properties dictated by their engineered structure. Within the realm of dynamics,
the idea of using engineered structures to produce novel properties has been
historically focused primarily on linear waves. This work seeks to understand
the propagation of non-linear waves in mechanical metamaterials with application
toward control of mechanical signals in larger-amplitude loading (for example,
to provide protection during impact events) and toward reconfigurable soft
structures (for example, locomotion of soft robots). This research will promote
interdisciplinary research and teaching. Students of all levels will learn
concepts and techniques from materials science and engineering, computational
and analytic mechanical modeling, advanced manufacturing, and sensing. Moreover,
the research team will integrate these efforts with undergraduate research
programs, outreach efforts, and educational material development at both
institutions to provide research opportunities to underrepresented groups of all
ages (K-12, undergraduate, and graduate).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this work is to understand the fundamental connection between geometry and the
propagation of non-linear waves in compliant mechanical metamaterials comprising
rotating polygons. Rather than limiting the scope to periodic systems as in
previous work, the geometry of the metamaterials will be locally tailored, and
inhomogeneities will be harnessed to achieve target dynamic responses such as
maximal energy absorption, soliton lensing, and locomotion. The multi-faceted
research program will intertwine theoretical, numerical, and experimental
activities to generate new insights into the non-linear dynamic behavior of
mechanical metamaterials based on rotating units. To achieve this, the research
is organized into three thrusts, focusing on (1) the effect of inhomogeneities
on the propagation of non-linear waves, (2) reconfigurability of system dynamics
via non-linear waves, and (3) optimization of geometry and defects via machine
learning to achieve targeted dynamic properties (energy absorption, steering
waves, locomotion, etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the
Dynamics, Control, and Systems Diagnostics (DCSD) and the Mechanics of Materials
and Structures (MOMS) programs in the Civil, Mechanical, and Industrial
Innovation Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.