* 2041546
* Collective Behavior of Cellular Oscillators
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Jonathan Arnold, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/28/2025
* USD 842,421.00

Collective behavior can be observed in a variety of contexts and across
biological scales, from the blinking of fireflies, the marching of locusts, the
flocking of birds, down to the synchronized behavior of cells in tissues. Single
cells have a biological clock, but their synchronized timekeeping is usually
only observed at the level of tens of millions of cells. A grand challenge is
understanding how cellular clocks in organisms, tissues, and cells become
synchronized to keep time. Using a model fungal system, Neurospora crassa,
investigators consider two principal theories on the emergence of clock
synchronization: (1) through a shared biochemical signal between cellular
clocks; (2) through the random switching of clock genes within a cell. In
examining these two scientific theories, investigators explore the origin of the
biological clock from a single cell perspective, which remains an open challenge
since the Nobel Prize winning discoveries of Hall, Young, and Rosbash linking
genes to circadian rhythms. As part of the Broader Impact activities
investigators develop new projects in the area of biological clock research for
two REU site programs in Genomics and Computational Biology and Nanotechnology
and Biomedicine, which actively recruits students from Clark Atlanta University.
The team will also organize and contribute to the Gordon Conference on
Collective Behavior (GRC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
understand the synchronization of clocks between cells, there are several
challenges that need to be addressed, including: (1) lack of working stochastic
network models to describe populations of cellular clocks; (2) lack of a direct
test for interrogating the biochemical signals as quorum sensing based
synchronization mechanisms; (3) lack of knowledge on what signal(s)
synchronize(s) cellular clocks; (4) lack of evidence to determine whether or not
stochastic switching in clock genes plays a role in synchronization â€“ the
stochastic resonance (coherence) hypotheses; (5) lack of understanding how the
clock functions at the predominant life stage of fungi, the filament. The goal
of this work is to understand the synchronization of biological clocks between
cells and filaments in N. crassa by two mechanisms, quorum sensing vs.
Stochastic Resonance (Coherence). The interdisciplinary team will investigate
mechanisms of collective behavior using: novel microfluidics platforms to
measure phase synchronization of biological clocks on a controlled number of
living N. crassa cells, methods from Statistical Physics to test quorum sensing
versus Stochastic Resonance theoretical frameworks, and a newly developed
Continuous in vivo metabolism-NMR (CIVM-NMR) method to identify and characterize
signaling molecules that may be responsible for clock synchronization. The
research-driven Broader Impact activities include: (1) Development of
interdisciplinary research-centered course, Clock Collaboratorium; (2)
Development of undergraduate research projects focused on the central theme of
the biological clock, which will be deployed in two NSF REU site programs; and
(3) Organization of a collective behavior community that will engage through a
new Gordon Research Conference in Newport, RI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.