* 2041927
* CAREER: Defining novel pathways for mitochondrial dynamics in an early-diverging eukaryote
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2020,11/30/2023
* Megan Povelones, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 11/30/2023
* USD 404,183.00

In this project, the investigators will engage high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students in cutting-edge cell biology research to discover how
compartments within cells change shape in response to nutrient availability.
Mitochondria are energy-generating compartments present in large numbers in
complex cells. Mitochondria have a characteristic shape in different cell types,
which is closely correlated to function. The shape of mitochondria is also
highly dynamic, and can readily shift to adapt to different energy requirements.
To discover shared mechanisms for establishment and maintenance of mitochondrial
shape, the researchers will use model organisms from a group of single-celled
parasites called the kinetoplastids. Kinetoplastids are unusual in that each
cell contains only a single mitochondrion that undergoes dramatic changes in
structure and function as the parasites alternate between insect and mammalian
hosts. This arrangement greatly facilitates the analysis of changes in
mitochondrial structure, and will reveal shared mechanisms by which cells
control the number and distribution of their mitochondria. Due to their
evolutionary position, kinetoplastids possess a basal set of mitochondrial shape
proteins, the investigation of which will provide insight into how these
processes work in a wide variety of cell types. To allow for better
understanding of these complex structures, engineering students will create
mitochondrial models using a 3-D printer. This interdisciplinary effort will
illustrate the connections between engineering and biology, and will demonstrate
how this technology may be applied for enhanced understanding and communication
of fundamental questions in cell biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kinetoplastid
parasites such as Crithidia fasciculata and Trypanosoma brucei have long been
important models for basic cellular processes. Kinetoplastid mitochondria in
particular have unusual features, including the fact that there is only one
mitochondrion per cell. This necessitates a thus far unknown mechanism for
regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis and division within the cell cycle. In
addition, the shape and function of the mitochondrion are dramatically and
reversibly altered in different life cycle stages of the parasite. In other
organisms, mitochondrial shape is established and maintained by membrane fusion
and fission events, collectively called mitochondrial dynamics. While much of
the machinery for mitochondrial dynamics has been described in yeast and humans,
how these processes are regulated is not well understood, and not all
mitochondrial dynamics proteins are conserved. The investigators will use a
variety of cellular and molecular biology techniques to identify the mechanisms
controlling mitochondrial shape in kinetoplastids, providing important insight
into how these processes evolved and their function in other organisms.