* 2041068
* CRII: CHS: Empirical and Design Investigations to Address Misleading Online News in Social Media
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Tanushree Mitra, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2023
* USD 126,808.00

This research employs social computing and human-centered approaches to
understand the relationship between people and technology in the context of
online news. It specifically investigates online news sources that propagate
fabricated stories, explores how users engage with these sources on social
media, and examines ways to nudge users to be more conscious consumers of online
news. This investigation aims to provide new perspectives that address digital
misinformation by focusing on the following questions: How can we establish
differences between mainstream sources and misleading sources of online news?
How can we nudge people to be more careful and conscious consumers of online
news? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted along two symbiotic
lines of inquiry. The first involves empirical investigation of misleading
online news sources to develop a deep understanding of their behavior along the
following threads: topical and writing style differences from mainstream
sources, user engagement distinctions, and the corresponding temporal changes.
This inquiry will be based on the following data: a professionally curated list
of online news sources along with their credibility labels from expert fact-
checkers, and tweets sent out by these news sources over a period of at least a
year. The second thrust of this research focuses on exploring design
interventions to increase people's awareness while they read news on social
media sites. Specifically, it will investigate two classes of design nudges on
Twitter. The first intervention, emphasize, will nudge users to reflect on the
ambiguity and uncertainty present in certain news posts. Emphasize will
automatically detect whether a social media news post from a mainstream source
has been questioned and highlight those question tweets for the news reader. The
second intervention, de-emphasize, will be triggered whenever news posts
originate from misleading sources, to make that post less visible in an attempt
to minimize exposure to misleading online news. The human-centered evaluations
that accompany the deployment of these interventions will provide qualitative
and quantitative evidence about user experiences, as well as measurements about
the efficacy of these interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.