* 2042504
* CAREER: Identifying a New Source of Lithium for Sustainable and Renewable Energy Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Kyung Jae Lee, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2026
* USD 427,152.00

While water produced from organic–rich (e.g. petroleum and natural gas) source
rocks has been considered wastewater, it has been recently revealed as a
potential source of substantial amounts of lithium (Li). This opens new pathways
to address the entire petroleum system and Li geochemical cycle. This project
will develop a transformative characterization framework for Li in source rock
brines, thus laying the foundation for converting source rock brines into a
sustainable source of Li. Thus, the goal of this project is to identify a new
source of Li–rich brines in organic–rich source rocks for sustainable energy
storage. This outcome will help address the urgent need to enhance and diversify
the domestic supply of Li, given the recently found potential of organic–rich
source rocks as a source of Li.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To attain the goal, the
research objectives are to (1) experimentally determine the reaction mechanisms
of Li originating from kerogen (solid organic matter of source rocks creating
oil and gas) in natural geologic systems, (2) enhance modeling capability for
characterizing the transport of Li as a function of mineral compositions and
structures through pore–scale modeling, and (3) promote the identification and
utilization of Li–rich brines by integrating this information into basin–scale
modeling. This research program is integrated with the educational goal of
enlightening students in subsurface processes related to sustainable resources
for energy storage. Students will be engaged in the research program by
conducting basin–scale modeling and compositional characterization of source
rock brines to find optimal locations for Li recovery. The PI plans to
disseminate the findings of these integrated research and educational efforts to
industrial collaborators through the development of short courses, panel
discussions, and e–newsletters. Additionally, the educational program will build
upon the PI’s existing mentoring program for high school students on the topic
of sustainable subsurface energy systems with computer programming applications
and leverage a Program for Mastery in Engineering Studies to engage with various
other students from underrepresented groups in STEM. This project will integrate
geochemical experimental characterization techniques and multiscale modeling
approaches for addressing the fate and transport of Li originating from kerogen
in geologic systems. Merging elemental, isotopic, pyrolytic, kinetic, and
thermal–compositional theories into a finite volume pore–scale model and an
integral finite difference basin–scale model is targeted to provide an insight
into observed laboratory behavior and help progress toward a solution to a
complex and expensive problem. The PI will utilize integration of a suite of
experimental characterization techniques and advanced pore and basin scale
modeling techniques to guide engineering efforts that aim to successfully
recover sustainable resources for energy storage. Results from the research
program are intended to create new opportunities of supplying Li for sustainable
energy storage by transforming the source of oil and gas into a source of Li.
The successful demonstration of an advanced approach to characterize Li in the
subsurface energy systems may give rise to field–scale Li recovery from the
source rock brines and potentially unlock vast new Li
reserves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.