* 2042101
* Collaborative Research: Modulation of pheromone-dependent host behavior by gut bacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2025
* Frank Schroeder, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 06/30/2025
* USD 352,924.00

Animals live in association with many microorganisms including bacteria,
collectively referred to as their microbiota. Microbiota are now well known to
regulate development and behaviors of animals. However, how bacteria, present
for example in the gut, influence animal development and disease is poorly
understood. The nematode C. elegans, a tiny worm, is a well-studied experimental
organism that consumes bacteria. Some bacteria survive and colonize the worm
gut, where they produce chemicals that influence worm physiology and behavior.
Preliminary results indicate that specific bacterial diets can change social and
food-finding behaviors of these worms. This project explores how chemicals made
by the bacteria target the worm’s nervous system to alter its behaviors. The
studies will identify the bacterial chemicals and genes required for production
of the chemicals and determine how manipulating these genes in the bacteria
affect the worm’s nervous system. Together, this research provides a detailed
description of how interactions among different organisms, specifically animals
and associated microbiota, shape their life cycles. The research program
supports the research experiences of high school, undergraduate and graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows with efforts made to recruit and involve
members of underrepresented minority groups in this work. Results and
foundational scientific principles will be shared with the public via hands-on
demonstrations at local science museums, via public presentations, and by the
involvement of project participants in local outreach activities. This work
incorporates a collaboration between neuroscientists and chemists, and promotes
interdisciplinary training in this way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbiota are now
well-established to play critical roles in modulating host physiology and
behavior. The mechanisms by which bacterial metabolites regulate host neuronal
functions to influence behavioral outputs is unclear. The nematode C. elegans
consumes bacteria and is associated with diverse bacterial species in the wild.
A subset of commensal bacteria can survive and colonize the worm gut.
Preliminary work indicates that growth of C. elegans on specific bacterial
strains alters its exploratory behavior, in part via the regulation of
production of specific pheromones. The project combines the complementary
expertise of the Sengupta lab in C. elegans behavioral analysis and the
Schroeder lab in metabolomics to describe the mechanisms by which the
interaction of C. elegans with specific bacterial strains alters the host’s
nervous system functions. Specifically, the work characterizes bacteria-driven
behavioral modulation, identifies the targeted neurons in C. elegans, and
characterizes the mechanisms by which bacterial metabolites alter neuronal
properties. This research uses bacterial and C. elegans genetics, as well as
unbiased metabolomics, to identify and manipulate bacterial and nematode
biochemical pathways, and characterize the effects of these manipulations on
host behavior. Results from this collaborative and interdisciplinary work will
provide new insights into the mechanisms by which animal behavior is regulated
in response to specific organismal interactions. In particular, the project will
provide insights into how animals leverage their microbiota to alter metabolic
pathways, thereby coupling their environmental experiences with behavioral
plasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.