* 2042173
* Particle clustering in dilute pyroclastic density currents and plumes
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Michael Manga, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 10/31/2024
* USD 216,164.00

Pyroclastic density currents are hot and fast-moving mixtures of solid particles
and gas produced by explosive volcanic eruptions. They travel great distances
over the land surface, up to many tens of kilometers, pose substantial hazards,
and alter landscapes. Spreading volcanic plumes in the atmosphere transport
particles from explosive eruptions to even greater distances, many hundreds of
kilometers. The formation of clusters of particles in these explosive eruptions
is a critical process because clusters affect the concentration of particles and
thus the speed of the flows and the distance they travel. Clustering, however,
remains a poorly understood process. By quantifying the controls on clustering,
it is possible to constrain particle concentration in geophysical turbulent gas-
particle mixtures which is essential for understanding flow dynamics.
Pyroclastic density currents are the most devastating of all volcanic hazards,
in part because they propagate over the ground surface and with great speed.
Volcanic plumes present substantial hazards to communities and aviation as they
can disperse ash over great distances. Results will provide new insight into
particle concentration and hence flow speed, dynamic pressure, sedimentation
rates, and hazard. The experiments will have relevance outside the field of
volcanology because turbulent particle-laden flows are common in both nature and
industrial processes such as snow avalanches and chemical reactors. The research
effort provides multidisciplinary training opportunities for students and
enables collaboration between academic and government
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory experiments will be used to
identify the controls on clustering and the implications for volcanic particle-
laden flows. The concentration of particles in volcanic particle-laden flows
controls the flow density and hence flow velocity, distance travelled, and
hazard. In dilute, turbulent spreading plumes and pyroclastic density currents,
particle concentration is controlled by sedimentation which in turn is
controlled by how particles interact with the surrounding gas and with each
other. A critical, but not well characterized, process controlling particle
sedimentation and concentration in dilute flows is the clustering of particles,
in which zones of higher concentration develop. The experimental setup will be
designed to permit a large number of experiments and hence to explore
relationships between parameters and processes including the role of particle
size and size distribution. A novel acoustic sensing method will be developed
and tested to measure particle concentration. The experimental results will be
used to interpret the deposits from historical eruptions to identify when and
how clustering affects eruption dynamics and the dispersal of erupted particles.
A quantitative description of clustering will improve the ability to relate
field deposits to the dynamics of these currents. The experimental results can
be used to improve models for pyroclastic hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.