* 2042363
* Identifying Catalysts for Increasing Student Diversity in Engineering in a Predominantly White Institution
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Arunkumar Pennathur, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2023
* USD 148,732.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by building institutional
capacity for broadening participation in undergraduate engineering. Colleges of
Engineering in predominantly white institutions continue to struggle to recruit,
retain and successfully matriculate their non-white students. Using a systems
approach, this project aims to identify catalysts that can unify programmatic
efforts to produce greater institutional success in broadening participation.
These catalysts can exist throughout an organization, and can take the form of
people, knowledge, money, policies, built environments, and other resources. A
coherent set of programmatic efforts can lead to greater transformative power
and sustainability. The project will generate templates that other colleges of
engineering in the United States can use to discover and understand their own
capacities and to further their own recruitment, retention and graduation
efforts for students from underrepresented groups. The ultimate aim of the
project is to enable the success of a diverse pool of engineering graduates, and
to strengthen the diversity of the engineering workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to generate systemwide
capacity change catalysts in a College of Engineering at a predominantly white
institution. The project conceptualizes the college as a complex sociotechnical
organization with two subsystems at work. The social subsystem consists of
people such as students, faculty, staff, and administrators. The technical
subsystem consists of elements that can impact capacity building, including
goals, policies, processes, programs, data, technology, and know-how. The
project uses semi-structured interviews and ideation focus groups with students,
faculty, and staff from admissions, advising, and career services as well as
administrative leaders. Results will be used to model the sociotechnical system,
to develop system capacity matrices and social focal role networks, and to
generate capacity change catalysts. The project contributes to identifying and
understanding, in-depth, the systemwide catalysts in predominantly white
engineering colleges that will enable these colleges to improve their capacity
to recruit, retain and successfully matriculate underrepresented students. The
project also contributes a new sociotechnical systems lens and lays out a
template for using the lens to model an educational unit. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.