* 2042251
* CAREER: Unique brain structures in human cortex: From structure to function and cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Kevin Weiner, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 532,279.00

The human brain contains unique neuroanatomical structures and cortical
convolutions that are absent in the brains of other mammals. Studying these
structures relative to human brain function and cognition is especially
important as it provides insight regarding the contributions of distinctive
parts of the brain that distinguish humans. Although scientists have been
studying the human brain for over a century, we still lack basic knowledge about
these “unique brain structures” or UBS, that are specific to the human brain.
The main research goals are to build a solid neuroanatomical foundation to
better understand the relationship between these UBS relative to brain function
and cognition in both children and adults. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of
this project is to investigate how individual differences in cognition and
functional representations in the human cerebral cortex relate to individual
differences in neuroanatomical features of these UBS. Specifically, this
research quantitatively investigates the UBS shapes in cortical folding called
tertiary sulci or convolutions, which serve as a meso-scale link between
microstructural and functional properties of the human brain. These studies
explore the relationship among these UBS across different lobes of the brain
relative to cognition and functional brain architecture in both children and
adults and reveal the changes in UBS that arise during human development. The
results of this research provide the first comprehensive UBS database which also
includes functional and cognitive measures in individual participants. This
project is accelerated by creating new analytic tools that employ machine
learning algorithms to automatically and rapidly define these UBS. A key
scientific and educational component of the project is that the new UBS database
is freely available to neuroscientists in the fields of brain mapping, brain
connectivity and functional neuroimaging and also as an interactive browser-
based learning tool generalizable to high school and college students. These
studies deepen our understanding of the neuroanatomical basis for human-specific
aspects of cognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.