* 2042930
* CAREER: Engineering Interfacial Flows and Instabilities in Solidifying Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Pierre-Thomas Brun, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2026
* USD 466,953.00

Patterns are ubiquitous in nature. Examples range from the regular coils that
form when honey is poured onto toast to the orderly arrangement of dewdrops on a
spiderweb. These structures originate from fluid mechanical instabilities, which
have been thoroughly studied in the context of pure liquids, e.g. water and oil.
In the real world, fluid dynamical systems are however often more complex; for
example, latex starts as a viscous liquid but transitions to rubber when cured.
The goal of this CAREER project is to further our fundamental understanding of
fluid flows in the context of solidifying liquids. Specifically, the project
will investigate fluidic instabilities in curable elastomers and the solids they
eventually form. This newly gained understanding will be leveraged to develop
new fabrication pathways akin to 3D printing. While this project could have a
broad economic impact, the research will also provide educational opportunities
for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, with focus on broadening
participation of students from underrepresented groups. In particular, arresting
flows with curing will be used to give tangible forms to abstract concepts in
fluid mechanics. Manipulating these physical objects will enrich the students
experience and ignite their interest in STEAM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award will support experiments carried out with curable elastomers and
development of theoretical models to further our understanding of the
interfacial fluid mechanics of solidifying liquids. Due to favorable downscaling
with length, capillary effects are dominant for submillimetric objects and play
a key role in a number of engineering and natural processes. As such,
interfacial effects have been widely researched, albeit primarily in Newtonian
fluids. In particular, the interplay between hydrodynamics, solidification and
the morphology of the solids formed when arresting interfacial flows remains
poorly understood. Additionally, interfacial instabilities are often studied
close to threshold, such that our understanding of nonlinear pattern formation
in these systems is sparse. In this project, the investigators will
significantly advance engineering science by studying the physics of viscous
jets and films in curable polymers and by elucidating the shape-flow coupling in
these systems. The project capitalizes on stability analysis and will help
revive this area of great fundamental and educational importance by providing a
rich and largely unexplored class of problems at the confluence of mechanics and
material science. Novel experiments involving the use of templates will be
developed to rationalize nonlinear pattern selection and self-assembly in these
systems. The new fundamental knowledge gained in the project will help solve the
so-called inverse problem: finding the optimal set of initial conditions and
interactions that lead a flow of solidifying liquid to form a target shape, a
feat that could spark the development of new fabrication
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.