* 2042525
* CAREER: Next-Generation Integrated Hybrid DC-DC Converters for Future More-DC World
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Hanh-Phuc Le, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

In modern residential and commercial buildings today, electrical loads are
growing fast to be more native direct-current (DC) loads, including computers,
smartphones, cameras, smart-home devices, LED lightbulbs, information screens,
televisions, microwave oven, and other appliances, etc. To optimize efficiency
and maintain the reliability of the electric grid, DC sources and energy
buffers, such as solar energy and other renewable energy sources, vehicle
batteries, and other separate batteries are integrated at an unprecedented rate.
While these electrical components are direct-current (DC) in nature, they still
need to interface with the legacy alternating-current (AC) power line in our
home and building, leading to inefficiencies in power delivery (10%-30% loss in
total power consumption), space utilization, and added 10%-15% overall system
cost for many AC-DC adapters. In addition, AC distribution at 110-220 volts in
commercial buildings and households also poses a safety concern especially for
children as AC wall outlets and cords are responsible for 15% and 63% of
injuries, respectively, in children aged 12 years and younger. The goal of this
integrated research and education career development is to facilitate faster
developments and increase adoption of DC micro-/nano-grids for more efficient DC
distribution in residential and commercial use in a More-DC world, by realizing
a next-generation integrated hybrid DC-DC power converter family with
demonstrations for multiple important applications. The converters are designed
to achieve superior efficiencies, smaller sizes, and lower system cost that can
reduce the number and impact of inefficient AC-DC conversions. The research
program, positioned at the boundary of integrated circuits and power
electronics, aims at fundamental advancements in converter technologies,
integrated circuit designs, integrated packaging, and system integration for DC
power management and delivery, applicable in billions of home and office
devices. The research outcomes can be applied and create positive impacts in
improving efficiency and density of power management and delivery in many
applications, including mobile battery chargers, mobile computing, data centers,
DChomes/DC-buildings, automotive vehicles, motor drive, and LED lightings. A
significant part of the research program is to integrate fundamental research
with education in the area of integrated power electronics and energy efficiency
through training and involvement of US San Diego graduate and undergraduate
students, specific outreach modules that will engage and attract K-12 students
and the general public to this important STEM area, and teaching activities that
integrate research topics and findings in the curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the research goal, the objectives of this CAREER proposal
are to: (1) investigate and implement scalable integrated converters with high
input voltage and large conversion ratio based on a novel single-inductor multi-
synchronous stage (SIMS) DC-DC converter architecture that can efficiently
provide large conversion ratios from high input voltages in order to minimize
the number and impact of AC-DC conversions, (2) study and design integrated
packaging procedures using integrated silicon capacitors &lt;br/&gt;to
fundamentally reduce distribution loss and improve the system efficiency and
power density, (3) generalize the median-average analysis (MAA) methodology, and
use it to provide more accurate, intuitive model and control of hybrid DC-DC
converters in order to bridge key knowledge gaps in understanding core
operations and control of hybrid converters, (4) demonstrate and evaluate the
feasibility of a DC nano-grid using a single AC/DC converter to supply multiple
DC loads through the integrated converter prototypes developed in this project,
and (5) demonstrate the integrated power delivery systems in a number of example
applications, including battery charger, mobile and highperformance computing,
and DC-home/DC-building power distribution. This comprehensive effort enables
important innovations and fundamental advances to push the boundary of two
areas, integrated circuits (with high input voltages, high power and current
density) and power electronics (with large direct step-down, and integrated
hybrid architecture).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.