* 2042368
* CAREER: Odor-Guided Flapping Flight: Novel Fluid Dynamic Mechanisms of Insect Navigation
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Chengyu Li, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Insects rely on odor-guided flapping flight to mate and hunt for prey. They
navigate by tracking odor trails in complex flow environments to detect and
locate distant targets. During this odor-guided navigation, the flapping wings
serve for force production and actively draw odor plumes towards the antennae
via wing-induced flow. It is hypothesized that the “flapping” used by insects
serves the same function as the “sniffing” in mammals for enhancing olfactory
detection. Understanding how insects achieve the balance between aerodynamic
performance and olfactory sensitivity is the stepping stone towards transforming
this feat in engineering solutions for the navigation of miniature aerial
vehicles in GPS-denied environments, with important applications for search in
natural disasters, chemical leaking monitoring, and drug trafficking detection.
To this end, the objective of this project is to establish a physics-driven
understanding of the odor-tracking flapping flight in nature. The project also
encompasses a variety of education and outreach activities to promote diversity
in engineering and strengthen the future STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying fluid dynamic principles of
olfactory searching in nature remain largely unknown. This project will test the
hypothesis that the enhancement of the olfactory sensitivity during navigation
can be achieved by regulating the odorant transport in unsteady wing-induced
flow through modulating flapping locomotion. A combined high-fidelity
computational simulation and theoretical treatment will be used to examine the
unsteady flow generated by flapping wings and its associated odorant transport
process. The application of a novel computational fluid dynamics-informed
simultaneous localization and mapping will be used to explore the odor-tracking
algorithms in flying insects. The research will reveal the overarching fluid
dynamic mechanisms of odor-guided navigation in nature after the completion of
three specific aims: 1) characterize the unsteady aerodynamics and odorant
transport in odor-tracking flights; 2) determine the influences of wing-induced
unsteady flow on the spatiotemporal distribution of odor plume structures; 3)
elucidate the interactions between the unsteady flow and odorant transport
during navigation. The findings will advance the development of design
principles for bio-inspired flying robots with superior aerodynamic performance
and olfactory sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.