* 2042314
* CAREER: Learning Smart Meter Data to Enhance Distribution Grid Modeling and Observability
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Zhaoyu Wang, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,714.00

This NSF CAREER project aims to provide the theoretical and computational
foundation that will allow unlocking the untapped potential of smart meters and
radically enhance electric power distribution grid observability in both normal
and outage conditions. The project will transform existing distribution grid
modeling and monitoring that relies on costly sensors to a scalable and robust
method using widely-deployed smart meters. The intellectual merits of the
project include developing new optimization and probabilistic graph learning
methods to enable data-driven real-time network modeling, rapid detection of
large-scale outages, and robust distribution system state estimation. The
broader impacts of the project include integrating power engineering education
with data science through training professional workforce for data challenges,
developing open-source datasets, and providing outreach to high-school students
for interactive learning of smart grids. If successful, this project will
provide U.S. utilities with better situational awareness at minimum sensor
investment cost, thus saving millions of dollars, while promoting seamless
integration of renewable energy, and enhancing grid
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing deployment of smart meters
extends monitoring capability to grid edges and provides unprecedented amounts
of data. However, most utilities use smart meters for billing purposes only,
without exploring insights or gaining actionable information from them because
these data are limited to low-resolution and unsynchronized measurements. The
proposed project will open a new venue to enable utilities to extract useful
intelligence from smart meters through three major technical innovations: (1)
Real-time topology identification, where the approach is to design a Laplacian-
like matrix that can capture the physical network feature and leverage its
inherent sparse structure to discover nodal connectivity even from low-quality
measurements. For online parameter identification, a novel bottom-up
optimization algorithm using only smart meter data is proposed. (2) A new graph
learning approach that takes advantages of intrinsic conditional independencies
among smart meters and other outage information sources to serve as a data
fusion framework for fast, scalable, and accurate outage detection. (3) A multi-
objective robust data recovery technique to minimize smart meter asynchrony
error. A hierarchical reinforcement learning-aided method is proposed to
overcome the scalability issue, and to enable joint primary-secondary
distribution system state estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.