* 2042471
* I-Corps:   Artificial intelligence-driven process for computationally predicting the  outcomes of civil legal matters
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Joel Cooper, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an artificial intelligence-driven process for computationally
predicting the outcomes of civil legal matters. At present, attorneys estimate
the viability and value of a new civil legal matter. The proposed technology
leverages artificial intelligence to standardize, systematize, and externalize
this time-intensive and suboptimal process. The platform intakes new case
information and generate both an assessment of the case and a prediction of its
likely settlement value. This represents an advance in managing legal affairs by
improved case selection, increased efficiency, and better decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
an artificial intelligence system that provides civil legal case values and the
appropriate action to take in response to the analysis. The proposed technology
uses a modeling process where features and associated weights are combined
across multiple computational models, including data-driven artificial
intelligence (AI) models, rule-based models, and models bounded by meta-analytic
research. In addition, the proposed technology will include a centralized
database using natural language processing to render the garnered cases into a
computationally useful form. One challenge is that the data are often
confidential and stored in disparate locations. Federated learning, a technique
that trains an algorithm across multiple decentralized databases holding local
data samples without exchanging the data samples, will be deployed. The method,
which is the first application of federated learning to legal data, enables
expansion of the product to numerous users while ensuring privacy and
confidentiality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.