* 2042529
* CAREER: Neuropeptidergic control of life cycle transition in Cnidaria
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Nagayasu Nakanishi, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2026
* USD 564,694.00

The evolutionary origin of nervous systems is a fundamental problem in biology.
Resolving this problem requires a clearer understanding of how the first nervous
system functioned. By investigating how evolutionarily ancient neuropeptides
control life cycle transition - from a larva into a juvenile form - in a sea
anemone, this CAREER grant will establish a foundation for understanding how an
early nervous system regulated developmental processes. Furthermore, this grant
will benefit society in several ways. First, it will promote an in-depth
understanding of the process of science at both undergraduate and graduate
levels, by integrating research activities into a course aimed at advanced
undergraduates and graduate students. The project is expected to expose up to
175 undergraduate and graduate students to research over five years. Second,
this project will broaden participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM
through participation in the Undergraduate Student Mentoring Program at the
University of Arkansas. Third, this grant will strengthen research and
educational environments of neuroscience and will pave the way for establishing
Center for Integrative Systems Neuroscience at the University of Arkansas, which
will promote collaborative research and education, and community outreach, in
diverse fields of neuroscience in the State of Arkansas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanism by which neuropeptides control life cycle
transition is poorly understood in Cnidaria (i.e. jellyfish, corals and sea
anemones). The proposed research plan will address this problem by elucidating
how evolutionarily ancient Wamide neuropeptides control the timing of
metamorphosis initiation in the sea anemone cnidarian N. vectensis. More
specifically, the proposed project will 1) employ ligand binding assays to
uncover Wamide receptors that are involved in metamorphosis regulation, and 2)
use RNA-seq and CRISPR-Cas9-mediated reverse genetics to determine the identity
and function of transcription factors that are regulated by Wamide signaling at
metamorphosis. This study will enable comparative studies of mechanisms
underlying neuropeptidergic regulation of life cycle transition across Cnidaria
and its sister group Bilateria (e.g. worms and vertebrates). Such comparative
studies are essential for defining deeply conserved and divergent mechanisms of
neuropeptidergic regulation of postembryonic development. This knowledge, in
turn, will contribute to our understanding of the evolution of nervous systems,
and the evolution of development, by providing fundamental insights into 1) the
ancestral mechanism by which the nervous system regulated postembryonic
development in animals, and 2) how this mechanism has changed since the split of
Cnidaria and Bilateria that occurred over 600 million years
ago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.