* 2042948
* A systems biology framework to uncover rules governing robustness of a microbial community
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Nitin Baliga, Institute for Systems Biology
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2025
* USD 729,313.00

This project is uncovering how a microbial community adapts to changes in its
environment to enable powerful biotechnology solutions, such as the production
of high value commodity chemicals in a sustainable manner. Adapting to
fluctuations in resource availability is an energetically expensive process for
a microbial community, requiring the modulation of hundreds to thousands of
genes. This project is characterizing the molecular and cellular networks of a
microbial community that drive this adaptive process. Activities in this project
are using a systems biology approach to study a microbial community as a whole.
Specifically, using modern sequencing technologies this project is investigating
how controlled environmental fluctuations induce changes in the expression of
all genes of a synthetic microbial community of two organisms that play a
central role across diverse environments, including lake sediment, soil, and the
human gut, contributing to a biogeochemically important process of cycling &gt;1
gigaton of carbon annually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing innovative
computational modeling technologies these data are being analyzed to uncover how
regulatory networks drive the dynamic community-wide gene expression changes, to
coordinate flux changes through metabolic pathways, and ultimately manifest in
overall improved fitness of the community. In so doing, this project is
generating a predictive and mechanistic understanding of the adaptive processes
of a microbial community. Hypotheses based on the predictive and mechanistic
understanding of the adaptive process are being tested using targeted genetic
and environmental manipulation of the cellular and molecular networks of the
community. The research capabilities, predictive models, and knowledge being
generated in this project are widely applicable to research and biotechnology
programs in the public and private sectors, including projects across the MCB
and IOS Divisions of NSF. To ascertain wide outreach, this project is leveraging
a long-term NSF-funded effort to engage women, minorities, and disadvantaged
students and teachers, to bring current science concepts and practices generated
by this project into high school classrooms. Curricula developed in this project
are being disseminated across all 50 states in the US and across &gt;100
countries worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.