* 2042142
* CAREER: Redefining Scientific Literacy at the Community Level - Researching Science Learning using a Social Network Approach
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Kirstin Busch, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 04/30/2026
* USD 654,696.00

Developing solutions to large-scale collective problems -- such as resilience to
environmental challenges -- requires scientifically literate communities.
However, the predominant conception of scientific literacy has focused on
individuals, and there is not consensus as to what community level scientific
literacy is or how to measure it. Thus, a 2016 National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine report, “Science Literacy: Concepts, Contexts, and
Consequences,” stated that community level scientific literacy is undertheorized
and understudied. More specifically, the committee recommended that research is
needed to understand both the i) contexts (e.g., a community’s physical and
social setting) and ii) features of community organization (e.g., relationships
within the community) that support community level science literacy and
influence successful group action. This CAREER award responds to this nationally
identified need by iteratively refining a model to conceptualize and measure
community level scientific literacy. The model and metrics developed in this
project may be applied to a wide range of topics (e.g., vaccination, pandemic
response, genetically-modified foods, pollution control, and land-use decisions)
to improve a community’s capacity to make scientifically-sound collective
decisions. This CAREER award is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) and the EHR CORE Research (ECR) programs. It supports the AISL program
goals to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. It supports
the ECR program goal to advance relevant research knowledge pertaining to STEM
learning and learning environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will conceptualize, operationalize, and measure community level scientific
literacy. This project will use a comparative multiple case study research
design. Three coastal communities, faced with the need to make scientifically-
informed land-use decisions, will be studied sequentially. A convergent mixed
methods design will be employed, in which qualitative and quantitative data
collection and analyses are performed concurrently. To describe the i) context
of each community case, this project will use qualitative research methods,
including document analysis, observation, focus groups, and interviews. To
measure the ii) features of community organization for each community case,
social network analysis will be used. The results from this research will be
disseminated throughout and at the culmination of the project through
professional publications and conference presentations as well as with community
stakeholders and the general public. The integrated education activities include
a professional learning certificate for informal science education professionals
and STEM graduate students. This certificate emphasizes high-quality community-
engaged scholarship, placing students with partners such as museums, farmer’s
markets, and libraries, to offer informal learning programs in their
communities. This professional learning program will be tested as a model to
provide training for STEM graduate students who would like to communicate their
research to the public through outreach and extension
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.