* 2042982
* CAREER: Advanced Surface Coating of Metallic Powders by Vibration-Enhanced High-Power Impulse Magnetron Sputtering for Sintering-Based Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Carlos Castano, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 01/31/2026
* USD 525,854.00

Sintering is one of the most practical manufacturing processes in producing
density-controlled materials from powder feedstock. However, producing
industrially applicable powder alloy precursors is challenging. Although pre-
mixing pure metal powders have allowed a wide range of compositions by
conventional sintering, rapid heating and cooling in modern sintering techniques
inevitably results in new but unwanted chemical gradients, as well as
microstructural and property anisotropy. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award will investigate a high-power impulse magnetron sputtering
process as an advanced technology to modify the surface of metallic powders. The
deposition of thin films on the powders forming core/shell systems can provide
solutions to make different alloys with more homogeneous and controlled
microstructures when used as powder feedstock. This new class of powders will
enable a reliable supply of raw materials for cost-effective sintering of
reproducible components in the aerospace, automotive, energy, and healthcare
industries. The integrated educational and outreach activities of this project
will broadly concentrate on: 1) educating and training women and
underrepresented minorities as the future generation of highly-skilled leaders
in advanced manufacturing, 2) establishing a pipeline of diverse undergraduate
students to pursue graduate studies in collaboration with James Madison
University in Virginia through special summer programs, and 3) implementing an
online set of virtual laboratories in advanced materials characterization of
core/shell structures as well as materials processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall research objective of this project is to establish the scientific
underpinnings for the surface modification of micro- and nano-powders into
core/shell systems that promote three-phase transformations in sintering-based
processes. The core/shell of various combinations (e.g., aluminum-copper,
titanium-copper, copper-chromium and nickel-chromium, etc.) will be the eutectic
compositions for modeling because of their industrial relevance, an ability to
form precipitation hardening alloys, and excellent high-temperature properties.
It is hypothesized that high-power impulse magnetron sputtering combined with
the vibrational motions of powder holders can achieve conformal thin films on
powders, which are desired to produce favorable microstructures. To test the
hypothesis, the project will study sputtering discharges to understand the
nucleation and growth mechanism of thin films on complex geometries such as
spherical powders when including vibrations. This research also aims to
understand the role of powder-film interface in the two-phase core/shell
diffusion couple and its effect on the final part microstructure from sintering.
The combined strategy of the project will lead to a new method of manufacturing
core/shell materials suitable for modern sintering
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.