* 2042612
* RAPID: Digital Social Connection and Immune Biology among Emerging Adults: Assessing Novel Sources of Health Resilience During the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2022
* Jeffrey Snodgrass, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 07/31/2022
* USD 34,660.00

The primary aim of our study is to understand whether, when, and how social
connections through the internet and other electronic means promote rather than
compromise health at the level of immune biology during the current pandemic
crisis. The positive impacts of social connections on general health and immune
biology are well-documented. However, during the current health crisis, digital
interactions necessarily substitute for conventional, person-to-person contacts,
especially during key periods such as lockdowns, with potential negative health
impacts for some, but with compensatory and thus positive impacts for others.
Researchers do not yet understand whether these decreases in face-to-face social
interactions might be beneficially compensated by increases in digital social
connections, and so sustain health and immune biology. In this study, we
anticipate that the social support emerging adults (U.S. undergraduate students)
find in digital social contexts might help them maintain their immune function
via digital proxy social interactions that nevertheless satisfy real-world
psychosocial needs, and thereby influence their health because of the link
between social contact and immune biology. The primary contributions here are to
a) provide better evidence for whether social connectedness through digital
means affects immune biology; and b) analyze the content and process of digital
interaction to determine which relational strategies are helpful/ healthy and
which are counterproductive/ dysfunctional. Validating this projects’ central
hypotheses will lead to the development of new perspectives and practical
interventions on how to maintain health during pandemic events and other
disasters. The involvement of students as research collaborators contributes to
their educational development. The research team will also develop for the
larger public educational materials documenting this study. Overall, the project
serves as a model of integrated anthropological research, education, and public
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research combines psychological
anthropological approaches with genomics studies of how social experience affect
gene expression to gain new biocultural perspectives on health resilience. The
study draws from and contributes to theoretical understandings of what
anthropologists call cultural consonance—roughly, the extent to which
individuals are congruent (or not) with socially shared norms regarding proper
behavior and interaction, which has well-documented health linkages. Offline/
online cultural consonance will be assessed via online questionnaires, where the
research team will also collect other relevant social interaction, demographic,
and health data (such as digital technology use, mental health, and respiratory
symptoms). Via blood samples, the research team will assess respondents’ immune
biology (antiviral and inflammation activity), analyzing the samples to see if
and how gene expression related to immune function changes. The study will
observe participants over time to document how changes in consonance with
offline/ online social norms are associated with changes in immune biology/
COVID symptoms. These linked social support and health processes need to be
examined now at the peak of the epidemic and its initial sweep through the
population, as behaviors and biology change rapidly in ways that establish
subsequent long-term trajectories of individual behavior and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.