* 2042421
* Collaborative Research: Redox Ratios in Amphiboles as Proxies for Volatile Budgets in Igneous Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Molly McCanta, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2024
* USD 55,416.00

Iron is the only element with multiple valence states (iron metal or Fe0,
ferrous iron or Fe2+, and ferric iron or Fe3+) that is a major constituent in
rock-forming minerals. It has long been a goal of analytical geochemists to
develop methods to analyze the amounts of each of these individually, because
their relative abundances record how oxygen evolved in the systems from which
the minerals formed. Hydrogen is also an important element in understanding
magma evolution. This project will develop methodology to make such measurements
on one important mineral group: amphiboles using two types of spectroscopy.
X-ray absorption spectroscopy will measure iron valence state, and Raman
spectroscopy will measure both iron valence state and the amount of hydrogen
present. This work is important because it will enable geochemists to trace how
hydrogen and the different valence states of iron behave in magmas as amphiboles
crystallize. It will also support undergraduate and graduate student researchers
by providing hands-on laboratory training, contributing to workforce development
and graduate school preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will undertake four interrelated tasks aimed at creating and applying a
calibration for hydrogen, ferric, and ferrous iron in amphibole minerals using
Raman and x-ray absorption spectroscopies.&lt;br/&gt;1. The team will create an
amphibole calibration for microanalysis of ferric iron using x-ray absorption
spectroscopy (XAS). Development of techniques for microanalysis of Fe3+/Fe2+
remains a high priority for in situ analyses of geological samples in standard
thin sections. The need is particularly acute for amphiboles, as it is a
dominant silicate host for ferric iron in igneous and metamorphic rocks.
Calibration of this technique requires access to dozens of amphibole samples
with known Fe3+ and H contents and time-consuming analyses of oriented single
crystals. &lt;br/&gt;2. The team will create a Raman spectral library of the
same well-characterized samples for use in interpreting and potentially deriving
Fe3+ and H contents. Recent work by a group at the University of Hamburg
suggests that both Fe3+ and H may be determined from Raman spectra of
amphiboles. Testing this work and establishing robust Raman calibrations will
enable the use of Raman scattering as a way to probe both the ferric iron and
hydrogen content of amphiboles, and could be applied to an extremely diverse set
of amphibole data collected both in the lab and in the field. It will also fill
in the sparse amphibole single-crystal data in the existing RRUFF database with
powder data increasing the viability of the database.&lt;br/&gt;3. The team will
characterize the partitioning of Fe3+ and H between amphibole and melt in
controlled experimental conditions. Measuring the ferric iron and H contents in
amphiboles will provide immense geologic value only if they can account for the
intensive and extensive variables that control the geochemical partitioning
between melt and crystal, and the dehydrogenation of amphibole. Amphibole
synthesis experiments at controlled P, T, XH2O and fO2 will be conducted. The
synthetic amphiboles, glasses, and associated minerals will be analyzed for
hydrogen and iron partitioning behavior. By conducting experiments with a range
of starting compositions and oxygen fugacities, they will build a database that
can be applied to natural amphiboles.&lt;br/&gt;4. The team will explore the
effect of Fe3+ on partitioning and geobarometers involving amphibole using the
Shiveluch volcano super-hydrous magmas as a case study. Using the calibrations
from the above three tasks, they will be able to better constrain the P-T- fO2
evolution of amphiboles from Shiveluch volcano, the most explosive volcano in
the world during the Holocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.