* 2042029
* I-Corps: Value-Added Products from Decommissioned Composite Material Wind Turbine Blades
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Russell Gentry, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to explore
translation of mass-market architectural, engineering and construction (AEC)
products produced from repurposed Fiber Reinforced Polymer (FRP) composite wind
turbine blades. FRP wind turbine blades are made from high quality composite
materials but do not recycle into new FRP materials. As a result, obsolete
blades are currently disposed in a landfill or incinerated. These disposal
methods are problematic from an economic, environmental, and social perspective.
Thousands of first-generation wind turbines are currently being decommissioned
and the blades stockpiled for want of alternative disposal solutions. Using the
proposed technology, the wind blades will be converted to electrical power
transmission structures and other large-scale civil infrastructure products
using proprietary software and hardware developed by the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
algorithms and software for wind blade modeling and analysis and in methods for
wind blade re-use. The algorithms create geometric and structural models of wind
turbine blades automatically from point clouds built from laser scans or
photographs. The algorithms also create engineering property data required for
structural analysis of the re-use structures under civil engineering loading
conditions, which are quite different from the aerodynamic loading for which the
wind blades were originally designed. The software includes methods for the
automated production of digital models of the wind blades, for visualization,
product design, structural design and analysis, and fabrication and
construction, all starting from the proprietary processing of digitized scans of
the blades using LIDAR or photogrammetry. In addition, new methods and hardware
may facilitate structural re-use applications of the wind blades in large-scale
civil infrastructure applications. Further research provides the ability to
predict the remaining life in the composite materials within the decommissioned
wind turbine blades and safe stress limits for use in various re-use
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.