* 2042870
* CAREER: Towards Unbiased Long-Range Freight Planning Through Passive-Sensors and Workforce Diversity
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Sarah Hernandez, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 04/30/2026
* USD 570,662.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will produce freight-goods
movement data at a resolution needed to make informed, data-driven, decisions
about long-range transportation infrastructure investments and policies. Such
decisions affect the health, safety, and prosperity of US citizens and the
freight transportation industry. Since the inception of nationwide shipment
surveys in the 1990s, little has changed in how public agencies collect
commodity flow data, despite the increasing complexity of freight operations and
supply chains. With the 2017 federal mandates for electronic logbooks and
widespread use of Global Positioning Systems, there is tremendous potential to
reimagine how freight data is collected. The research objective of this grant is
to derive unbiased spatial and temporally-continuous commodity and industry
information from passively collected, anonymized freight movement data
(specifically for truck and waterborne freight). The work will enable
researchers and practitioners to advance 20-40 year forecast models of freight
movement, as well as formulate solutions to critical industry issues such as
driver shortages, Hours-of-Service regulations, and lack of safe and available
parking. Additionally, diversity in the transportation workforce is critical for
ensuring that investment and infrastructure decisions reflect the unique needs
of diverse travelers. An innovative service-learning education plan is
integrated into the project to improve job attraction and retention rates of
female transportation professionals and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will yield positive societal impacts by enabling transportation
agencies to leverage increasingly available samples of passively collected
freight movement data for timely, unbiased decision-making regarding
infrastructure investment, environmental policy, and economic development. The
research will: 1) determine the extent to which activity patterns derived from
passively collected mobile sensor data accurately predict commodity carried; 2)
identify the extent to which vehicle body characteristics derived from roadway
traffic sensors predict commodity carried; 3) establish and validate bias
detection and quality measures for passively collected freight movement data.
The project will promote womenâ€™s initial engagement and ongoing career
satisfaction to help close the gender gap and ensure that diverse perspectives
are routinely included in transportation planning processes. The three-tiered
plan implements train-the-trainer sessions during annual professional
conferences where college students (tier 1) teach practicing transportation
engineers (tier 2) how to deliver traffic sensor-themed K-12 (tier 3) outreach.
The broader educational impacts of this project support NSF societal outcomes by
promoting: 1) full participation of women in STEM, 2) development of a more
diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce, and 3) increased partnerships
between academia and professional organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is jointly funded by the Civil Infrastructure Systems (CIS) program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.