* 2042111
* PFI-TT: Developing next-generation cryopreservation media for natural killer cells
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Allison Hubel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,992.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project seeks to produce an effective, non-toxic
preservation strategies for natural killer (NK)immune cells. NK therapies are
composed of living cells that survive for only hours or days outside the body.
Without cryopreservation, these therapies can only be administered to a limited
number of patients close to the sites of cell collection and manufacturing. As
the number of NK cell therapy trials grows, including emerging clinical trials
to treat COVID-19, cryopreservation is essential to allow these life-saving
therapies to reach a larger number of patients. By enabling cryopreservation of
NK therapies, the proposed nkCube product would allow these therapies to be made
available off-the-shelf and transported to any hospital or clinic, enabling
wider use of this therapy. The nontoxic formulation of nkCube will also
facilitate the growth of NK therapies. Cells will be stable in the solution for
several hours, allowing for scale-up in batch production, which in turn could
decrease the cost of these therapies. While traditional therapies are preserved
in a toxic solution that can cause life-threatening side effects, especially in
children and smaller patients, nkCube will be formulated with molecules that are
safe for human infusion. Overall, the proposed nkCube technology aims to address
issues involving the safety, quality and availability of NK therapies, and would
allow these therapies to be accessible to a larger population of
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the NK cell type survives
for only a few hours outside of the body. Current methods of NK preservation
result in poor post-thaw tumor killing function, which limits the effectiveness
of the treatment. In order to achieve product-market fit, the team will address
key hurdles identified in the customer discovery process, including the need to
optimize a preservation solution for NK cell survival and function, the need to
design a protocol compatible with a variety of workflows, and the need to
perform scaled manufacturing and external testing of the final product. This
PFI-TT project aims to translate a prototype NK cell preservative into a minimum
viable product (nkCube) that meets the needs of NK cell manufacturers. Better
methods of preserving these cells may aid in the biomanufacturing of the cells
and should reduce the overall cost of producing this type of product. A
successful outcome of this study will demonstrate the proof of concept for this
preservation process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.