* 2042028
* Workshop: Intensive, interdisciplinary short courses on Bayesian inference for ecologists
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Bailey Fosdick, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 11/30/2024
* USD 412,288.00

Progress in environmental biology requires application of statistical methods to
gain understanding from models and data. Models describe scientific hypotheses
about environmental processes in mathematical terms. Statistics allow
researchers to assess the value of their data as evidence supporting or refuting
the hypotheses expressed in those models. This procedure is fundamental to all
scientific inquiry, but many modern researchers at all stages of their careers
lack the training needed to apply it confidently. This award will provide
intensive training in Bayesian statistical modeling to graduate students, post-
docs, university faculty, and agency researchers. Participants will be actively
recruited from groups underrepresented in science. This training will enhance
participantsâ€™ ability to advance science and to solve complex, environmental
problems confronting society and will foster collaborations between ecologists
and statisticians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training workshops will teach basic
statistical theory needed to understand Bayesian inference, train participants
to write proper mathematical expressions for Bayesian models, enable
participants to use Bayesian methods to solve a wide range of analysis problems
and disseminate materials to enhance teaching by others. The training will
emphasize understanding basic principles of Bayesian modeling using lectures and
laboratory exercises during three, annually offered short courses spanning two
weeks each. Topics to be covered include probability and distribution theory,
Bayes theorem and its relationship to maximum likelihood, writing simple and
hierarchical Bayesian models, the Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm, and model
checking. Specialized, advanced topics will be chosen to match the specific
interests of course participants. Future collaborations between participants and
statisticians will be encouraged by including six statistics graduate students
to assist with problem solving during courses. The training will enhance the
intellectual capital of the disciplines of environmental
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.