* 2042618
* CAREER: Visualization, Interpretation, and Modeling of Exchange-Correlation Hole for Density Functional Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Jianwei Sun, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2026
* USD 317,583.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the metallurgy of the bronze
age to the silicon semi-conductors driving the information age, every major step
forward in human progress has been enabled by the arrival of new materials that
expand the limits of human capability. Discovery of new materials has
historically been achieved by diligent but expensive experimentation, but the
advent of the computer changed this process. A rapid rise in computing power
brings with it the possibility of simulating chemistry and physics to understand
material processes at a microscopic level and to run programs that design new
materials from the atoms up. In principle, such simulations are easy to
formulate, as the equations of quantum mechanics that govern the constituent
electrons can be written down on the back of an envelope. In practice, however,
the equations become impossible to solve in all but the simplest situations, and
the search for approximate models that are both accurate and efficient to
compute is ongoing. Many of the most successful approximations to date fall into
the class of "density-functional theory" (DFT), in which the complexity of the
electronic quantum wave function is eschewed in favor of manipulating the
simpler electron density function. This CAREER award supports basic research
around density functional development, analyzing the fundamental quantum-
mechanical nature of how electrons repel each other by interrogating the
"exchange-correlation hole", a key object describing how finding an electron at
one position reduces the chance of finding another electron elsewhere. The
exchange-correlation hole will first be analyzed in some simple systems that
challenge current DFT approximations, and this information will then be used to
build more advanced DFT approximations. The resulting approximations will be
tested in more complex systems relevant to technological applications. This
research project will support, and be supported by, a high-school,
undergraduate, and graduate education program that places importance on
encouraging the participation of under-represented groups. The project's work
and teaching will support outreach to community members in the New Orleans
region who do not typically have access to high-quality opportunities for STEM
mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A disconnect has emerged between applications of
electronic-structure calculations and the underlying analyses that inform when
and why a particular theory is successful. Of the many electronic-structure
methods available, density-functional theory (DFT) has become the most popular.
This project will analyse and improve approximations to the DFT exchange-
correlation (XC) energy by modelling, interpreting, and visualizing the
underlying XC hole, one of the most fundamental aspects of DFT. The results will
be validated for a variety of molecules and solids, in particular transition-
metal compounds. Whilst DFT is exact for the ground-state energy and electron
density in principle, in practice the accuracy and efficiency are limited by the
approximation of the XC energy, which can be formally defined by connection to
the XC hole. Historically, developing an understanding of the XC hole has played
a vital role in developing density-functional approximations and explaining
their successes, though recent research into the XC hole has fallen behind the
development of XC energy approximations. This has occurred for two reasons: 1) a
practical DFT calculation needs only an XC energy approximation, resulting in
developers overlooking XC holes in favor of energy densities and a gap in user
understanding of XC holes, and 2) the formally defined XC hole is complicated to
compute and only available for a few simple many-electron systems. This project
will close the gap between users and developers as well as accelerating research
in XC holes, and thus DFT generally, by i) accurately computing the formally
defined XC holes for carefully chosen systems with interesting properties that
are challenging to existing density-functional approximations, ii) reverse
engineering holes for popular XC energy approximations and visualizing them
against reference XC holes, iii) improving XC energy approximations using
knowledge obtained from XC hole research, and iv) validating the existing and
improved XC energy approximations on difficult systems with emphasis on
transition-metal compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.