* 2042917
* CAREER: Consideration of Manufacturability in Early Stage Design for Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Nicholas Meisel, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2026
* USD 556,586.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will contribute to
the advancement of national prosperity and economic welfare by studying how the
design opportunities and manufacturing restrictions of additive manufacturing
(AM) processes should be integrated in the early stages of engineering design
practice. The global AM market is expected to reach over $40 billion by the end
of 2025 and has been identified as an important facet of the United Statesâ€™
future global manufacturing competitiveness. While the increase in geometric
complexity afforded by AM opens new opportunities for design innovations,
designers' traditional assumptions of manufacturability may unintentionally
limit them from taking full advantage of these opportunities. At the same time,
design engineers will have to consider new restrictions that AM technology
imparts on designs to avoid potential build failure. This CAREER project will
help to understand how best to balance these tradeoffs so as to be able to more
quickly arrive at viable, creative, and manufacturable designs for AM and to
reduce product revision in later design stages. The accompanying educational
plan will address the need for an innovative, technically grounded workforce
capable of breaking down traditional barriers between the realms of design and
manufacturing. This will be achieved through the deployment of three novel
educational platforms meant to engage students from across academic levels in
hands-on learning with core design concepts for AM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this CAREER research is to gain a fundamental understanding of how
engineers' early-stage designs reflect traditional manufacturing limitations and
to understand how the presence of such limitations in an engineer's design
practice can be supplanted through systematic integration of both opportunistic
and restrictive guidelines. Specific research tasks will address (1)
understanding how prevalent traditionally manufacturable features are in early-
stage designs and how compatible these features are with DfAM, (2) understanding
how and when DfAM guidelines should be conveyed to engineers in early-stage
design to successfully supplant the use of traditionally manufacturable
features, and (3) understanding how systematic integration of DfAM guidelines in
early-stage design affects iteration and product quality for both original
design and redesign cases. These objectives will be addressed through design
studies with both engineering students and practicing engineers. The result will
be a robust, validated approach to incorporate AM design concepts in early-stage
design practice so designers can quickly converge to manufacturable designs.
This research is expected to reveal crucial interaction effects between the
seemingly contradictory opportunistic and restrictive sides of DfAM, which might
otherwise remain hidden when studying each in
isolation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.