* 2042654
* Estimates on eigenvalues and eigenfunctions in convex settings
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Thomas Beck, Fordham University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2024
* USD 107,225.00

Elliptic differential equations are used to describe a wide variety of physical
phenomena. A main goal of this project is to study a particular class of these
equations that can be used to model the behavior of vibrations of a drum or an
inhomogeneous material, the temperature distribution of a thermal conductor, or
the distribution of the random motion of particles moving in a region of fluid.
Other than in a few simple model cases, this behavior is still far from
understood. By reformulating these problems in terms of partial differential
equations, this project will study this behavior. One particular question of
interest is how does the shape of a drum influence which part of the drum its
vibrations are typically localized to. Another aim is to study free boundary
problems. A free boundary is the region separating two different materials, such
as the interface between water and the air in the ocean or between an insulating
material and the air. The free boundary can be modeled via solving differential
equations, and understanding its shape and the scale at which it appears smooth
has applications to optimal shape design, electromagnetism, and fluid flow. This
project contributes to the development of the US workforce through mentoring of
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI
will study eigenvalues and eigenfunctions on convex domains in Euclidean space
and the sphere. A main goal of the project is to further the understanding of
the level sets of the eigenfunction. The starting point is a quantitative
property, namely the convexity of the level sets, and the aim is to use and
develop techniques from elliptic and differential geometry theory to establish
quantitative properties involving their shape and location with the domain. This
would lead to understanding the region of the domain where the eigenfunctions
localize in cases where no explicit formulae are available. Another part of the
project involves variants of the classical Friedland-Hayman inequality
concerning eigenvalues on the sphere. This will involve developing tools from
convex geometry, isoperimetric inequality theory, and Brenier's optimal
transportation mappings. This will be applied to prove regularity properties of
minimizers of associated free boundary problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.