* 2042154
* CAREER: Two-Dimensional Straintronic Field Effect Transistor
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Saptarshi Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal Number: 2042154&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Saptarshi
Das&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Two-Dimensional Straintronic Field Effect
Transistor&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Pennsylvania State Univ University
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Energy efficient
computing will revolutionize next generations of smart and secure electronic
devices, and benefit all sectors of modern society including agriculture,
healthcare, automation, communication, defense, and infrastructure. In fact, the
21st century, which promises to thrive on big data, remote sensing, Internet-of-
Things (IoT) and so on, demands novel devices, which can operate with power so
frugal that ambient energy harvesting may accommodate all of their needs. The
conventional silicon based complementary metal oxide semiconductor technology is
inadequate for achieving such goals necessitating novel material discovery and
device level innovations. This may be achieved in two-dimensional straintronic
field effect transistors by utilizing a unique property of two-dimensional
materials, namely, strain induced dynamic bandgap engineering and integrating it
with piezoelectric nanotransducers, which will be explored in the proposed
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the
proposal is to experimentally demonstrate steep slope switching in two-
dimensional straintronic field effect transistors (2D SFET) exploiting in-
operando and uniaxial strain engineering in 2D transition metal dichalcogenides
(TMDCs). The 2D SFET can defy the thermodynamic limit imposed by Boltzmann
statistics in conventional metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors
(FET) and achieve sub-60mV/decade subthreshold swing at room temperature along
with high on-state performance. Realization of 2D SFET requires monolithic
integration of 2D TMDC based FETs with piezoelectric (PE) ceramic based
nanotransducers. The PE expands in response to an applied gate bias and
transduces an out-of-plane stress on the 2D channel material reducing its
bandgap. The result is an internal voltage amplification that leads to steep
slope switching. While static, in-plane, and biaxial strain is used in
conventional silicon technology, dynamic strain engineering is a relatively
uncharted territory. Consequently, exploration of novel straintronic devices
based on novel 2D TMDCs will add new fundamental knowledge towards advancing
concepts for resolving critical computing needs and grand engineering
challenges. Furthermore, the proposed straintronic platform will offer exciting
opportunities to develop novel concepts including straintronic neuromorphic
devices (SNDs) for brain-inspired computing, straintronic memory devices (SMDs)
for in-memory computing, and straintronic security devices (SSDs) for secure
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.