* 2042775
* Science Diplomacy to Promote and Strengthen Basic Research and International Cooperation
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2020,07/31/2021
* Nicole Cervenka, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 07/31/2021
* USD 49,999.00

As the science community works together to solve large-scale global challenges,
the commitment and accord of funding agencies is invaluable in advancing the
work necessary to solve these challenges. The planning meetings on Science
Diplomacy to Promote and Strengthen Basic Research and International Cooperation
will explore options and best practices for U.S. and other funding agencies to
consider with regard to global norms for basic research collaboration. The
meeting will also investigate the role of U.S. and other funding agencies in
science diplomacy and how best to leverage and strengthen networks. As global
problems affect the U.S population and others around the world, promoting the
advancement of basic science aims to benefit the public within the context of
working toward global solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Global Research
Council (GRC) represents an important constituency of heads of science and
engineering funding agencies from around the world that are dedicated to
promoting high-quality collaboration among funding agencies worldwide. The GRC
plays a unique role in the scientific research enterprise, as scientists rely on
funding agencies to conduct their work. The planning meetings on will identify
different mechanisms and approaches for investigating the links between
international basic research cooperation in the context of science diplomacy,
such as: What are the current structures currently available to look at
international basic research cooperation in a frame of science diplomacy?; What
are the areas within basic research that might be worth exploring in greater
depth to better connect research funders and science diplomacy practitioners?;
What opportunities are there for the GRC and funder community to find new ways
to work together on those areas and projects?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.