* 2042453
* CAREER: Predicting plant functional trait variation across spatial, temporal and biological scales
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Catherine Hulshof, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2026
* USD 907,981.00

Variability is an inherent property of life on Earth. As a result, understanding
the causes and consequences of variability is central for understanding the
nature of life itself. As mean temperatures increase around the world, many
areas are simultaneously experiencing increasing climatic variability. Yet,
there is no theory that predicts the variability of natural systems. This
research will develop a model for predicting the variability of plant function
across scales of biological organization, from organisms to ecosystems. This
research will focus on plant functional traits (morphological, physiological,
and phenological characteristics) and environmental variability because
functional traits link plant performance to ecosystem processes. Further,
gradients of environmental variability are ubiquitous in nature across all
spatial and temporal scales, and underlie prominent ecological and evolutionary
hypotheses. In addition to developing new theories and generating new data
essential for predicting species responses to increasing climatic variability,
this project will address a national training need in data literacy, data
science, and working with different scientific disciplines. To do so,
undergraduate course content and training modules will be designed following
open science principles. Course content will leverage open biological and
environmental data produced by NSF investments in research and infrastructure,
including the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON), the Long-Term
Ecological Research (LTER) network, Integrated Digitized Biocollections
(iDigBio), and the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF).
Additionally, this project will support the training and professional
development of students from historically underrepresented groups in science,
contributing to a diverse, skilled, and innovative STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research will quantify emergent
properties of functional trait variation by decomposing trait-trait and trait-
environment relationships; testing the environmental heterogeneity and climatic
variability hypotheses; and linking trait variation at the organismal scale to
patterns of species distributions. At a continental scale, this project will
leverage data from NEON sites across latitude encompassing the eastern United
States and Puerto Rico to quantify plant trait variation across spatial,
temporal and biological scales. This project will also characterize scaling
between plant functional trait variation, environmental heterogeneity, and
climatic variability across temperate and tropical mountains, where abiotic
gradients in temperature and precipitation are steep in space and time.
Measurements of plant abundance, growth, functional traits, and satellite
observations of vegetation indices will form one of the few explicit tests of
the environmental heterogeneity and the climatic variability hypotheses across
spatiotemporal scales. Ultimately, this research will resolve major disparities
in the measurement, quantification, and modeling of functional trait
variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.