* 2042975
* CAREER: Partnering with Teachers and Students to Engage in Mathematical Inquiry about Relevant Social Issues
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Kari Kokka, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 11/30/2022
* USD 309,306.00

Despite efforts to address racial, gender, income-level and other kinds of
inequities, disparities persist throughout society in educational, occupational,
financial, and healthcare services and opportunities. To work toward societal
equity, mathematics teachers have shown increased interest in both improving
students’ achievement and supporting students’ ability to use mathematics to
analyze these inequities to create change. For instance, a mathematics task may
use rate, ratio, and proportion to explore the gender wage gap, and then use
functions to explore disparities in earnings over time. Few resources, such as
textbooks, coaching protocols, or video examples of classroom teaching, however,
exist to support mathematics teachers’ efforts to teach the mathematics content
while investigating relevant social issues. In addition, research indicates
several dilemmas teachers face in maintaining the cognitive demand of the task,
addressing state standards, and improving student agency through such
investigations. Research is needed to understand how teachers learn to adapt and
implement mathematics tasks that facilitate students’ mathematics learning and
investigation of social issues. This project team partners with the mathematics
department of one urban public charter high school that serves 65% students of
color (most of whom identify as African American). At the school, 70% of all
students qualify for free or reduced lunch, and 25% of the students have
Individualized Education Plans. This project investigates: 1) how mathematics
teachers learn to teach the mathematics content through investigation of
relevant social issues, 2) how teachers negotiate classroom dilemmas related to
this approach, and 3) how students feel about mathematics and their ability to
enact change toward an equitable society. The professional development will be
co-designed with mathematics teacher leaders from the school and the research
team and will last three years. Teachers will invite students to become advisory
board members to center students’ voices and solicit feedback about the
relevance of the social issues embedded in the tasks. Classroom videos will be
captured to share on a project website for use by mathematics teacher educators
and professional development providers. The website will also host mathematics
tasks designed through this project for teachers’ use in their own classrooms.
This is a Faculty Early Career Development Program project responsive to a
National Science Foundation-wide activity that offers the most prestigious
awards in support of early-career faculty who have the potential to serve as
academic role models in research and education. It is funded by the Discovery
Research K-12 program, which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics by preK-12 students
and teachers through research and development of innovative resources, models,
and tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This qualitative, participatory design study
partners with the mathematics department to investigate the following research
questions: (1) How do teachers learn to adapt mathematics tasks to make them
cognitively demanding and socially relevant for their students? How do
contextual factors (e.g., specific school context/location/history, student
backgrounds, teacher backgrounds, such as race and class) influence teacher
learning? (2) What dilemmas become salient and how do teachers negotiate them
while implementing the tasks? (3) How do these tasks improve students’ attitudes
about mathematics and feelings of empowerment? In the first year, the research
team and two mathematics teacher leaders from the school will co-design the
professional development experience focused on designing and implementing
mathematics tasks grounded in issues that are socially relevant to students. In
years 2-4, the mathematics department will engage in this professional
development, with continual input from teacher participants. Participants will
create student advisory boards who will offer feedback to teachers about the
relevance of the mathematics tasks. Participants will video tape their own
classrooms to share brief vignettes (5-8 minutes long) that highlight dilemmas
and/or successes for video club sessions as part of the professional development
series. Video club sessions offer opportunities to discuss challenges and
successes with colleagues and offer peer support. These video clips will also
become video case studies, along with the mathematics task and teacher
reflections, for use by mathematics teacher educators and professional
development providers through a project website. In addition, years 3-4 the
project team will develop four detailed classroom case studies, accompanied with
coaching support from the research team. To answer research questions 1 and 2
regarding teacher learning and dilemmas, teachers’ perspectives will be captured
through professional development artifacts, coaching debriefs, teachers’ written
reflections, and one-on-one semi structured interviews. To answer research
question 3 regarding student agency and attitudes about mathematics, student
sentiments will be explored through student work, open-ended surveys, and focus
group interviews with eight focal students per classroom case study. A project
website will share mathematics tasks and video cases with the broader community
of mathematics educators. Through distribution of such materials, the project
aims to offer much-needed resources and supports for mathematics teachers to use
cognitively demanding and socially relevant mathematics tasks with their
students. The project will also publish peer-reviewed research articles to share
findings with the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.