* 2042433
* SBP: CAREER: Multiple Identities &amp; Intergroup Interactions: A Dual Pathway Model
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Sarah Gaither, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/2026
* USD 633,235.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People define themselves in terms
of social categories that lead to seeing similarities and differences with
others. These social identities can involve being part of specific groups (for
example, female) and having specific social roles (for example, mother).
Thinking about one's multiple identities simultaneously (for example, female,
mother, scientist) has been shown to lead to increased creativity and flexible
thinking. The current project examines: 1) the interpersonal benefits that may
occur when individuals each consider their own multiple identities as they
interact with others, and 2) the mindset and conditions that promote these
interpersonal benefits. As the U.S. population becomes increasingly diverse,
multiracial, and multi-ethnic, it becomes increasingly important to understand
and maximize the benefits of perceiving oneself in terms of having multiple
identities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of a series of studies to
examine pathways that produce interaction benefits. A primary pathway involves
having experiences that lead to considering one's multiple identities rather
than only a single identity. Another pathway involves having increased contact
with others whose identities differ from one's own, which should encourage a
multiple identity mindset. These studies examine people from different groups,
different ages, in different contexts, and they utilize experimental, survey,
and longitudinal methods. The predictions concern whether multiple identities
can: coexist simultaneously across the lifespan, be invoked or changed, vary
across contexts, and also yield benefits even when some of the identities evoke
negative beliefs or stereotypes. This project also provides a variety of
training opportunities for the next generation of scholars, including
underrepresented students. Outcomes additionally include developing programming
for local science museums and implementing university-level assessments that can
inform campus diversity efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.