* 2042174
* CAREER: Peatland Geomorphology: Quantifying Geomorphological Changes across SE Asia Peatlands
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Estelle Chaussard, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2026
* USD 0.00

This project will determine how a process resulting from human activities (peat
degradation due to deforestation) influences natural hazards (flooding) and
climate change (carbon dioxide emissions). Peatlands are wetlands where
waterlogged conditions slow plant decomposition to such an extent that dead
plants accumulate to form peat. Under natural conditions peat domes grow over
time, storing carbon underground and minimizing the risk of coastal flooding. In
contrast, damaged peatlands are compacting, which results in a lowering of the
ground elevation and in greenhouse gas emissions. This project proposes to
integrate multiple satellite- and ground-based datasets with artificial
intelligence tools to address a question of high societal importance: “At what
rates will thousands of years of accumulated peat carbon be released to the
atmosphere and on what timescale will large coastal areas in southeast Asia
become permanently flooded?” Retrospectively, in Louisiana, it was shown that
the impact of hurricane Katrina would have been less severe without the
preceding decades of peat degradation. This project will proactively quantify
when and where flooding will become the most severe in southeast Asia and
improve our understanding of peatland dynamics worldwide. Knowledge from this
work will enable forecasting future peat decomposition rates and flooding
hazards, and refine estimations of carbon dioxide fluxes. These results will
inform outreach efforts aimed to empower local communities through education,
boost engagement of scientists in public communication, and increase
undergraduate diversity through early exposure to hands on research.

The goals of this project are to establish the capability to predict the fate of
tropical peatlands and their carbon in response to environmental changes and to
develop effective ways to engage the population on the importance of peatlands.
The central hypothesis of this project is that peat degradation rates are
controlled by the landscape morphology and land use history. To test it, this
project will rely on three main tasks: 1) identify the controls on peat
degradation rates across southeast Asia by combining morphology (Light Detection
and Ranging data), deformation (Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar data
validated by fieldwork), and land use timeseries (multi-spectral optical data);
2) develop a machine learning model accounting for the controls on degradation
rates to predict the timing and amplitude of future degradation, carbon dioxide
emissions, and the associated flooding; and 3) increase awareness on the
importance of peatlands by sharing socially responsive outreach material. The
developed techniques will provide a critical framework for worldwide peatland
geomorphology studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.