* 2042553
* CAREER: Investigating composition and rheology of circum-Pacific mantle wedges with body-wave attenuation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Songqiao Wei, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2026
* USD 294,271.00

Seismic observations help us understand the geological processes in subduction
zones, where megathrust earthquakes occur and most volcanoes form. Seismologists
usually measure seismic waves propagating in rocks to probe the temperature,
composition, and other properties of the Earth. Yet many details of the
subduction processes remain unknown partly because interpreting these velocity
measurement are sometimes ambiguous. Seismic attenuation measures how a seismic
wave loses energy as it moves through the Earth, and these measurements may help
to reduce some of the uncertainties we have in observing and interpreting
seismic signals. In particular, by combining velocity and attenuation
measurements this project has the potential for detecting magma, water, and
oxygen associated with the formation of volcanoes and earthquakes. This project
will integrate research in seismic attenuation with an education plan that will
develop a diverse geophysics workforce at Michigan State University (MSU). This
work helps to address grand challenge science questions about tectonics,
earthquakes and volcanoes highlighted in the Earth in Time report from the
National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research goal is to conduct a series of
attenuation studies on regional and global scales. The project will image the
attenuation structure of multiple subduction zones surrounding the Pacific
Ocean, with three focus sites of Tonga, Alaska, and the Pampean flat slab
segment of the South American subduction zone. These systematic investigations
will advance our understanding of seismic interpretation, upper-mantle dynamics,
subduction processes, and material recycling in the Earthâ€™s interior. The
education component of this project raises awareness of geophysics as an area of
study for students in STEM. This project will work with the MSU Science Theatre,
an undergraduate student organization, develop several geophysics demonstrations
for use on campus and at local elementary schools. Second, the PI will develop a
junior-level modular course to prepare geoscience students with much-needed
quantitative skills. Third, this project will also provide research
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.