* 2042875
* PSID 2021-2024: Continuity and Change in American Economic and Social Life
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2025
* Robert Schoeni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2025
* USD 15,566,887.00

The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) is a cornerstone of data
infrastructure for social science research in the United States. The study has
used a series of surveys to gather information on US families since 1968.
Children and grandchildren from the original PSID families now participate as
well; the result is data that follows families through several generations. The
long timespan allows scientific investigation of questions about how people and
families grow and change over time. This includes the study of economic outcomes
such as employment, income, and wealth, research on how early life experiences
affect employment and health in adulthood, research on how U.S. families cope
with the needs of aging family members, and work that examines how key economic
variables like consumption and employment are affected by broader businesses
cycles and unanticipated events. The research team will collect two new waves of
data. The new waves will include measurements of the effects of the COVID-19
pandemic on PSID families. This includes measurements of the direct health
impacts of the disease, the effects of disruptions to employment and education,
and whether family members were helped by government efforts to reduce the
burden of the pandemic. The PIs also plan new measurements of participation in
short term ‘gig economy’ jobs, will expand valuable administrative data
linkages, and will continue their current effort to expand web-based
administration of the PSID questionnaire. The project promotes the national
interest by maintaining U.S. leadership in science, by making data available to
a broad community of researchers interested in understanding American families,
and by providing necessary data to evaluate the long-term impacts of past policy
decisions at the federal, state, and local levels of
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PSID is the world's longest running
household panel survey. Through its long-term measures of economic and social
wellbeing, the study allows researchers and policy analysts to investigate the
dynamism inherent in social and behavioral process. The long panel, genealogical
design, and broad content provide scientists a unique and powerful opportunity
to study change within the same family over decades. Collecting additional waves
of data from the PSID families contributes to scientific understanding of the
dynamics of economic and social behavior. The extended time series of data
supports new and systematic investigation of a myriad of questions in the full
range of scientific disciplines that study how humans grow and change over the
life cycle. This includes the study of economic outcomes (for example, the
changes that occur across business cycles and changes in response to increased
international economic competition), the study of intergenerational transmission
of wealth and income, and the study of how income and health in adulthood and
old age depend on early-life experiences. Consistent measures over time are
important for accurately estimating the dynamics of these behaviors. Gathering
data from the same families over many years improves the precision of the
measurement as multiple measures are collected within the same families as well
as from multiple families over a period of decades. The investigators will carry
out numerous innovations and enhancements while maintaining core data collection
for comparability. The PSID creates broader impacts in many ways. It is used by
an interdisciplinary community and is increasingly important in health research.
The data archive is used to inform public policy; at least nine federal agencies
use PSID data. The PSID is also an important resource for teaching and learning.
The data are free and publicly available. They are widely used by graduate and
undergraduate students. The award funds web-based outreach activities that will
make the PSID an even more valuable tool for teaching and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.