* 2042871
* FMiTF: Track II: Alloy Analyzer Plus: An Integrated Development Environment for Alloy
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Allison Sullivan, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 01/31/2022
* USD 68,290.00

To deliver reliable and correct software systems, developers can create a
software model, a representation of their software design written in a
mathematical logic, which can then be checked for consistency. Unfortunately,
the difficulty in writing models correctly remains a barrier to their adoption
for large, complex software designs. This project develops the Alloy Analyzer
Plus, an integrated development environment (IDE) toolset, that will provide a
one-stop shop for software testing methods and enables the development of
correct models written in the Alloy modeling
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will create the Alloy
Analyzer Plus IDE by building out two important infrastructure thrusts: first,
the creation of workflows for verification techniques of Alloy models, enabling
systematic unit testing, mutation testing and fault localization; and second,
the creation of workflows for synthesis techniques of Alloy models, enabling
correct from construction models through repair and sketching. These two thrusts
will culminate in the creation of a guided development environment that can
iteratively walk users through building correct models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project bridges the gap between imperative IDEs and
declarative-modeling IDEs. A robust verification-oriented IDE reduces the
learning curve for Alloy and facilitates a larger adoption of software modeling.
Furthermore, by enabling more reliable Alloy models, this project in turn leads
to the development of more reliable software systems. The project will also help
enhance formal methods curricula, as the Alloy Analyzer Plus synthesis
capabilities provide an interactive tool to teach first-order logic. The project
will extensively involve graduate students, notably those from underrepresented
minorities, and expose them to formal methods and tool
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main code base will be maintained for a
minimum of three years on GitHub under the Apache License 2.0. The public
repository, which will accumulate the code, documentation, and evaluation
materials, is available at: [https://github.com/alloyanalyzerplus]. An
associated GitHub Page will provide quick access to the latest stable release
and tutorials for the extensions, and is available at:
[https://alloyanalyzerplus.github.io].&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.