* 2042608
* I-Corps:  Mechanistic solid-state welding model for materially efficient metal extrusions
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Daniel Cooper, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a sustainable manufacturing process that reduces the costs and
time to market for light metal extrusions increasingly used in electric
vehicles, machinery, and buildings. This development has the potential to double
an extruder’s profit margin, make U.S. manufacturers more competitive, and
ultimately save the global industry around $4 billion per year. The proposed
process may accelerate the adoption of efficient extrusion designs, leading to
lighter vehicles and less pollution from transport. In addition, this process
may make U.S. manufacturing more environmentally sustainable by reducing the
scrap that is generated in conventional extrusion by 25-50%. If successful, this
will increase the energy efficiency and reduce the carbon footprint of U.S.
industry. Furthermore, the underlying science on solid-state welding developed
for this technology may inform the development of other joining technologies to
prevent undesirable welds from forming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of mechanistic solid-state welding models,
extrusion simulations, and algorithms for designing new light metal extrusion
tools and billet shapes. This development may reduce the scrap generated in
direct extrusion of aluminum and magnesium components. Currently, around one-
quarter of the extruded material fails to make it to a final product and is
scrapped within the manufacturing process. One source of manufacturing scrap is
the removal of the weak, solid-state weld that forms between consecutively
extruded metal billets. The proposed technology controls the geometry of the
final transverse weld and the deformation conditions across the evolving
interface as it passes through the extrusion die. This in turn determines the
interface oxide fragmentation, normal and shear contact stresses at the
interface, and subsequently the weld strength. This technology is designed to
shorten the weld (reducing the quantity of the profile that must be removed) and
increase the weld’s strength (negating the need to remove the weld in many non-
critical applications). Early physical trials and simulations on aluminum
billets indicate that the new technology may reduce the generation of extrusion
scrap by at least 25%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.