* 2042216
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Improving the Post-Flood Financial Resiliency of Low- and Moderate-Income Households
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Carolyn Kousky, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,658.00

This project addresses resiliency to natural disasters from a perspective that
is frequently not researched but one that has major human impact - financial
resilience. Prior research has found that low income households suffer
disproportionately from disasters and recover less quickly than other residents.
Financial resilience—the ability to recover from an economic shock—underpins
other aspects of recovery and is a necessary condition for broader urban
disaster resilience. Despite this, it is an under-investigated aspect of climate
adaptation. While the problem has been identified, actionable research into
solutions is scarce. The proposed project is designed to fill this gap. This
project's specific objective is to demonstrate that increasing the financial
resilience of low and moderate income (LMI) households (both homeowners and
renters) in New York City presents an essential element of resilience strategies
especially in response to increasing urban flooding risk.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, across both phases, will be comprised of
three inter-related research components: (1) designing a pilot policy
intervention; (2) improving disaster financial literacy among households and
capacity among city staff; and (3) developing a metric of financial resilience
to disasters, especially for LMI households. The work will be a joint effort
between the Wharton Risk Center at the University of Pennsylvania, the New York
City Mayor’s Office of Resiliency, and the Center for NYC Neighborhoods, as well
as other partner researchers. The work will be informed by an advisory board
with deep expertise on this challenge. The pilot program will be a public-
private partnership to demonstrate the importance of financial resiliency as a
complement to other more typically researched approaches - since LMI households
tend to have insufficient savings, can be locked out of credit, cannot afford
standard insurance, and suffer disproportionately more longer term damage. Phase
1 of this project will be a period of stakeholder engagement, involving scoring
policies against chosen criteria, to identify the most promising solution for
piloting in Phase II: (1) parametric microinsurance, (2) premium reductions for
low-cost flood mitigation, (3) a local flood insurance affordability program,
(4) community assistance plus a high-deductible NFIP policy, (5) right-sizing
insurance coverage, and (6) community-based insurance. The second project
component will be developing disaster financial literacy tools and building
expertise on this topic among civic partner organizations through specific
products and engagement strategies. Prior work has found that increasing
financial literacy makes individuals better able to withstand shocks. The third
component will develop a metric of financial resilience to disasters for LMI
households. This metric will be designed to inform the broader academic
literature, which lacks an established approach to measurement of this specific
concept, as well as be practically useful to city programs. Constructing the
metric will draw on city data, as well as a survey of LMI households.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to Track B - CIVIC Innovation
Challenge - Resilience to Natural Disasters a collaboration with NSF and the
Department of Homeland Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.