* 2042256
* EAGER: Additive Manufacturing of High-Purity Epitaxial Gallium Nitride
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Jarod Gagnon, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,349.00

The printing of single crystal semiconductors is investigated through a unique
combination of additive manufacturing and reactive gas phase formation. The
localized growth of semiconductors which can form electronic devices would
eliminate process steps, saving time, and create unique three-dimensional
architectures on a variety of materials platforms. Here liquid metal gallium is
locally deposited using a printing technique while being reacted with ammonia to
produce gallium nitride, GaN. GaN is an important semiconductor which forms the
basis of the solid-state lighting industry and high-power electronic devices. In
all device applications, the impurity content can control the materials
properties and device characteristics. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project will focus on the understanding and developing this
reactive printing process with an emphasis on controlling unintentional and
intentional impurities. The formation of a new semiconductor printing process
would contribute to the national prosperity and open new manufacturing avenues.
The educational effort has high school interns from underrepresented groups
involved in a hands-on research experience with cutting-edge STEM research on
semiconductor synthesis, characterization, and additive
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel techniques for removing oxygen from
gallium precursors and mitigating oxygen incorporation into printed gallium
nitride will be investigated. Local, epitaxial deposition of the compound
semiconductor GaN has been initially demonstrated with the gas-phase reactive
additive manufacturing (GRAM) process. The oxygen impurity incorporation in GRAM
GaN is an area of concern due to the rapid formation of a native oxide on
gallium metal, which is used as the gallium precursor. Several approaches
ranging from in situ gas phase as well as wet chemical oxide removal systems are
developed and used in combination with detailed characterization to obtain a
process understanding of the changes in oxide formation and oxygen incorporation
at the growth front. This research will determine the viability of GaN single
crystal printing in producing materials of high structural perfection and
controlled chemical purity as needed in the device fabrication process. The
potential of demonstrating printed GaN with comparable purity that is achievable
with standard thin film techniques (i.e. chemical vapor deposition - CVD,
hydride vapor phase epitaxy - HVPE) has the potential to revolutionize the way
semiconductor device manufacturing is performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.