* 2042691
* CAREER: Macroeconomic Implications of Microeconomic Heterogeneity
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Adrien Auclert, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2026
* USD 291,940.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Incorporating microeconomic heterogeneity into
macroeconomic models radically changes the understanding of the economy. This
project consists of five research questions that examine macroeconomic
implications of micro-level heterogeneity by building macroeconomic models that
can be tightly connected to data. The first project is on understanding the
conduct of monetary policy when the distributive implications of exchange rates
is taken into account. The second project focuses on the optimal use of fiscal
and monetary policy. The third project examines the consumer bankruptcy system.
The fourth project explores economic adjustments to shifts in the sectoral
composition of workforce. The fifth project investigates the recent decline in
the employment of the young workforce by gender and skill group. The educational
component of the project convenes workshops with graduate students to teach
frontier research on solution methods for heterogeneous-agent models. The
findings from these research projects will have broad implications for
macroeconomic policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal consists of five
projects that use general equilibrium models with heterogeneous agents
calibrated to micro data. The first project introduces a Heterogenous-Agent New
Keynesian model of a small open economy. In the model, exchange rate
depreciations increase import prices and lower real income, which can in turn
lower domestic output and employment. This is a contractionary effect absent in
standard models with profound implications for the transmission of monetary
policy. The second project provides a general method to solve for the optimal
policy response to aggregate shocks in heterogeneous-agent economies. The third
project studies the automatic stabilizer role of the consumer bankruptcy system
in a model in which consumers face incomplete markets with an option to default
on their debts. The fourth project builds a dynamic model of labor supply with
adjustment costs to study the effects of sectoral demand shocks. The fifth
project uses a model of skill acquisition with heterogeneity in ability to
understand the observed changes over time in the elasticity of labor supply of
the workforce by gender and skill group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.