* 2042644
* CAREER: Multi-Utility Textile Electromagnetics for Motion Capture and Tissue Monitoring Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Asimina Kiourti, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2026
* USD 315,832.00

Wearable sensors show much promise for medical, sports, defense, emergency, and
consumer applications, but are currently limited to obtrusive implementations.
Akin to the evolution of cell phones that evolved from foot-long prototypes to
recent smart devices, next-generation wearables are envisioned to be seamlessly
embedded in fabrics. This CAREER project aims to understand the unique
challenges of operating such textile sensors “in-the-wild” and to empower their
reliable operation via closed-loop interaction among fabrics, electronics, and
humans. To serve as a model and to inspire new applications, the project focuses
on new classes of functionalized garments that can seamlessly monitor kinematics
and/or tissue abnormalities with unique advantages over the state-of-the-art.
Concurrently, the integrated education/outreach efforts aim to increase student
and public exposure to bio-electromagnetics that are now confined to specialized
research, yet can enable interdisciplinary training for all via appealing
activities with direct societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project
will pioneer a design, modeling, and implementation framework that reconciles
human-in-the-loop Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) with conductive e-textile sensors
operating in complex (human wearing a sensing fabric) and dynamic (real-world)
environments. Cognitive and fully-adaptive e-textile CPS are proposed that: (a)
are cognizant of inputs received by the wearer, the fabric, and the environment,
and (b) integrate agility in both the cyber and physical sides for closed-loop
adaptability on the fly. In turn, potentials in optimizing performance,
minimizing resources, and enhancing opportunities for myriads of human-in-the-
loop CPS are envisioned to be significant. Without loss of generality, focus is
on a novel-multi-utility sensor that addresses two of the most challenging
sensing modalities in the area of wearables, i.e., motion capture and tissue
abnormality monitoring. These modalities may be individually or concurrently
employed to create models for dense-data (motion captured on the go), sparse-
data (tissues monitored over sparse intervals), and context-aware (both of the
above) human-in-the-loop CPS. As a case study, a novel CPS will be progressively
designed – from concept to in vivo testing – to improve outcomes after anterior
cruciate ligament reconstruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.