* 2042631
* CAREER: Subduction initiation in the Iapetus Ocean: How, and how fast?
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Daniel Viete, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 05/31/2026
* USD 296,299.00

According to plate tectonics, the continents move on geologic time scales. These
rearrangements require the birth and death of extensive plate boundaries across
which continents separate or come together (converge). Convergent margins are
established in the oceans following initiation of a process of descent and
recycling of oceanic crust back into the Earth’s interior (subduction). The
proposed work will focus on oceanic rocks that are preserved along the
Appalachian mountain system and its European continuation (the Caledonides), and
record subduction initiation in an ancient ocean (the Iapetus). It will use
fieldwork and modern laboratory techniques to address key unknowns in plate
tectonics, including how subduction initiates and how quickly it propagates
throughout an ocean. Research activities associated with this proposal include
work in remote areas of central Norway, the Shetlands, Newfoundland and Quebec,
but also in urbanized parts of Baltimore, Maryland. The proposed research is
partnered with educational outreach activities involving the Center for
Educational Outreach, Johns Hopkins University, and the Y in Central Maryland’s
summer education programming. These activities are aimed at establishing a long-
term program of field- and laboratory-based community education centered around
the outstanding urban geology of Baltimore. The outreach activities seek to
enrich the educational experience by focusing on accessibility and the local
cultural/environmental significance of concepts being taught, and have an
ultimate goal of increasing participation in geology of underrepresented
minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central postulate of the theory of plate
tectonics is that tectonic convergence is seeded in oceanic basins. However,
details of the process remain unknown. How exactly does subduction initiate? How
quickly do convergent plate boundaries emerge? How does their development relate
to global-scale tectonic reorganizations? Constraints on the kinematics of
subduction initiation and propagation are required to address these questions,
but practical research targets in the modern oceanic record are limited; key to
answering these questions are ophiolites. To track subduction initiation and
propagation over 1000s of km within the Iapetus Ocean, a program of fieldwork,
geochemistry and high-precision geochronology will focus on six
Cambro–Ordovician ‘ophiolites’ distributed along ~4800 km of the
Appalachian–Caledonian system, from Baltimore, Maryland to Leka, Norway.
Extensive work on the Izu–Bonin–Marianas system has demonstrated that products
of suprasubduction-zone (SSZ) spreading v. (nascent) arc activity can be
distinguished on the basis of geochemistry. The proposed research is centered
around high-precision U–Pb dating to assess the timing of units whose whole-rock
geochemistry constrains geodynamic context. It will test two hypotheses: (1) SSZ
spreading preceded (nascent) arc activity in each of the six ophiolites, and (2)
propagation of subduction initiation throughout the Iapetus occurred at ‘plate
rates’ (≤ 25 cm y-1). Testing of Hypothesis 1 will reveal mode of subduction
initiation—‘spontaneous’ (density-driven) v. ‘induced’ (lateral stress-
driven)—for the six ophiolites. Testing of Hypothesis 2 will constrain rates of
emergence of a new convergent plate boundary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for
this project is provided by NSF EAR Tectonics and Petrology &amp; Geochemistry
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.