* 2042221
* Microcirculatory blood flow in sickle cell disease
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2023
* Michael Graham, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 10/31/2023
* USD 338,268.00

Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a disorder of red blood cells that affects about
100,000 Americans, particularly those whose ancestors came from sub-Saharan
Africa or Latin America. In the disorder, red blood cells stiffen as they age
and often take on a sickle shape. Acute symptoms of SCD arise when diseased red
blood cells obstruct small blood vessels due to the sickled shape and increased
stiffness, resulting in restricted local blood flow. However, chronic issues
arise as well, and these have received less attention in the past. The cells
that line blood vessels become dysfunctional in most regions of the circulation,
and especially in the brain, where blood vessel damage is associated with
increased risk of stroke, one of the leading yet least understood causes of
mortality in SCD. Additionally, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
reports that having SCD increases the risk of severe illness from COVID-19. This
project will use simulations of a detailed mathematical model of blood flow to
gain a better understanding of how the altered properties of sickle cells may
lead to damage of blood vessel walls. Particular attention will be paid to blood
vessels of serpentine and related shapes that are found in the brain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diseased cells of a SCD patient are smaller and stiffer
than healthy red blood cells (RBCs). Both of these features increase the
propensity for cells to reside near blood vessel walls, a phenomenon called
margination. Past experimental and computational work in idealized systems
supports the hypothesis that diseased cells strongly marginate, residing
primarily in the cell-free layer near blood vessel walls, thereby generating
physical interactions such as large shear stress fluctuations and mechanical
contacts that damage the endothelial cells that line the vessels. This project
will move from idealized systems to physiologically relevant conditions and
complexities, addressing important questions about the fluid mechanics of sickle
cell disease. Detailed simulations and simplified mechanistic models will be
used to (1) Predict the effects of cell properties, including shape, size,
stiffness, adhesiveness and polydispersity on spatial distributions and wall
interactions during flow, and (2) Mechanistically determine the effects of blood
vessel geometry and hemodynamics on SCD RBC margination and cell-wall
interactions, particularly in branched and serpentine blood vessel geometries
characteristic of the brain microcirculation. Broader impacts of the project
include (1) its focus on connecting fundamental biomechanics and fluid dynamics
to an important problem in medicine, (2) involvement of undergraduate students,
especially those from underrepresented minorities, in research, and (3) a
service learning course in which undergraduate engineering students develop
project-based lessons in fluid mechanics and share them with children from
underserved minority populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.