* 2042397
* CAREER: The effect of brain size on the evolution of neuronal circuits in the genus Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Sophie Caron, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 05/31/2026
* USD 725,000.00

How brains evolve such that a species can adapt and survive in a new environment
remains an open question in biology. Historically, this question has been
confined to macroscopic approaches, thus limiting our knowledge of how neuronal
circuits — the functional units of the brain — evolve. Recent advances in
Drosophila research — aided by an array of sophisticated genetically-encoded
tools — have enabled neuroscientists to understand, with cellular precision, how
well-defined neuronal circuits detect sensory information and transform it to
generate meaningful behaviors. These tools can be easily applied to other
Drosophila species, facilitating detailed comparative studies. In this project,
these advances are used to address a fundamental question in evolutionary
neuroscience: why do brains increase in relative size among related species? The
research outlined in this proposal will break new ground into this question by
bringing a neuronal circuit perspective to this long-standing problem. The
project also aims at showcasing the value of a humble fruit fly to scientific
research — and in particular in the field of neuroscience — to the general
public and to the next generation of biologists by pursuing different outreach
activities that aim at increasing public awareness for the potential and
importance of Drosophila research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why the brains of some
species — including our own — grow larger and what advantages these larger
brains may convey are questions is of immense interest. Drosophila pseudoobscura
— a species that diverged from D. melanogaster about 25 million years ago — has
an unusually large brain relative to its body size when compared to other
Drosophila species. This size difference is immediately noticeable in the
antennal lobe, an olfactory processing center: while the overall organization of
the antennal lobe is largely conserved in both species, some glomeruli are three
times as large as their D. melanogaster counterparts and there are two D.
pseudoobscura-specific glomeruli. These observations led to two hypotheses.
First, the large D. pseudoobscura antennal lobe might result from an increase in
both the number of neurons associated with certain glomeruli as well as from an
increase in the total number of glomeruli. Second, these differences might endow
the D. pseudoobscura olfactory circuit with an increased detection bandwidth.
This research project will test these hypotheses by quantifying which components
of the olfactory circuit of D. pseudoobscura increase in number and by
identifying the functional consequences of these quantitative changes. These
results will reveal which elements of a neuronal circuit are evolutionarily
malleable and how such changes affect the function of a circuit. It is possible
that from these analyses fundamental rules of neuronal circuit evolution can be
delineated. This research project will also lead to the formulation of specific
hypotheses regarding the potential adaptive significance of changes in neuronal
circuits and lay the foundation to identifying the genetic underpinnings of
brain evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.