* 2042748
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Variation in English Intonational Acoustic Phonetics from Grammatical Perspectives
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2025
* Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2025
* USD 79,722.00

Spoken language consists of multiple streams of information – including a
segmental stream (i.e., the consonants and vowels that make up words, suffixes,
prefixes, etc.) and a suprasegmental stream (e.g., the pitch, amplitude, timing,
etc. that define stress and cadence) which is often called "prosody". All
speakers (consciously or not) know prosody can be used to communicate meaning –
a single sequence of words can be pronounced many ways, often with importantly
distinct meanings. Despite this, most formal and computational linguistic
investigations into meaning have primarily dealt with meanings encoded by the
segmental stream (in words, suffixes, and prefixes). This project addresses this
issue by exploring questions of how prosody and meaning relate. For example,
what sorts of prosodic changes map onto changes in meaning? And what sorts of
meanings? To explore these questions, the research team makes use of
contemporary empirical methodologies, analytic tools, and formal theories, and
particular attention is paid to intonational aspects of
prosody.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project encompasses three sets of experimental
tasks of speech production and speech perception. Each of these sets of tasks
corresponds to a different domain of semantic/pragmatic meanings: Common Ground
management, Information Structure signalling, and scope ambiguity resolution.
Different semantic/pragmatic contexts correspond to different experimental
conditions, and these contexts are presented to participants as visual, comic
strip-like, stimuli. These experiments measure prosodic characteristics of
speech (e.g., pitch movements, coded with a recently developed annotation system
called PoLaR) and/or reactions to speech (e.g., acceptability ratings). These
data are then be subjected to quantitative analysis as well as to formal
linguistic models to uncover how different meaning-based conditions and
different prosodic patterns are related. This work has important implications
for improving human-computer interactions that are mediated by natural language,
as well as for deepening understanding of various speech
pathologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.