* 2042600
* "SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Co-creating Data for Disaster Resilience with Historically Marginalized Communities in Savannah."
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2021
* Mildred McClain, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 12/31/2021
* USD 49,957.00

In coastal communities across the United States, environmental disasters such as
flooding, hurricanes, and heatwaves have become increasingly common and costly,
both in terms of human and economic impacts. The coronavirus pandemic is
exacerbating these impacts and bringing inequalities to the fore. This project
proposes to study the compounded effects of social and physical vulnerabilities
to environmental disasters in Savannah, Georgia, as well as the local policies
and practices that promote resilience and recovery. The proposed approach
prioritizes social equity and justice by including residents and representatives
of Hudson Hill, a lower-income black neighborhood in Savannah, as research
partners. Together, the project will identify and co-create new sources of data
on disaster vulnerability and resilience and foster broader stakeholder networks
within the region. The team also includes researchers from Georgia Tech and
Savannah State as well as officials from the City of Savannah Office of
Sustainability and the Harambee House, an environmental justice organization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New forms of community-based data exploration,
integration, and mapping are necessary to understand the impacts of compounded
environmental disasters faced by residents of Savannah, Georgia, particularly
marginalized communities. The project will use these new tools to identify what
vulnerability and resilience mean in this context, and then reimagine the
resilience networks that these communities need to bounce forward from future
disasters. The plan of work includes: 1) socially distanced workshops with
communities and organizations; 2) preliminary data collection and archival
research on resilience and vulnerability in the area; 3) the development of
community-level research protections that bring social justice to data
stewardship; 4) the of design community-centered but socially distanced data
exploration and mapping techniques; and 5) collaborative grant-writing for the
full project proposal. The intellectual merit of the project is to improve our
understanding of disaster resilience in marginalized coastal communities and to
establish new community-centered methods of data exploration and mapping that
prioritize data justice. The following broader impacts are anticipated: 1) to
highlight and strengthen existing strategies of disaster resilience in
marginalized coastal communities; 2) to model how university partnerships might
prioritize social equity and justice as they co-create data and put them into
action; 3) to chart and establish a resilience network that can leverage data as
planning tools for collective recovery and regeneration; and 4) to model new
forms of inclusive and equitable community engaged research under social
distancing conditions of COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.