* 2042252
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How language experience and cognitive control shape new language learning
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Judith Kroll, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2022
* USD 17,701.00

Adult language learning is of primary social importance, but most research has
overlooked the influences of the linguistic environment of the learner and of
previous language history. Recent research suggests that there is significant
variation in adult language learning outcomes. This variation likely comes not
only from individual differences in cognitive skills but also from differences
in previous language experience. The vast majority of research on adult language
learning has focused on individuals who are learning a second language for the
first time. In today's globalized society, however, the majority of people
learning a new language already know or have considerable exposure to more than
one language. In order to fully understand new language learning in adults and
to design effective pedagogical methods, it is important to consider how
cognitive abilities and previous language experience impact the learning
process. This project takes a novel approach by teaching a third language to
people who are already bilingual with many years of second language experience.
This will enable examination of the impact of the context of learning as well as
individual differences in cognitive skills. In order to understand language
learning in situations where there is cultural and linguistic diversity, the
planned study will take place at a university with a large and diverse student
population. The planned study also aims to benefit the student participants by
providing training opportunities in language science, thereby helping to support
an increase in the diversity of the scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The context in which language learning and
language use occur has a range of consequences for communication and cognition.
Some learning contexts are linguistically diverse, with ambient exposure to
languages that may not be known or used, whereas others are more uniform, with a
single majority language that dominates. Recent studies suggest that ambient
language exposure may itself benefit phonetic learning. Other studies suggest
that the regulation of the two languages in different contexts may produce a
variety of consequences for the way in which cognitive control mechanisms are
engaged. For example, bilinguals living in environments where their non-dominant
language is supported may rely more on proactive control. The planned research
will compare the performance of two groups of bilinguals in the US as they learn
a novel language. One group lives in a region with ambient exposure to the novel
language in their environment. The other group lives in a largely monolingual
English environment with little linguistic diversity. Both groups are immersed
in English, their non-dominant language, although the second group is immersed
in English to a greater extent. Participants will complete a series of tasks to
learn morphosyntax (gender assignment) and certain phonetic distinctions in the
third, novel language. The ability to engage proactive control resources and
ambient exposure are hypothesized to lead to enhanced learning
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.