* 2042126
* Collaborative Research: Chalcogenide Perovskite Light Emitting Diodes to Fill the Green Gap
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Shengbai Zhang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 04/30/2024
* USD 120,956.00

Solid-state lighting plays a central role in substantially reducing the amount
of energy consumption. The efficiency of current LEDs drastically decreases from
∼80% in the blue-light regions to ∼15% in the green region. This lack of a
suitable semiconductor green light source is known as the “green gap” problem.
This research aims to address this problem by developing green LEDs based on an
entirely new family of semiconductor materials called chalcogenide perovskite.
The proposed work is a critical step towards opening a new frontier in
semiconductor device research based on chalcogenide perovskites, with far
reaching impacts on applications such as sensing, energy harvesting, information
processing, and storage. The use of earth-abundant elements in these materials
can reduce our nation’s reliance on rare-earth materials. Through collaboration
with local industry, the proposed work will also develop samples and
instrumentation for advanced laboratory courses, which will not only impact STEM
education in the US and worldwide, but also the local economy in Western New
York. The research activities involving machine learning, first-principles
computation, material synthesis, device fabrication, and characterization, will
offer important interdisciplinary training to a diversified student body through
targeted recruiting from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal aims to demonstrate the first chalcogenide perovskite-based light
emitting diodes, with the long-term goal of bridging the green gap in LED
technology. This will involve an iterative process in which theoretical
prediction will guide material synthesis and atomic level structural, optical,
and carrier transport characterization will inform theoretical models as well as
device design and fabrication. The idea of this work was conceived based on the
principal investigators' recent prediction and realization of chalcogenide
perovskite materials with tunable band gap and promising semiconducting
properties. The specific project objectives are to: i) Develop a low temperature
chalcogenide perovskite thin-film processing technique compatible with device
fabrication and growing high quality SrHfS3 and SrZrS3 thin films with strong
green and amber light emission. ii) Control device properties through concerted
first-principles computation and experiments of atomic scale structural,
optical, and carrier transport characteristic. iii) Design, fabricate, and
evaluate green and amber LEDs from n- and p- type doped SrHfS3 and SrZrS3 thin
films. An innovative device fabrication technique incorporating micro-transfer-
printing allows for dissimilar materials to form a high-quality p-i-n type LED
structure with extremely clean interfaces without being constrained by their
growth conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.