* 2042211
* RAPID: Linking population dynamics and behavior to understand how wildfire modifies the prevalence of zoonotic disease
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2022
* John Orrock, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 10/31/2022
* USD 132,900.00

An estimated 60% of pathogens that affect humans, including the novel
coronarvirus, also infect wild animals. This project examines Sin Nombre virus
(SNV), a causative agent of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in humans, in wild
mouse populations. In particular, this work evaluates how wildfires, which are
increasing in frequency and severity, affect disease dynamics. Knowledge of
wildfire effects on disease in animal populations is incomplete because pre-fire
data rarely exist to make informed post-fire comparisons, and because wildfires
can simultaneously affect animal behavior, abundance, and movement. This project
will help identify mechanisms whereby wildfire modifies disease in animals,
thereby providing benefits to society by improving the ability to predict how
future wildfires will affect disease in wildlife and humans. The project will
also provide ways to mitigate human disease risk by identifying which
intervention strategies are likely to be most successful for reducing post-fire
disease in wildlife populations. Through outreach the project will educate the
public about how wildfire affects infectious disease. In addition, the project
will provide significant opportunities for training graduate students
underrepresented in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project evaluates
how wildfire affects the prevalence of SNV via the effects of wildfire on deer
mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus) demography and behavior. Intensive immediate
post-fire demographic, behavioral, and environmental data will be combined with
existing long-term, pre-fire data. The project occurs on Santa Cruz Island, CA
and capitalizes on a recent wildfire in June 2020. The objective of the project
is to evaluate three hypotheses that link disturbance and the prevalence of
zoonotic disease. 1) Sex-based differences in dispersal yield changes in
prevalence by altering the composition of post-fire populations. 2) Changes in
vegetative structure in post-fire habitats drive local changes in animal
abundance that modify contact rates and disease prevalence. 3) Homogeneous
resources and risk in post-fire habitats serve to synchronize the timing of
animal activity, increasing contact rates and
prevalence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.