* 2042325
* CAREER: An Integrated Dissipative Modeling Framework for the Long-Term Assessment of Geohazards
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Emmanouil Veveakis, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2026
* USD 580,158.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award focuses on developing an
integrated modeling approach –combining predictive modeling and simulations with
optimal experimental selection— and monitoring protocols to predict and mitigate
man-made and natural Geohazards. Examples of such Geohazards include landslides,
debris and mudflows, sinkholes, over-pressurized underground zones, barriers and
disposal sites, volcanoes, and earthquakes. They are often devastating in
casualties and infrastructure damage, and remain largely unpredictable. These
Geohazards evolve on very long time-scales, of years or more, extend to field
dimensions exceeding hundreds of meters, involve the response of Geomaterials
prone to internal microstructural changes and transformations (like clays,
shales, sandstones, mudstones, limestones), and display complex loading
conditions, often involving heat and/or overpressures in the presence of
chemically active fluids. Through a combination of techniques from multiple
disciplines, the project provides a major step towards demonstrating how
interdisciplinary, energetic approaches may link processes operating at
different scales. The aim is to develop a dissipative framework at the field
scale using material information from the lower scales to assess the long-term
potential of both man-made and natural Geohazards. The research is complemented
by innovative educational tools –such as an interactive 3D simulator—and an
outreach program based on project-based curriculum development targeting a broad
audience to make geotechnical engineering a gender-equal
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to
understand and quantify the dominant physics governing the response of materials
in the long-term conditions frequently encountered in Geohazards. This will be
achieved by developing and testing an integrated framework combining
experimental, theoretical and numerical developments, where information from
material science analyses at the small scales is assimilated in a
computationally-assisted constitutive framework through nested multi-scale
numerical approaches, and validated through state-of-the-art experiments, before
being upscaled to the field scale. Thus the objectives of this project include:
(i) bringing together concepts from disciplines including material science, soil
and rock mechanics, solid and fluid mechanics, chemical engineering,
thermodynamics, computational mechanics, and applied mathematics and physics, in
order to identify and constrain the laws governing the long-term response of
geomaterials; (ii) quantifying the energy budget of dissipative structures
through multi-scale modeling, calibrated via testing in which both the
microstructure and the average temperature are continuously monitored; (iii)
predicting the response of selected Geohazards from microstructural data and
continuous monitoring. The research project has the capability of offering
unique and transformative knowledge on the response of Geomaterials in long-
term, multi-physical loading, as well as deep insights into the mechanical and
physical processes operating in Geohazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.