* 2042646
* CAREER: Fundamental Chemistry of Combustion Intermediates: Cyclic Ethers
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Brandon Rotavera, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 01/31/2026
* USD 415,781.00

The U.S. Energy Information Agency predicts that portion of combustion-derived
energy consumed by the transportation sector over the next several decades
remains strikingly similar to that in 2020, with hydrocarbons and biofuels
providing about ninety-seven per cent. Concurrent with other technologies,
continued development of sustainable combustion systems for transportation is a
high priority for the United States. Despite numerous advancements over the
years, including drastic reductions in emissions and improvements in fuel
economy, significant scientific challenges still remain on development of
sustainable and low-carbon-intensive energy sources. Improvements in the
efficiency of combustion systems is predicated on an understanding of chemical
reactions that control ignition and pollutant formation and, moreover, the
ability to predict such phenomena via computer modeling. However, fundamental
understanding of hydrocarbon and biofuel chemistry becomes more complex in next-
generation combustion systems that incorporate new strategies and operating
conditions of temperature and pressure that differ from conventional systems.
This project specifically focuses on cyclic ethers, which are a class of
intermediates formed predominantly at low temperatures as found in modern
combustion systems. To contribute to energy efficiency goals for next-generation
combustion technologies, this CAREER project tightly integrates research,
education, and outreach strategies to produce fundamental knowledge and
instructional tools to advance the field of combustion chemistry. This project
includes scientific training of Ph.D. students, undergraduate Student Veterans,
and first-generation students. The research elements underpin several
educational projects, including, among others, combustion science videos
produced in collaboration with the Grady School of Journalism, wherein graduate
and undergraduate students discuss their research and its broader impact to spur
interest in combustion research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research
activities of the project involve combustion experiments on cyclic ethers using
a high-pressure jet-stirred reactor and the development of new sub-mechanisms
using Reaction Mechanism Generator, a leading open-source software for chemical
kinetics modeling. The project specifically focuses on cyclic ether radical
chemistry, the knowledge gap on the competition of between unimolecular ring-
opening and bimolecular reaction with oxygen, and related impact on ignition and
emissions predictions. The experiments utilize mass spectrometry and a state-of-
the-art electronic absorption spectroscopy technique to measure isomer-resolved
species profiles of products from combustion of the six cyclic ethers produced
from n-pentane oxidation: 1,2-epoxypentane, 2,3-epoxypentane, 2-ethyloxetane,
2,4-dimethyloxetane, 2-methyltetrahydrofuran, and tetrahydropyran. The
scientific impact of this research includes the development of new, fundamental
understanding of chemical reactivity relevant to combustion, new cyclic ether
sub-mechanisms, as well as improvements to the fidelity of existing chemical
kinetics mechanisms, which enable the design and modeling of next-generation
combustion systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.