* 2042243
* Processes Influencing Critical Element Enrichment in Alkaline Magmatic Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Carol Frost, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2024
* USD 274,610.00

The distribution of critical elements in the Earth’s crust is influenced by many
processes across distinct geologic settings. The rare earth elements (REEs) are
important components in many facets of our day-to-day life, for example, in
permanent magnets, many electronics, and batteries in hybrid cars. Platinum
group elements (PGEs) are important components in catalytic agents and are
utilized in many industrial and electronic applications. Despite critical
element enrichment in many alkaline magmatic systems, our understanding of the
igneous processes that influence their enrichment and distribution is limited. A
better understanding of the igneous processes that control critical element
concentrations in alkaline systems can aid in informing focused critical element
exploration. This project aims to evaluate igneous processes that may influence
the enrichment and distribution of PGEs and REEs within the alkaline magmatic
system at the Rattlesnake Hills Alkaline Complex, Wyoming. Broader impacts of
this project include graduate student training, research experience for
undergraduate students, and the development of 3D rock models and associated
assignments for distribution to educators. This project is jointly funded by the
Petrology and Geochemistry program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alkaline systems show
extreme variation in critical element enrichment (e.g., REEs, PGEs, Te, V, W,
Ba, and F) and Au contents. The proposed project will evaluate potential
controls on critical element enrichment at the Rattlesnake Hills alkaline
complex (RHAC). End-member hypotheses for critical element enrichment include:
1) country rock control, potentially as crustal assimilation or hydrothermal
scavenging and redistribution of critical elements from country rock, 2) liquid
immiscibility, and 3) initial composition of alkaline magmas. The project will
document the igneous history of the RHAC, distinguishing timing and sources of
igneous units and their relationship to mineralization. Geochemical and isotopic
data will be collected to evaluate the input of critical elements from country
rock. The role of liquid immiscibility will be investigated through the use of
geochemical and melt inclusion data. Despite recognition of economic enrichment
in alkaline systems for over 100 years, the processes that control critical
element enrichment within these deposits are unclear. Understanding these
controls will better elucidate the evolution of shallowly-emplaced, mantle-
derived melts, the cycling of critical minerals in the upper-crust, and inform
targeted exploration for critical minerals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.