* 2042489
* Innovating Developmental Science with an Online, Scalable Meta-Science Platform for Investigating Cognitive Development During Early Childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Candice Mills, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 11/30/2024
* USD 1,256,000.00

The preschool years are a particularly rich time for development in children’s
thinking and learning. To gain a deeper understanding of how children develop
and how this development can vary across children, it is important to have a
large and diverse sample of children participate in multiple studies over time.
Unfortunately, due to challenges with current in-person methods, much of the
previous research on children has small samples, with limited diversity, and
with limited opportunities for the same children to participate in multiple
studies as they age. This project will address these limitations by collecting
data with a large and diverse sample in many studies over time. To do so, it
will be a collaboration across multiple universities in which families
participate conveniently at home, over the internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will present parents with a family-friendly website where their child
will be able to participate in research studies online from home and will enable
them to learn more about developmental science. Using this approach, researchers
will be able to design and conduct online studies as well as share data. The
collected data will involve large-scale replication and extension of several
classic measures of cognitive development related to thinking and reasoning in
children ages 3 to 6, and will integrate new experimental studies into the
infrastructure to understand how generalizable past findings are and how
behavior on one task relates to others. In subsequent phases of this project,
scholars outside of the project’s initial collaborative network will be invited
to use the infrastructure for their own research and will be able to use the
initial data to guide new research questions. The results will have implications
for improving theoretical models of cognitive development and education and
launch discipline-wide opportunities for innovative, representative, and open
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.