* 2042377
* CAREER: Disrupting the Status Quo Regarding Who Gets to be an Engineer
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Jeremi London, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 02/28/2026
* USD 479,104.00

While there has been extensive research on the barriers Black and brown students
face as they strive to participate in engineering education and the workforce,
there is less scholarship on solutions for addressing this complex challenge.
One reason for this is because the scholarship on how change happens in
engineering education tends to focus on course content and classroom
instruction. Unfortunately, such findings do not easily lend themselves to
value-laden, systemic issues like diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI).
Fortunately, some Colleges of Engineering (COEs) throughout the U.S. have
adopted change strategies that have resulted in consistently being named among
the top-ten producers of Black and brown engineers. This project is motivated by
a desire to learn from and follow their example. This CAREER project will
disrupt the status quo regarding who gets to be an engineer by investigating
five COEs that have significantly changed the face of engineering over the last
20 years. This project will: (1) Advance our understanding of the change
strategies that exemplary COEs have used to improve Black and brown students’
access to engineering education and careers; (2) Identify evidence-based models
for broadening participation of underrepresented racial/ethnic groups in
engineering; and (3) Set COEs on a path to parity, such that the student body
demographics in COEs across the country reflect the racial/ethnic makeup of the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using Kotter’s Leading Change Model and Acker’s
Inequality Regimes as a framework, this multi-case study will investigate how
exemplary COEs envisioned, implemented, and institutionalized changes that
influenced Black and brown students’ access to engineering. The five COEs that
will be investigated are: Florida International University, Morgan State
University, University of Central Florida, University of Maryland-Baltimore
County, and University of Maryland-College Park. Given variations in the types
of universities included in the research design, comparing and contrasting
insights that emerge from each case will enable the PI to understand the
conditions for change. The use of a research study design that relies on both
qualitative and quantitative data will produce complementary forms of evidence
on what promotes and impedes progress in this context. The research outcomes
will include: (1) impact narratives that document concrete examples of how to
expand who gets to be an engineer; and (2) a model for broadening participation
informed by a cross-case analysis of these exemplars. Furthermore, this timely
work focuses on the need to leverage talent from every demographic to diversify
the engineering workforce and improve the lived experiences of minoritized
groups. The educational outcomes will include: an Impact Playbook that
translates the research into actionable strategies; a graduate course for future
engineering faculty designed around each of the cases; a townhall discussion
among associate professors; sharing insights with ASEE’s Engineering Deans
Council; and a partnership with Virginia Tech’s (VT) College of Engineering and
College of Science to build capacity among its leaders to envision and enact
sustainable changes that promote DEI on VT’s campus. This CAREER project has the
potential to reshape how COEs approach their DEI efforts, and increase the
likelihood of long-term success. The proposed activities are designed to foster
a network of STEM leaders motivated to envision and enact sustainable, scalable
changes that expand who gets to be an engineer at their
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.