* 2042343
* Defining and Building the Engineering Workforce of the Future
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Rocio Chavela Guerra, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 11/30/2023
* USD 658,851.00

To assist higher education programs in adapting their practices to better
prepare engineering professionals who thrive in the future workforce, the
American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) will conduct a two-part
workshop series to identify the key competencies required for a future-ready
engineering workforce, and the elements of an education action plan that would
equip such workforce. This proposal builds on the National Science Foundation’s
(NSF) strategic goal of fostering the growth of a more capable and diverse
research workforce, advancing the scientific and innovation skills of the
nation, as well as the projected impact of the industries of the future such as
artificial intelligence (AI), quantum science, advanced communication
networks/5G, advanced manufacturing and biotechnology. This project will conduct
a visioning exercise to identify and disaggregate key competencies with enough
specificity so that meaningful change actions in engineering educational
programs can be conveyed in a straightforward manner. This multi-stakeholder
agenda for action will help develop large numbers of individuals with the
engineering skills needed for success in the workplace of the future and
increase the capacities of the nation’s engineering workforce. This will help
define the startup phase of establishing a sustainable Future-Ready Engineering
Ecosystem (FREE) composed of education, policy, and private sector
collaborations, that will be necessary to maintain U.S. technological
leadership. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the Future Ready Engineer
Ecosystem (FREE) two-part workshop series are two-fold: The first workshop will
focus on visioning and definition and the second workshop will focus on
operationalization. Specifically, the first workshop will focus on
disaggregating key competencies for the future-ready engineering workforce and
will identify a prioritized taxonomy of the key competencies with the essential
details and context summaries to provide meaningful specificity. This Future-
Ready Engineering Ecosystem Competency Taxonomy (FREE-CoT) would then become the
desired student outcomes for the second workshop. The second workshop will build
upon the outcomes of the first workshop to define what are the specific actions
that educators, policymakers, and industry need to take to co-develop a critical
mass of emerging engineers with the competencies needed to succeed in the coming
years. A framework for the necessary changes in engineering educational programs
will be identified along with the required actions to achieve these changes. The
framework will also include the essential collaborative processes that must be
established across the sectors to achieve the communication and feedback
required for ongoing co-development. A rubric will be drafted that defines a
threshold of what success looks like for each key competency. This Future-Ready
Engineering Ecosystem Framework and Rubric for Action (FREE-FRA) would then
provide an easy to communicate vision for a national call to
action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.