* 2042324
* Embedding Equitable Design through Undergraduate Computing Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Margaret Burnett, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 01/31/2024
* USD 185,132.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating a new approach
to teaching computer science (CS) that fosters inclusive and equitable
practices. The structure of a typical undergraduate computer science degree
program has changed little in decades. The curricula rarely include courses like
CS ethics or usability that teach CS students how systems affect people and
society. When such courses are included, they are largely disconnected from the
rest of the CS degree. As a result, students entering the workforce tend to
design software that is highly inequitable for large portions of the intended
users of that software. This project will investigate a new approach to teaching
CS that embeds equitable software design into computing courses throughout all
four years of the undergraduate CS curriculum. The new approach does not require
large changes to the curriculum, but instead integrates equity and inclusion
into the CS work the students are already doing. Through the participation of
three universities, over 20 faculty, and over 6000 students, this project will
investigate the effectiveness, sustainability, and impact of the new
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is based on the foundations of
equitable design methods. The expected results of this project will include new
course materials to support transforming an existing CS curriculum to one that
embeds equitable design, and professional development for faculty to foster
success at embedding equitable software design into their courses. Research
questions that will be investigated as part of this work will generate knowledge
that will allow CS teachers to better understand the impacts of the changes on
the ability of students to create high-quality software that is equitable, the
impacts on the culture in computing classes and majors, and the feasibility of
the approach across several different educational settings. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.