* 2042090
* CAREER: Thriving in Context: Bridging Academic, Social, and Psychological Wellbeing among Black College Women to Increase STEM Retention (Broadening Participation and Persistence)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Seanna Leath, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2026
* USD 258,718.00

Academic motivation has received more attention regarding Black women’s STEM
retention. Yet, psychosocial processes, particularly those tied to
discrimination, are crucial to understanding how Black women navigate university
contexts. What is less clear is under what conditions and in what ways,
individual factors and institutional resources, operate as protective factors
for Black women’s STEM retention. How might attention to social and
psychological phenomenon shed light on academic motivation and STEM retention
among Black women? The present CAREER proposal draws on an integrated program of
research and education to: (1) focus specifically on how, in addition to
academic ability, social and psychological wellbeing are largely neglected, but
powerful influences on Black women’s STEM retention; (2) investigate key
moderators of the relationships between Black women’s perceptions of
institutional climate and STEM persistence; and (3) explore how Black women
cultivate networks of personal and institutional support to offset identity-
based marginalization and thrive. This work was supported by the Developmental
Sciences program and the Education and Human Resources Core Research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes two phases of research and an
educational plan that will benefit a range of stakeholders, including educators,
scholars, and community organizations. The first phrase involves mixed
methodological data collection with annual surveys and in-depth, semi-structured
interviews with Black undergraduate women at two local institutions (PWI and
HBCU) over a 4-year period. The second phase involves design-based research with
administrators at both universities to develop a comprehensive set of practical
resources for future cohorts of Black undergraduate women. The current study
will expand developmental theories of college student adjustment to create a
student thriving framework that examines individual and institutional-level
factors as key aspects of STEM achievement and retention. In addition, the
findings will inform institutional efforts on helping Black women thrive in STEM
contexts, and use a multi-tiered approach with Black women STEM majors, faculty
in STEM departments, and university leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.