* 2042915
* SG: Evaluating synchrony among ecosystem productivity, benthic cyanobacterial growth, and toxin production dynamics in rivers
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Joanna Blaszczak, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 01/31/2024
* USD 199,891.00

Cyanobacteria growing in freshwater ecosystems, such as lakes and rivers, can
produce toxins that threaten aquatic life and human health. This project
advances our understanding of controls on the timing of peak cyanobacterial
growth and cyanotoxin production in rivers where blooms are becoming more
common. This project monitors the Eel, Russian, and Klamath rivers in northern
California and uses the data to develop predictive models of cyanobacterial
growth and toxin production. This research advances the ability of managers to
predict where and when toxins produced by benthic cyanobacteria reach
concentrations that exceed human and animal health risk thresholds. The
researchers are also broadening participation in aquatic ecosystem science by
supporting a summer intern in partnership with the Klamath Basin Monitoring
Program and Karuk Tribe Department of Natural Resources and by supporting a
graduate student. The investigators are also organizing two experiential field
trips for K-12 students in partnership with the Mid-Klamath Watershed Council.
The results of this work are critical to river managers in identifying and
managing risks associated with exposure to algal toxins and transmitting that
information to the public. All data and modeling approaches developed in this
project are being shared publicly on web-accessible
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances understanding of the timing
and occurrence of cyanobacterial growth and cyanotoxin production in rivers by
using high-frequency sensor data and new approaches in ecological modeling. To
improve predictions of cyanobacterial growth and toxin production through time,
the investigators are focusing on two questions: 1) To what degree do processes
that shape overall productivity dynamics in rivers predict the growth of toxin-
producing cyanobacteria? and 2) How do environmental conditions modify the
relationship between cyanobacterial growth and cyanotoxin production over the
growing season? These questions are being addressed through the use of aquatic
environmental sensors and coupled field sampling for two years at locations with
previously documented occurrences of cyanobacteria that produce anatoxins, a
neurotoxin produced by many species of freshwater cyanobacteria. Data on whole-
ecosystem productivity rates are being used in combination with survey data to
inform a series of models testing the relative importance of drivers of
cyanobacterial growth and cyanotoxin production in rivers through time. These
analyses are laying the foundation for future forecasts of harmful
cyanobacterial blooms and toxin production in United States
rivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.