* 2042107
* Collaborative Research: Actuating and Sensing Objects on a Free Surface
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Daisuke Takagi, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 110,531.00

This collaborative research investigates the strong coupling between floating
particles at the air-water interface and water waves, which is a fundamental
scientific problem with inspiration for technological innovation. The water
surface in nature attracts all sorts of objects, such as biological organisms in
search of food and mates, as well as microplastics and oil spills polluting the
world's oceans and lakes. Thus, the water surface provides an important
opportunity to survey the local ecology and clean the pollutants if one can
identify and control these objects on-demand. The outcomes of this project will
provide fundamental understanding of physical mechanisms necessary for such
applications, which range from locating floating objects in darkness for search
and surveillance missions, to collecting marine debris for environmental
protection. In addition, the PIs will participate in various educational
activities at their home institutions with a focus on recruiting students from
under-represented groups. The students participating in this research will be
trained in both experimental and theoretical approaches and will engage in
active collaboration across institutes through co-advising, virtual group
meetings, and presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this
collaborative research is to gain fundamental understanding of rich dynamical
interactions that arise between the floating objects, surface waves and fluid
flows. Specifically, the PI team will uncover complex particle-wave interactions
in the context of sensing and controlling objects at the fluid-fluid interface.
There are different types of hydrodynamic interactions that dominate depending
on the relevant length scale of the system. For example, wave dispersion and
particle movement on a thin liquid layer are governed by capillary and viscous
forces, while the wave-particle dynamics on the deep water surface is governed
primarily by inertia and gravity. However, there is no comprehensive framework
at present that can resolve the coupled dynamics of the surface waves and
particles at the interface across different scales. By combining experiments and
mathematical modeling, the four PIs will investigate the fundamentals of wave-
particle interactions: sensing (scattered waves) and actuation (force and
torque) of floating objects remotely, in the distinct limits of shallow and deep
water waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.