* 2042662
* CAREER: Rethinking the Dynamics of Magma Storage and Eruption for Yellowstone’s Youngest Supereruption’
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Madison Myers, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2026
* USD 442,022.00

Beneath Yellowstone National Park exists an active heat source which fuels the
steaming springs and gushing geysers that draw more than 4 million visitors to
the park every year. In the past, this heat source resulted in large-volume
volcanic eruptions that created many of the rocks we see scattered across the
landscape today. Because Yellowstone is a federally protected and active
volcanic center, scientists have an obligation to understand the geologic
history and possible hazards of such a massive volcanic system and to convey
this information to the communities and people that visit each year. This
project aims to systematically investigate the youngest supereruption, the Lava
Creek Tuff, which produced the modern-day Yellowstone caldera. The questions to
be addressed include: (1) how was magma positioned beneath the surface? (2) what
may have triggered the magma to move to the surface? (3) where did magma erupt
from? and (4) how long (days, weeks, years) did it take for all of these
processes to occur? Throughout this project, the researchers will be training
the next generation of geologists to develop their skills as scientists and
communicators. Yellowstone provides an ideal setting to teach skills related to
geologic mapping, critical thinking, and rock analysis, which is why this
proposal is structured to provide eight undergraduate and three graduate
students with summer mapping experiences, with an emphasis on recruiting
students from underrepresented backgrounds. All students will be trained to be
active stewards of Yellowstone science, writing blog articles and preparing
presentations that communicate to the public the geology and monitoring of
Yellowstone Volcano.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms and timescales by
which large volumes of rhyolitic magma accumulate, are stored in the upper crust
and are triggered to eruption remain fundamental questions in volcanology. The
overall Research Objective of this proposal is to reevaluate the assemblage,
storage and eruption dynamics of the youngest supereruption from the Yellowstone
Volcanic Field (YVF), the Lava Creek Tuff (LCT; 0.63 Ma). This work was ignited
by the 2018 discovery of two new ignimbrite units previously unrecognized (and
currently spatially unconstrained) as belonging to the LCT. Additionally, hints
of inter-depositional chemical variations within the LCT exist in the
established literature but are currently poorly defined. The working hypothesis
of this proposal is that the LCT eruption consisted of multiple magma bodies
tapped differentially along the caldera boundary, comparable to what is inferred
in the better-studied Huckleberry Ridge Tuff, the oldest (2.08 Ma) supereruption
from the YVF. Through a combination of detailed field mapping, extensive whole
rock, glass geochemistry and petrographic analysis, diffusion modeling and age
dating, this project will rethink the makeup and progression of the youngest
Yellowstone supereruption. The Educational Objective of this study is to
leverage the proximity (1.5 hours) of Montana State University to one of the
largest volcanic systems on Earth, using it as a field-based laboratory for
training the next generation of geologists. This project presents numerous
opportunities for practicing science communication in light of over 4 million
tourists that visit the park each year. All students will be trained to be
active stewards of Yellowstone science, writing blog articles and preparing
public presentations that communicate the geology and monitoring efforts of
Yellowstone Volcano.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.