* 2042873
* CAREER: Mechanistic dissection of sleep and behavioral arousal: A model system approach to interdisciplinarity in neuroscience research and education
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Divya Sitaraman, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 09/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Sleep and wakefulness are highly conserved and fundamental behavioral states.
The ability to regulate these states in response to environmental conditions and
homeostatic needs is critical for survival. Goal-directed motivated behaviors
like mating, feeding and aggression are essentially dependent on strong
behavioral arousal. Nonetheless, little is known about the neuronal mechanisms
that compartmentalize and coordinate motivational processes with sleep-wake
regulation. Here, the investigators determine how arousal states are encoded and
integrated across behaviors in the brain by studying the behavioral coordination
of sleep and social behaviors like courtship using the experimental tractability
of the fruit fly Drosophila. The focus on small circuits with measurable
behavioral outputs in organisms amenable to genetic manipulations and
neurophysiological recordings generates resources and expertise that exposes
middle-school, high-school, undergraduate and graduate students to
interdisciplinary research. The research and educational programs in this
project act synergistically to support female, minority, and first-generation
college students to integrate skills and concepts across disciplines through
research engagement, career mentoring, skills-training, interdisciplinary
thinking, and inclusive teaching practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Circuit
mechanisms underlying the coordination of sleep and behavioral arousal are not
understood in any organism. The focus of this project is to define the circuit
mechanisms by which sleep and wake are encoded in the fly brain and how they
causally influence arousal states associated with motivated social behaviors
like courtship and aggression. The research team has identified integrator
neurons that encode motivation to court and also mediate wakefulness and
arousal. This project investigates the mechanisms by which these integrator
neurons initiate and maintain arousal to co-regulate sleep expression with
motivated behaviors. The investigators have established Drosophila as an
advantageous model for circuit analysis of co-regulation of sleep and behavioral
arousal by developing novel behavioral assays, tools to target individual cell-
types and record network activity where this co-regulation has been
destabilized. In Aims 1 and 2, studies map excitatory and inhibitory synaptic
interactions between integrator P1 network and sleep-regulating neurons of clock
network, Mushroom Body and Central Complex that underlies the bidirectional
control of sleep and social behaviors. In Aim 3, measurements are made of the
spontaneous neural activity of identified microcircuits animals with
destabilized sleep- or social-arousal states. This project will establish
connections between genes, circuits, and behavior in understanding internal
state dependent decision making and action-selection. The project also exposes
middle-school, high-school, undergraduate and graduate students to
interdisciplinary research. A key focus is supporting female, minority, and
first-generation college students to integrate skills and concepts across
disciplines through research engagement, career mentoring, skills-training,
interdisciplinary thinking, and inclusive teaching
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.