* 2042638
* CAREER: Tuning Interface Atomic Structure and Composition for Fast Ion Conduction
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2027
* William Bowman, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 02/28/2027
* USD 512,733.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Ceramic materials are key components in current and
future energy conversion and storage technologies, such as fuel cells,
batteries, and devices used to produce hydrogen gas and process carbon dioxide.
Improving these technologies relies on understanding and enhancing the ionic
conductivity of crucial ceramic materials. New knowledge produced by this
research will yield design rules for high-performance engineering materials, and
enable unprecedented ceramics for energy conversion, energy storage, and
chemical conversion applications. This project combines state-of-the-art
nanomaterials fabrication methods, and advanced electron microscopy
characterization to explain the behavior of ceramic materials at the atomic
level. The research is integrated into a novel outreach and education activity
which engages high school students and teachers in activities rich in science
and technology, and designed to develop a pipeline of diverse students into
science and engineering fields. The new “Science, Technology and Art of Imaging
and Recording” (STAIR) outreach activity is bringing high school teachers and
students from underrepresented groups in local low-income areas to learn about
imaging physics and technology while making art. STAIR leverages general
knowledge to engage and educate about imaging hardware (cameras, microscopes),
physics (optics, colors, radiation), art (photography, videography), and
technology (virtual reality, computer vision). Materials science graduate
students funded by this project are trained in advanced nanomaterials synthesis
and characterization, preparing them for employment in manufacturing, and
research and development in clean energy and
semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This research elucidates
the links between atomic structure, chemical composition, and oxygen anion
conductivity across material defects in ion-conducting ceramic materials. Two-
dimensional defects (interfaces) are investigated in model multilayer thin films
and bicrystals synthesized by state-of-the-art nanofabrication techniques based
on pulsed laser deposition. Such interfaces are key to the electrical and
electrochemical performance of a wide variety of engineering materials, not just
electroceramics. A combination of experiments using advanced transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) imaging and spectroscopy techniques capable of
directly imaging and identifying atoms, and simulations of anion diffusivity,
answer fundamental questions surrounding the behavior of mobile ions near
interfaces. This research is attempting to advance fundamental theories of
electrical conductivity in ionically-conducting ceramics, uncover atomic-level
mechanisms of mass transport across interfaces, and ultimately explain how to
best design materials for optimal electrical
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.