* 2042182
* CAREER: Glycogen metabolism kick-starts photosynthesis in cyanobacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Xin Wang, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 05/31/2026
* USD 791,227.00

Life on Earth depends on photosynthesis to harvest solar energy. During the day,
plants and other photosynthetic organisms use solar energy to fix carbon dioxide
and store excess carbon as carbon polymers such as starch or glycogen. At night,
these storage carbons are broken down as the energy source for dark survival.
The dark-to-light transition represents a universal environmental stress for
photosynthetic lifeforms. For example, many metabolites necessary for
photosynthetic reactions upon light exposure are limited or depleted due to
metabolic reactions conducted in dark. It is important for photosynthetic
organisms to have a mechanism in place to cope with this stress and ensure
healthy photosynthetic performance upon exposure to light. How photosynthetic
organisms achieve this dark-to-light transitions remains unclear. This research
project applies cutting-edge biochemical and systems biology approaches to
dissect the molecular mechanisms that allow this dark to light transition to
occur in a model photosynthetic blue green alga. Knowledge gained from this
research will how storage polymers like glycogen pave the way for carbon dioxide
fixation to occur during the dark to light transition and eventually lead to
ways to improve photosynthetic efficiency for crop productions. The research
project also provides training opportunities for one postdoctoral researcher,
one graduate student, and several undergraduate students. Components of this
research are also integrated in a cluster education program as well as in the
form of a special topics course on Synthetic Biology to broaden the training
opportunity and strengthen scientific literacy for both undergraduate and
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyanobacteria experience drastic
metabolic changes under daily light/dark cycles. The smooth metabolic transition
from dark to light is crucial for healthy photosynthetic performance and the
overall fitness of phototrophs. It is known that glycogen metabolism is involved
in supporting the initiation of the Calvin-Benson-Bassham (CBB) cycle reactions
during dark-to-light transitions in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus
PCC 7942. However, the molecular mechanisms of how glycogen metabolism supports
photosynthesis are not clear. This project applies proteomics, metabolomics,
metabolic flux analysis, and photochemical analyses to characterize the coping
mechanism of cyanobacteria for the dark-to-light transition stress. The research
activities will illustrate the status of a stalled CBB cycle, and understand how
glycogen metabolism helps replenish and restart carbon fixation reactions, as
well as protecting Photosystem I from photoinhibition during dark-to-light
transitions. Discoveries from the research will significantly advance the
understanding on a fundamental mechanism employed by photosynthetic lifeforms to
cope with the dark-to-light transition stress and further our knowledge on
energy balance between photosynthetic light reactions and carbon fixation.
Results from the study also benefit photosynthesis redesign research in the
field of synthetic biology for sustainable food
supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.