* 2042661
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A:  Meeting COVID and Household Affordability Challenges through Flex Streets and Dynamic Bicycle Transportation Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* David Hurwitz, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

This project seeks to merge the need for flexibility affordability, and physical
distancing along our streets by developing flexible traffic signal
infrastructure. The goal is to use smart and connected communication systems to
maximize the throughput of people on bike, scooter, and other micromobility
modes and minimize physical proximity (when needed) that happens if a group
arrives at a red light in any given cycle. With safe and efficient
infrastructure, micromobility has the potential to meet a majority of household
trip needs, is more affordable than car ownership allowing households to either
reduce expenses or allocate more to address housing needs, and is more inclusive
for people aged eight to eighty to access their communities more
fully.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work proposes to expand the nation’s only
bicycle and driving simulation lab to create dynamic, immersive environments to
test new V2X communication with flexible streets and traffic signals that can
help municipalities dynamically and quickly change the use of their public right
of way due to changing needs, whether due to pandemics, disasters, or just to
respond to overall changing community preferences. The team intends to install a
network of traffic signals and test the efficacy of this new smart system on
streets in Portland, Oregon, in partnership with community stakeholders. The
team includes researchers in urban planning, transportation engineering, and
computer science from two universities, a private sector vendor of next
generation smart traffic signals, and traffic engineers from the cities of
Portland (OR) and Utrecht (Netherlands). The results of this work can help fully
integrate micromobility into traffic signal systems, in a scalable way, that
also gives information to users in ways that help them optimize their travel.
This project is in response to the Civic Innovation Challenge program, Track A—
Communities and Mobility: Offering Better Mobility Options to Solve the Spatial
Mismatch Between Housing Affordability and Jobs—and is a collaboration between
NSF and the Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.