* 2042937
* Comparative Biomechanics of Hawk Moths with Minute to Giant Proboscises and Diverse Feeding Habits
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Peter Adler, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 807,800.00

Among the most popular insects are the hawk moths, well known for their
remarkably long proboscises and ability to feed from flowers with
extraordinarily long nectar tubes containing nectar of variable viscosity, from
watery to sticky. To understand the wide-ranging abilities of these moths to
acquire fluid from long and short nectar tubes, a diverse team of researchers
will investigate the structure, function, and biomechanics of the proboscis and
its associated sucking pump. The team will focus on how wettability of the
proboscis and it ability to take up fluid enable the many species of hawk moths
to feed on a wide range of liquid resources and from flowers with different
nectar-tube lengths. By coupling structural and functional characteristics of
the proboscises with principles of biology and fluid dynamics, the team will
provide insights into the diversification of hawk moths and their coevolution
with the different species of flowering plants from which they acquire nectar
and, in turn, pollinate. The results will provide strategies for novel bio-
inspired engineering designs and products, such as new microfluidic probes. The
resulting tools, techniques, and theories will be mutually beneficial for
biological and engineering sciences and will involve integrated biological and
engineering education of a new generation of scientists and teachers. In
addition, the researchers will participate in public outreach activities related
to the project, and students will lead citizen-science activities that provide
hawk moth specimens for study and share results on a student-created
webpage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on how proboscis structure in
hawk moths relates to biomechanics of feeding and explores the evolutionary
forces responsible for miniaturization and gigantism of the proboscis. More than
1460 species of hawk moths have evolved to exploit diverse fluid resources.
Their proboscis ranges in length from a fraction of body length to more than
twice body length, allowing hawk moths to feed from many species of flowering
plants. The morphological structure of the tubular proboscis facilitates
passive, spontaneous fluid uptake. The principal hypothesis is that structural
variations of the proboscis and sucking pump provide physical determinants for
diverse fluid-flow scenarios that enable hawk moths to use many liquid resources
of different viscosities. Coupling morphology and wetting and transport
properties of proboscises with biomechanics and energetics of fluid uptake will
provide physical clues to the evolution and diversification of hawk moths. The
objectives are to investigate (1) proboscis structure in relation to
wettability, (2) influence of permeability and proboscis geometry on fluid
uptake, (3) sucking-pump morphology as a basis for fluid-mechanics modeling, and
(4) evolution of physico-chemical traits and the constraints imposed by physical
determinants of fluid flow. The research is based on unique materials
characterization technology and high-speed microscopy of live moths, supported
by theoretical modeling. The team will include diverse talent and perspectives
from all academic levels. Researchers will network with amateur lepidopterists
to study hawk moths from around the country. Inspiration and skills exchanged
between biologists and engineers will generate new techniques and approaches
impacting biology, physics, and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.