* 2042634
* I-Corps: Identification of disease-carrying mosquito vector species using computer vision
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Youseph Yazdi, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of mosquito vector surveillance methods that enable public health
agencies to better evaluate risk of vector-borne disease outbreaks.
Surveillance, monitoring, and evaluation of vector populations, such as
mosquitoes, is widely recognized as a strategic public health activity that will
need to be scaled globally. However, current practices require significant
logistical resources and entomological expertise unavailable in many parts of
the US and around the world. In the US, nearly half of mosquito control
organizations lack the capability and capacity to conduct routine surveillance.
This is complicated by varying regional practices, geographies, resources, and
local mosquito species compositions. Computer vision is a technical approach
that may offer standardized ability to classify different species of mosquitoes.
The proposed technology could be embedded in various configurations from lab,
field, and remotely deployable devices, reducing surveillance costs while
providing data with greater accuracy for decision-making. The flexible nature of
this technology may allow it to be modified for additional
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a dynamic optics configuration and computer vision system capable
of high accuracy classification of mosquito species. Using deep convolutional
neural networks (CNN), the platform successfully achieved 94.7% classification
accuracy across 24 species of field collected (highly damaged) specimens using
computer vision compared with 66% accuracy among entomologists. The optical
system optimizes depth of field, color, lighting, and resolution necessary for
classification. To increase capacity for mosquito control programs to conduct
surveillance, and improve data quality for more effective decision-making, the
technology includes automated mosquito traps for remote mosquito classification,
a robotic identification and sorting system and a handheld identification and
sorting tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.