* 2042761
* CAREER: Impact of Pesticide and Antibiotic Cocktails on Nitrogen Removal Processes in Treatment Wetlands
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Tiffany Messer, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2026
* USD 501,479.00

Nitrate is the most commonly observed chemical contaminant of ground and surface
water in the world. This prevalence leads to nitrate being the major cause for
drinking water impairment. Common use pesticides and antibiotics have also
become ubiquitous in waterways worldwide, particularly in agricultural settings.
While these chemicals are important for agricultural productivity, their release
to the environment has resulted in significant impacts to agroecosystem food
webs and human health, including bee colony disruptions, human reproductive and
development disruption, and the spread of antibiotic resistance. Treatment
wetland systems have the potential to be a cost-effective alternative to prevent
the release of these chemicals and other emerging contaminants to the
environment. However, there is a lack of understanding whether treatment
wetlands can remove both nitrate and contaminant mixtures that exist in runoff;
a critical knowledge gap that prevents more widespread adoption of this
technology. The goal of this project is to develop science-based guidance for
the use of treatment wetlands to remove contaminant mixtures and nitrate to
improve water quality. This goal will be achieved by evaluating the influence of
specific contaminants on wetland treatment processes using state-of-the-science
tracers and automated sensing technology. Successful completion of this project
may lead to cost-effective treatment alternatives for contaminants to protect
human and ecological health in low income, rural communities. These results will
be used to develop innovative community water quality education programs both
locally and remotely. Additional engagement of community members will advance
scientific literacy and diversity through hands-on engineering experiences for
underrepresented groups in STEM. These groups are often among those most
impacted by degraded water quality and, as a result, have the greatest potential
ability to benefit from these efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The twin goals of
this CAREER project are to improve understanding of how antibiotics and
pesticides impact nitrate removal in wetlands while engaging communities through
an innovative citizen science and education platform to advance science literacy
and STEM workforce development. The following specific objectives are designed
to achieve these goals: i) Identify water quality parameters that impact
nutrient removal efficacy through the use of 15N isotopic enrichment studies in
land-based and floating treatment wetland systems; ii) Create a toolkit for
identifying ideal placement and sizing of wetlands using three-dimensional
multiparameter in-situ sensor technologies; iii) Train future practitioners
through mentorship and the development of pre-K and high school curricula to
deliver hands-on ecological systems education; and iv) Provide citizen science
opportunities and water quality training virtually and at field locations to
engage affected rural communities. Field and laboratory scale experimental
approaches will bridge gaps between observation and kinetic modeling from
microcosm and mesocosm experiments with field-scale monitoring and modeling.
Successful completion of this research will advance knowledge by elucidating
mechanisms controlling nitrogen removal and transformation in two distinct
wetland treatment systems. Knowledge will also be advanced through understanding
how contaminants of emerging concern impact microbially mediated denitrification
in wetlands. Further benefits result from improved protection of downstream
water quality and reservoir resilience by evaluating the influence of specific
contaminants of emerging concern on wetland ecosystem services. These results
have potential to benefit society by accelerating the development of treatment
wetland design and management based on science-based observation to enhance
treatment options for water in agricultural and other
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.