* 2042718
* CAREER: Three-Dimensional Modeling and Digital Repatriation of Arctic Indigenous Heritage in the Bering Strait Region of Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Medea Csoba-DeHass, Des Moines Area Community College
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 06/30/2023
* USD 655,999.00

This CAREER project undertakes the first systematic three-dimensional (3D)
modeling and digital repatriation of Alaska Native cultural heritage from the
Bering Strait region of Alaska. Employing innovative and collaborative modes of
community engagement, the PI examines how digital 3D models of cultural heritage
objects are viewed relative to the originals housed in distant museums. Working
with Alaska Native partners, and museum personnel, this project will train both
Midwestern community college students and Alaska Native undergraduates in the
design and implementation of collaborative research, digital technologies, and
3D modeling. The project will produce the first readily available collection of
3D models of Alaska Native cultural heritage and develop a plan for providing
Indigenous communities across the country with access to distant museum
collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students and Alaska Native
interns will review the Arctic collections of the four partnering museums in
preparation for an on-line workshop to select objects for 3D modeling. Following
training on the use of 3D technologies for digital repatriation, student
participants will conduct collections research, literature review, and
ethnographic interviews. During the museum-based component of the project,
selected objects will be scanned and modeled; the process will be video recorded
for educational use by Indigenous organizations, museum staff, and in college
courses developed by the PI. Project partners and student participants will
present workshops in Alaska communities and collaboratively develop a digital
exhibit of scanned objects. Working with university partners, the PI will also
develop and produce a series of open-access videos that explain the basics of 3D
modeling and scanning procedures. The video series will include interviews
focusing on collaborative work with Indigenous communities and address ethical
issues of digital heritage preservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.