* 2042012
* Rural Ventures: Mineral Exploration and Economic Life
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Thomas Ozden-Schilling, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 08/31/2023
* USD 157,537.00

Efforts to regulate expert communications within venture capital markets have
been studied for their effects on prospective investors, but not for their
impacts on individuals living near the sites where market activities originate.
This research addresses this gap by examining how relationships between mining
industry experts and rural residents take shape around speculative projects
during periods of market collapse. Throughout North America, new corporate
outreach strategies and environmental risk assessment regulations have caused
mining companies to engage with rural communities ever further in advance of
actual mining activity. This research examines the social consequences of these
shifts in the context of a recent “boom” and subsequent “bust” affecting several
towns and Indigenous reservations. In 2011, a spectacular rise and fall in
global market prices for rare earth elements drew half a dozen small companies
to the region to conduct geological analysis and local promotion campaigns.
While none of the prospects identified became producing mines, exploration
experts have continued to visit the region to encourage residents to sustain
their hopes that new mines will eventually be constructed. This research will
generate new insights into how residents of rural communities come to
participate in globalizing knowledge economies by examining how local
conversations about mineral exploration, venture finance, and regional economic
uncertainty increasingly highlight the individual agency and
mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contributes to analyses of the roles
that experts and expert knowledge play in shaping contemporary rural life by
examining how resident-expert relationships take shape around promised projects
that may never be realized. The project addresses two main questions: (1) How do
new forms of financial and other technical information shape how rural residents
understand the “failure” of exploratory projects and their potential for future
renewal? (2) How have venture capitalism and the financialization of resource
development planning altered conversations about regional futures and economic
life? Data come from interviews and observations of everyday life during
prolonged lulls in exploration activity. Analysis will focus on how references
to exploratory projects emerge in residents’ encounters with political leaders,
geologists, and financial experts as each group speculates about delays and
discusses other potential futures for regional landscapes. Building on
ethnographic engagements with Indigenous corporations and governance groups
working to re-shape resource economies, the project also examines how Indigenous
groups with diverse political and economic ambitions are working to frame these
deferrals alongside longstanding sovereignty goals and other collective
prerogatives. Overall, the project explains how venture market-focused
regulatory processes have changed the ways experts active in rural areas
understand the ethical demands of their work, and how these processes affect
residents’ sense of their own futures amid profound economic and ecological
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Science and
Technology Studies and Cultural Anthroplogy in the Directorate for Social,
Behavioral and Economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.