* 2042939
* Understanding variation in African American Language: Corpus and prosodic fieldwork perspectives
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lisa Green, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 434,027.00

African American Language (AAL), a term used to capture a range of linguistic
varieties spoken by many, but not all African Americans, and some non-African
Americans, has syntactic, phonological, semantic, pragmatic, and lexical
patterns intertwined with structures of General American English. Prosody, a
part of the grammar dealing with the aspects of speech related to stress and
melody, is one of the least systematically studied linguistic components of AAL.
The interface of prosody with other parts of the AAL grammar is not well-
understood. This project responds to an important need to extend linguistic
analyses and tools to better understand the prosodic systems at work in AAL and
its different varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will pioneer inclusive
tools and methods capable of reaching a wide range of AAL speakers and
communities, combining community-based prosodic fieldwork and large-scale, web-
based corpus analysis. Fieldwork sites include an isolated homogenous community
in a small town in the Southern U.S., and a heterogenous community in the small
city in the Northern U.S. The project adapts standardly-used prosodic fieldwork
elicitation tasks to analyze prosodic interfaces with semantics, syntax, and
discourse context in language production and comprehension. Psycholinguistic
methods to enrich the tasks to explain variation within and across speakers will
be incorporated. Experimental design for field- and large-scale web-based
production and comprehension studies will also be informed by data-driven
computational pattern discovery of how prosodic AAL structures are conveyed on
Twitter in written form. Workshops and courses based on data from the grant will
be offered at the 2022 Linguistic Society of America (LSA) Summer Institute and
the project includes other training and educational opportunities for students
from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.