* 2042354
* CAREER: Constrained Optimal Control of Partial Differential Equations for Improving Energy Utilization in Transportation and in the Built Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Stephanie Stockar, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2026
* USD 683,084.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will lead to the creation
of a new mathematical framework for the solution of optimal control problems
with input and state constraints in systems described by Partial Differential
Equations. Partial Differential Equations are relevant to several engineering
fields, such as electrochemical and thermal energy storage, energy distribution
and conversion, and are frequently used to predict traffic flows in
transportation. Application of optimal control to such Partial Differential
Equations systems will lead to a significant reduction in the energy utilization
and improve sustainability in the residential and transportation sectors,
however such benefits are contingent upon the ability of the control algorithm
to satisfy input and state constraints. This work will establish an emerging and
interdisciplinary research program that bridges across thermal and fluid
sciences, control theory, modeling and simulation. This award will support the
educational goal of mentoring and motivating undergraduate students in pursuing
a research experience by starting a new program targeting Sophomore and Junior
Mechanical Engineering students. This initiative will support the retention of
students in their program of choice, particularly from underrepresented groups,
and will result in larger number of domestic students pursuing graduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will lead to the creation of a
theory and methods to obtain approximate solutions of constrained optimal
control problems for Partial Differential Equations. The established practice
relies on a two-steps process, in which the plant is first discretized to a
finite dimensional system, then the controller is designed on the reduced order
model. This research will overcome the theoretical and practical limitations of
conventional methods, leading to (i) controllers that do not require calibration
to compensate for model approximations; (ii) guaranteed satisfaction of
constraints on the infinite dimensional system; (iii) eliminating the need to
develop reduced plant models. The enabling mathematical tool to achieve this
goal is the derivation of an approximate solution of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
equation via parametrization of the value function, which is a central
contribution of this research. Ultimately, this project will (i) advance the
theory of constrained optimal control of Partial Differential Equations, through
transformative methods for the parametric solution of the Hamilton-Jacobi-
Bellman equation via reduction; (ii) advance the understanding of constrained
control of large scale system, by interpreting them as finite-order
approximations of infinite dimensional systems; (iii) develop methods for
practical, online implementation of state feedback controllers for systems
described by Partial Differential Equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.