* 2042692
* RAPID: Quantifying turbulent mixing and heat flux in the Mackenzie Canyon and across the Beaufort continental slope in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2023
* Amy Waterhouse, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2023
* USD 71,299.00

The Arctic Ocean is the one place in the world where the warm, salty waters from
the Atlantic Ocean meet the colder and fresher waters of the Pacific Ocean.
Because the Pacific Water is fresher, it is lighter and floats above Atlantic
Water (AW), which is warm but heavy and sinks to fill the depths of the Arctic
Ocean. As such, the Pacific waters act as a physical barrier that prevents warm
Atlantic waters from reaching the surface where they can cause increased melting
of sea ice. Because the flow of Atlantic Water is approximately ten times
stronger than the flow of Pacific Water, it represents a huge potential for
influencing sea ice coverage. However, because it is salty and heavy, Atlantic
waters cannot reach the ocean surface unless they are actively drawn to the
surface. The ocean’s tides and winds provide energy sources for lifting these
heavy waters and the mechanisms for raising these waters to the surface are not
well understood. This project studies how the Mackenzie Canyon - a submarine
canyon - can act as a conduit to draw up the deep, warm Atlantic Water to the
shallow shelves, and mix it into shallow, near-surface water masses where it may
influence sea-ice processes. Redistribution of heat by turbulent mixing plays an
important role in controlling the ocean climate in the Arctic. This is a unique
opportunity that documents the dynamics and mechanisms during a time where ice-
cover and the Arctic Ocean structure is rapidly evolving.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this project, the research team uses special custom-
made mixing sensors and a commercially available acoustic instrumentation aboard
an already-planned field experiment to allow characterization of the rate at
which heat is being drawn to the Arctic Ocean’s surface through turbulent mixing
processes. The individual processes and sources of energy responsible for this
heat transfer (e.g., tides, winds, and mean flow) vary depending on how details
of the forcing combine, often creating geographic hotspots of mixing that
dominate the net turbulent heat fluxes. Continental slopes have been identified
as one such conduit for heat. This project determines how much and by what
mechanism warmer Atlantic Water (AW) is modified and upwelled due to the
presence of the slope-incising topography of the Mackenzie Canyon, compared to
the smoother Beaufort continental slope. Aims include providing turbulent
instrumentation added to the Arctic Observing Network (AON) conductivity,
temperature, and depth (CTD) survey sections to estimate turbulent dissipation
rate and heat fluxes within the canyon and across the AON hydrographic transects
of the Beaufort Sea, where there are relatively few known turbulence
observations. As a result of this work, the project obtains a comprehensive map
of the turbulent heat flux and dissipation rate across the Beaufort slope via
the AON transects and within the Mackenzie Canyon. This work is important for
measuring ocean dynamics and increases understanding of the influence of
incising topography to the upward heat flux from the Atlantic Water in the
Arctic Ocean. While canyons represent a small percentage of the coastline in the
Arctic, this project’s measurements quantify their contribution to the
modification and transport of heat in the Beaufort Sea. On a larger scale, this
work contributes to refining methods for calculating turbulent quantities using
two different CTD-mounted instruments in the Arctic, a region rich with warm
lateral intrusions and significant heat flux across regions of variable and
complex topography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.