* 2042690
* SBIR Phase I:  Coronavirus API (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Susan Joseph, HEALTHTRENDS.AI LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 06/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to accelerate development of a digital
infrastructure trust layer for public health data around monitoring and
responding to COVID-19 public health objectives. This project will provide both
trust and accessibility through the application of blockchain technology to
public health data to transform it into verified, legally weighted, and tamper
resistant data upon which decision makers in the public and private sector can
benefit. This innovative combination of new technological solutions will allow
for better products, data analytics, predictive modelling systems, and ESG
(environmental, social and governance) responsiveness based on organized and
trusted systems. Since public health statistics are used by private enterprise
as well as the public sector and the general public, the addition of a trust
layer to public health data more widely is important as fidelity in statistics
is critical to effective individual and organizational
action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This projectâ€™s goal is to develop tools and
practices to make authoritative, reliable data available, enabled by
cryptographic techniques and accessible to a broader set of individuals and
organizations. The scope of the project looks to develop aggregation, access,
and reporting systems which can support new decentralized economics, such as
smart contract marketplaces, while remaining interoperable and accessible to
users of legacy technology. The solution requires creation of a single,
trustworthy platform that combines research, development and commercial
application of emerging blockchain approaches with a suite of supporting
technologies and systems including: distributed data infrastructure, flexible
delivery methods, intuitive interfaces, and analytics tools. This research hopes
to allow for the creation of novel resources to support the trustworthiness and
consequently, the fundamental usefulness of all public health data records. The
expected outcomes include: improved data integrity using blockchain-backed
systems, tools enabling accelerated innovation in data driven decision making,
and a prototype marketplace for COVID-19 resources managed by
blockchain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.