* 2042494
* CAREER: CAS: Highly Stable Depolymerizable Polymers with Tunable Thermal and Mechanical Properties as Sustainable Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Junpeng Wang, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2026
* USD 363,787.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic polymers, including rubber
and plastics, are used in nearly every aspect of daily life. The dominance of
synthetic polymers is largely driven by their excellent stability and versatile
mechanical properties. However, due to their high durability, waste materials
composed of these polymers have accumulated in the land and oceans, causing
serious concerns for the ecosystem. In addition, since over 90% of these
polymers are derived from finite fossil feedstocks, the production of these
materials is unsustainable if they cannot be recycled and reused. This project
seeks to address these challenges by developing recyclable polymers that can be
broken down into the constituents (monomers) from which they are made. The
recycled monomers can be reused to produce the polymers, allowing for a circular
use of materials, which not only helps to preserve the finite natural resources
used in plastics production, but also addresses the issue of unwanted end-of-
life accumulation of plastic objects. Besides demonstrating the recycling of the
polymers, the PI plans to tune the thermal and mechanical properties of the
polymers to meet the needs of a variety of applications. This project will also
contribute to education and broadened participation in materials science and
sustainability through developing undergraduate and graduate courses, recruiting
underrepresented minority researchers, and reaching out to local high schools
and museums. A multimedia exhibition called “Polymers and Life”, which will
include cards, videos and hands-on projects, will be developed in collaboration
with the Akron Children’s Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A promising solution to address the challenges in
plastics sustainability is to replace current polymers with recyclable ones in
order to achieve a circular use of materials. Despite the progress made thus
far, few recyclable polymers exhibit the excellent thermal stability and high-
performance mechanical properties of traditional polymers. This project aims to
address those challenges by developing polymers that can undergo catalytic
depolymerization to yield their constituent monomers. When the catalyst for
depolymerization is absent or removed, the polymers will be highly stable and
their thermal and mechanical properties can be tuned to meet the needs of
various applications. The objectives of the research include design and
synthesis of the polymers, demonstration of depolymerizability and stability,
and establishment of structure–thermal property relationships and
structure–mechanical property relationships. Research results will be
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses. These courses are expected
to bridge the knowledge gap between fundamental physical organic chemistry and
materials science, integrate experimental and computational research, and
enhance student awareness of sustainability. The proposed research will also
provide opportunities to attract and nurture a diverse group of future
scientists who can participate in research activities on sustainable polymers.
In addition, demonstration materials based on the research findings will be
developed for use in outreach efforts to local high schools and museums in order
to inspire an interest in science in the younger
generation.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.