* 2042908
* CAREER: Specify germ cell lineages from pluripotent state
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Yuan Wang, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 04/30/2026
* USD 780,000.00

In multi-cell organisms like mice or humans, one fertilized egg can develop into
all cell types with diverse biological functions that make up the body. However,
these processes are complex and yet to be fully understood. For example,
primordial germ cells (PGCs) are the embryonic precursors that ultimately
develop into eggs and sperm to ensure the continuation of life. Disruption of
PGC formation will cause infertility. It remains elusive how PGCs diverge from
other cell types during development and establish germ cell competency. Based on
a recently developed platform that enables robust PGC generation and advanced
genome-wide gene-editing technologies, this project aims to unveil novel
regulators and fundamental mechanisms (or “rules”) that govern germ cell
commitment. Research findings will critically improve understanding of the
causes of human infertility, which affects about 15% of couples worldwide.
Results from this project will further benefit the agricultural community by
critically informing novel strategies to improve the reproductive health of
livestock animals. The research team will maximize the broader impact of this
project by combining scientific research with educational and public outreach
activities. They will incorporate scientific advances into educational programs
to foster next-generation STEM scientists, and work closely with outreach
partners to engage K-12 students. They will promote diversity, equality, and
inclusion by encouraging underrepresented groups and women to get involved in
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, only a few regulators (e.g., WNT and
BMPs) have been identified to play crucial roles in PGC specification during
mammalian embryonic development. The broader gene-regulatory network that
controls PGC ontogeny remains poorly defined – feasibility largely limited by
the low numbers of nascent PGCs during development and inefficient approaches to
identify and functionally evaluate candidate regulators at large scales.
Pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) have the great potential to proliferate
unlimitedly in vitro and to differentiate into all lineages of cells in the
body, including germ cells. In pilot studies, the research team used a robust in
vitro differentiation platform of mouse PSCs with germline reporters to generate
a large quantity of PGCs, and subsequently identified 589 putative germ cell
regulators from a genome-wide CRISPR-based activation screening. Building on
these promising data, this project aims to reveal the novel molecular
determinants and functional mechanisms by which PSCs establish germline
competency. Objective 1 will discover novel regulators of PGC specification at a
genome-wide scale, with a custom-made small guide RNA (sgRNA) library and a
stepwise validation strategy. Candidate regulators will then be prioritized for
individual validation according to their sgRNA enrichment frequency, expression
levels in PGCs, and ontology. Objective 2 will unveil the molecular mechanisms
by which a newly discovered candidate from the pilot study regulates PGC
specification via both WNT-dependent and independent pathways. In summary, this
project will unveil a broader regulatory network that governs PGC ontogeny, a
major advance in understanding the molecular determinants that control lineage
specification during development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.