* 2042285
* CAREER: Examining Prenatal and Postnatal Influences on Infant Brain Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Kathryn Humphreys, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2026
* USD 291,168.00

This project explores the influence of stressful experiences and supportive
caregiving on the developing brain. Given the dramatic growth that occurs during
the prenatal and early postnatal periods, the brain seems especially sensitive
to the environment during these months. Understanding when and how exposure to
stress shapes the brain is essential for advancing knowledge about long-term
health and functioning. This research will address fundamental questions
regarding infant brain plasticity and provide insights that can be used to
inform prevention and intervention efforts for children at risk for stress
exposure in early life.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Stressful experiences influence
neurodevelopment in a manner that contributes to risks of emotional
difficulties. Exposure to stress, even prenatally, may result in lasting changes
in brain development. In this longitudinal study, following infants through
early childhood, repeated assessments of infant brain structure and function
will allow investigators to examine how prenatal stress exposure as well as
measures of the subsequent caregiving environment serve as risk and protective
factors in changes in the developing brain. During this period of heightened
neuroplasticity the brain may be particularly vulnerable to the effects of
stress, but also highly responsive to supportive caregiving experiences.
Understanding how the brain changes in response to the early environment,
particularly in a manner that explains links to later emotional difficulties,
will provide new insight into when interventions may be most needed to support
children in healthy development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.