* 2042836
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B Creating an Integrated Emergency and Crisis Response System
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2021
* Tom Fisher, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The 911 system remains the primary way in which Americans seek help when facing
a crisis. However, the multiple public agencies that field 911 calls remain
disconnected and dependent upon the judgment of the person answering the call,
with some individuals “self-resolving” emergencies out of a distrust of
authorities. This has led to a national conversation about how local government
can better address crisis situations and avoid tragic outcomes. This project
will bring together multiple entities responsible for the 911 network, including
Hennepin County, the Hennepin County Sheriff’s Office, and the City of
Minneapolis. Together and in conjunction with existing efforts, this project
will work to develop an organizationally unified and technologically integrated
emergency response that makes it easier for the public to identify who to call
for help and for the appropriate personnel to be dispatched to the scene,
depending on the situation. The project team will examine technology tools, like
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, to help responders assess an
emergency situation and route it to the right
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to create a nationally
replicable model that integrates technology and emergency response systems to
respond more appropriately to the diversity of crises that people face. The
project team will seek community input regarding the types of resources and
diversity of situations that require emergency response and will work with the
community partners to define standards around responses and what professionals
are required for each. The Stage I grant will assess the current emergency and
crisis response landscape, map its diverse parts and their level of connection,
work with city and county staff members to discuss what a more adaptable system
might look like, and engage community members to gather their insights in order
to build trust and improve upon mental health emergency response that
effectively meets their diverse needs while minimizing cost and optimizing
resource deployment. The planning phase will take 4 months, during which the
team will develop a pilot project for implementation and testing in a 12-month
Stage II grant. Technically, the team will examine existing AI applications for
their applicability to emergency response in cities. We will also develop AI and
Machine-Learning technology that leverages the knowledge and experience of
emergency responders. The team will look, as well, at sharing-economy strategies
to explore the use of often-overlooked community assets in responding to
emergencies to ensure that people have access to the services they
need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.