* 2042102
* Advancing Arctic research and education through data preservation and reuse at the Arctic Data Center
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Amber Budden, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* Allen Pope
* 04/30/2026
* USD 2,348,152.00

Data and scholarly products from Arctic research spanning natural and social
sciences are fundamental to addressing coupled socio-environmental challenges in
the Arctic. The Arctic Data Center advances research and education by
preserving, documenting, and disseminating the results of Arctic research from
National Science Foundation awards. This repository is the primary archive for
data, software, and scholarly products from researchers complying with the open
data directives from the Office of Polar Programs. The Arctic Data Center will
broadly engage the Arctic research community with extensive data curation
support services, effective communications and engagement, and new services that
increase research productivity and capacity. By preserving, documenting, and
disseminating NSF-funded data, the Arctic Data Center will amplify the
Foundationâ€™s investments in Arctic research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the
next five years, the Arctic Data Center will operate a reliable, secure, and
feature-rich data management platform that is certified by CoreTrustSeal and
preserves datasets that follow the FAIR principles: Findable, Accessible,
Interoperable, and Reusable. The previous phase of the Arctic Data Center
preserved over 5,988 datasets totaling 37 terabytes from thousands of
researchers; in the second phase (2021-2026) the Arctic Data Center team expects
that archive to grow to 2.5 petabytes due to field-based remote sensing, high-
resolution model output, high-frequency sensor networks, and programs like
MOSAiC and Navigating the New Arctic. Activities will focus on four areas: 1)
securely operating a reliable data management platform to preserve and
disseminate Arctic data, while extending it with a scalable microservices-based
architecture; 2) building storage capacity and data ingestion and data
dissemination systems to handle up to 2.5 petabytes of new data; 3) providing
first-class support for lab-based and project-based data management with a
robust data curation services; and, 4) enriching systems supporting data
integration and reuse across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.