* 2042276
* RUI: A sedimentological and sequence stratigraphic framework for carbon isotopic sampling and interpretation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Rygel, SUNY College at Potsdam
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 370,113.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the Paleozoic Era
(541-251.9 million years ago) the continents we repeatedly submerged by shallow
seas. The chemistry of the rocks formed in these shallow seas record details
about how carbon moved between the oceans, atmosphere, biosphere, and sediments
(carbon cycling). This project will focus on understanding how sea level change
influenced the record of carbon cycling, which will improve our understanding of
Earth’s climate history. Ten undergraduate students will participate in this
project and gain valuable field and laboratory experience. The data generated
will be used to build teaching modules to help the public understand how
geologists study Earth’s climate history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore the relationship between sea level and carbon isotopic records in
ancient epicontinental carbonate settings by addressing the following questions:
1) does sea level change in epicontinental carbonate settings result in
consistent and resolvable patterns in bulk carbonate isotopic values; 2) if
these patterns do exist, are they resolvable at multiple scales of sea level
change; and 3) are the patterns different depending on which process (carbon
cycling, meteoric influence, or carbonate sedimentation) is exerting primary
control? We will generate high resolution carbon isotopic records within a
sedimentological and sequence stratigraphic framework along a shore to basin
transect of the Early Mississippian Madison shelf and the Late Permian Permian
Basin, where there is a high probability that sea level influenced the carbon
isotopic patterns. Results from this project will have implications for the
methodological approach and application of carbon isotopic records from
epicontiential seas and the generated carbon isotopic data will provide
important geochemical constraints for carbon cycling and sea water chemistry
during the Late Paleozoic Ice Age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.