* 2042881
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Helping Rural Counties to Enhance Flooding and Coastal Disaster Resilience and Adaptation
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Timothy Havens, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,999.00

In the United States, flooding is a leading cause of natural disasters, with
congressional budget office estimates of $54 billion in loss each year. Although
both urban and rural areas are highly vulnerable to flood hazards, most natural
disaster resilience studies have focused on urban areas, often overlooking rural
communities. One such area that has been overlooked are the many rural
communities bordering the Great Lakes. These communities are facing
unprecedented challenges due to rising water levels, particularly since 2012,
which have resulted in significant coastal flood hazards to the communities.
Flood hazard assessments are a critical tool that is used support communities in
determining how to mitigate flooding; however, data gaps in current flood hazard
modeling tools render them inaccurate for rural communities. This project will
use various strategies, including sensors and crowdsourced information, to fill
critical information gaps required to improve flood hazard modeling in rural
communities bordering the Great Lakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
bring together community-university partners to understand the data gaps in
addressing flooding and coastal disaster in three Northern Michigan Counties.
The rural coastal and inland counties in the Great Lakes states face an
unprecedented challenge due to rising water levels. While these rural
communities are vulnerable to flooding, they lack flood hazard assessments and
inundation maps due to the lack of resources. The Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) commonly recommend
counties to use a freely available tool—called HAZUS to develop hazard
mitigation plans and enhance community resilience and adaptation. However, the
usage of HAZUS for rural communities could potentially have some serious
deficiencies unless augmented with additional data and analyses. These severe
deficiencies are due to the data gaps in analyzing the hazards in rural
communities. The use of standard datasets for HAZUS analysis by rural counties
could likely leave the communities underprepared for future flood events of
significant magnitude. The proposed project’s vision is to develop methods that
use remote sensing data resources and citizen engagement (crowdsourcing) to
address current data gaps for improved flood hazard modeling and visualization
that is transferable to rural communities. This project is in response to the
Civic Innovation Challenge program, Track B—Resilience to Natural Disasters—and
is a collaboration between NSF and the Department of Homeland
Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.