* 2042513
* Taking a breather: Characterizing the role of H+/Ca transport in anoxia tolerance
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Tracy Punshon, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 05/31/2024
* USD 796,394.00

Plants experience a dynamic environment where numerous stress conditions may be
encountered. For example, flooding induces several stresses: limited oxygen
availability, changes in temperature, reduced light. Anoxia, the removal of
oxygen, is a consequence of waterlogging and submergence of plants. During this
stress, plant tissues significantly reduce the rate of energy production,
affecting many aspects of metabolism. This project examines how fluctuations in
calcium (Ca) within plant cells can impact anoxia tolerance. The investigators
have discovered that removal of a specific Ca transporter appears to buffer the
plant against anoxic conditions. Here imaging experiments will visually address
how this change effects how Ca moves, where it is localized, and how the
temporal and spatial changes in Ca can impact anoxia tolerance. To complement
these photographic approaches, biochemical and genetic experiments will address
the mechanisms of Ca movement. Approaches to measure changes in protein and
nucleic acids will be used to further define how removal of a specific Ca
transporter can impact the plant’s utilization of energy. One broad impact of
this work will be the development of a unique research collaboration with
faculty and students from Houston Community College (HCC). HCC is an open-
admission, public school that while serving one of the most diverse populations
in the US, does not usually provide research experiences. These HCC students
will both learn and contribute to this project. The efforts of this work will
lead to a better understanding of how plants adapt to their environment. In the
future, engineering-modulated Ca movement in plants could circumvent adverse
effects of anoxic conditions to mitigate climate change-induced crop
loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxygen deficiency (hypoxia) and absence (anoxia) are
severe physiological stresses in plants. Most commonly they occur when extreme
weather events lead to flooding, which causes widespread crop losses. Membrane
transporters may be essential components of anoxia tolerance because they are
involved in signal transduction and regulation of metabolic processes. Mutations
in the Arabidopsis vacuolar cation/proton exchangers (CAXs) cause striking
tolerance to anoxia. This robust phenotype was unexpected: a loss-of-function
mutation causing a gain of function. The majority of CAX RNAs are unchanged
during hypoxia, highlighting the limits of RNA profiling as an exclusive means
of gene discovery. A series of genetic, omics, membrane transport,
physiological, cell and elemental imaging experiments will be used to
characterize the role of CAXs during anoxia that will demonstrate their role in
signaling, cation transport and metabolism. A highly skilled, diverse team will
use a multi-disciplinary approach including plant genetics, membrane transport
and elemental imaging. As part of the broader impacts, and as a further means of
discovery, a Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) at Houston
Community College (HCC) will be implemented. HCC is an open-admission public
school that, while serving one of the most diverse populations in the US, does
not typically provide research experiences. In short, characterizing the role of
CAXs in anoxia tolerance will lead to a greater understanding of plant signal
transduction. Furthermore, this knowledge will eventually aid in the development
of flood-resistant crop plants, reducing crop loss during extreme weather
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.