* 2042411
* CAREER: Environmentally-Mediated Coordination in Natural and Robot Swarms
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Kirstin Petersen, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2026
* USD 425,514.00

Autonomous robot swarms are becoming ubiquitous with thousands of robots and
drones operating simultaneously in places from warehouses to entertainment light
shows. This technological revolution makes it critical to look beyond robots
working in parallel, and towards actual swarm intelligence where the whole is
more than the sum of its parts. As a proof of concept, natural swarms exhibit
scalable, error tolerant, and adaptive properties by integrating and propagation
information into their shared environment over space and time. Adoption of these
concepts in robot swarms can complement existing control architectures, and may
result in systems that are less efficient than those with centralized control
architectures, but are much faster and inexpensive to deploy, are resilient to
individual failures, resize easier from initial to full-scale deployment, and
can adapt to changing tasks or environments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Although
gaining in popularity, this type of distributed coordination has many facets and
is still poorly understood - especially as a design tool for engineered swarms
that aim to achieve biological levels of resilience and adaptability. To address
these shortcomings, this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) research
project will extend upon the concept of environmentally-mediated coordination
from working on perfect robots operating in static environments, to include
dynamic environments and ways to deal with realistic bounds on error and
hardware reliability. The work will result in a model of swarms in dynamic
environments that act to integrate, diffuse, decay, and filter information
derived from characterization of a biological model system, as well as practical
robot experiments. Practical verification involves collective robotic
construction, odor plume tracking by honey bees, and strain-mediated behaviors
in programmable matter. This project further involves aims to secure and
increase such a diverse workforce through novel methods for inclusive, shared,
online robotics curricula; cross-generational outreach programs for the public;
interdisciplinary student projects; and workshops for researchers across the
fields of robotics, biology, and architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program,
jointly managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and
Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.