* 2042155
* CAREER: Exploiting Parallel Heterogeneous Architectures to Enable Time-domain Astronomy in the LSST era
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Michael Gowanlock, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 06/30/2026
* USD 288,421.00

Recent and near future scientific instruments will generate large amounts of
data. One example of such an instrument is the Vera C. Rubin Observatory that
will carry out the Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) over a ten year
period. This astronomical survey has the potential to advance many fields of
astronomy, and may even lead to the development of new fields of scientific
inquiry. However, the large data volume implies that many processors will need
to be used to process the data within a reasonable amount of time. This project
creates new technologies and algorithms that can utilize a large number of
processors. In particular, the project harnesses the power of both standard
central processing units (CPUs) and graphics processing units (GPUs) that are
good at processing many data items simultaneously. The developed technologies
are designed to use the data from LSST and find interesting events in the Solar
System. Once an interesting event is detected on a given astronomical object,
alerts are sent to the astronomy community so that they can use additional
telescopes to further study these objects. Without the technologies developed in
this project, astronomers will miss out on opportunities to study transient
phenomena. The project integrates several teaching activities that ensure both
computer scientists and astronomers receive the necessary training to exploit
future generation computer systems. The project includes mentoring undergraduate
and graduate students. In addition, the local community will be engaged through
outreach activities that promote science, technology, engineering, and
mathematical fields, particularly through activities targeting K-12 students.
The project serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission, by
promoting the progress of science, and to advance the national health,
prosperity, and welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Vera C. Rubin Observatory
will have unprecedented time domain capabilities. However, LSST will generate
large volumes of data that need to be examined in order to realize many
scientific goals. This project focuses on LSST supporting cyberinfrastructure
(CI) in the context of Solar System science. Fast outlier detection is needed to
enable rapid follow up by other facilities to ensure that transient events in
the Solar System and objects with intrinsically unusual properties are
discovered. To ensure rapid detection capabilities, the outlier detection
algorithms will exploit heterogeneous CPU and GPU architectures. Furthermore,
heterogeneous computing will be employed where the work is distributed between
the CPU and GPU. Also, the project examines using application specific
integrated circuits on modern GPU hardware, such as tensor and ray tracing cores
as applied to a broader range of applications than matrix multiplication and ray
tracing. Algorithmic transformations are needed to exploit these heterogeneous
processors; consequently, a unifying framework is developed that models the
performance of these algorithms as executed on these architectures. This
framework and novel parallel and scalable algorithms provide foundational CI
that will enable the LSST to successfully explore the Solar System, understand
its origins, and identify potentially hazardous asteroids, among other
scientific objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.