* 2042043
* NSFGEO-NERC Collaborative Research: Effects of a Changing Climate on the Habitat Utilization, Foraging Ecology and Distribution of Crabeater Seals
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Tift, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 08/31/2024
* USD 170,621.00

Part I: Non-technical description: The crabeater seal is the most important
predator of Antarctic krill in the western Antarctic Peninsula oceanic waters
after the disappearance of large whales due to human hunting 100 years ago. The
crabeater seals are expected to consume large quantities of krill due to their
high abundance (about 7 million individuals), large body size (about 700 pounds
in body weight), high metabolism and a diet specializing in krill. This species
depends on sea ice presence all year long, living, reproducing, and diving to
feed from that environment, making this marine mammal species a good indicator,
or sentinel, of how the Antarctic ecosystem responds to a changing climate. As
sea ice has been decreasing in the northern Antarctic Peninsula, this project
aims to understand if the species food availability has changed in the last
decades in response to environmental changes. In particular, the proposed work
will concentrate on known populations of crabeater seals in northern (i.e.,
warmer, sub-polar) and southern (i.e., colder, polar) Antarctic Peninsula, 450
miles apart, making measurements on the abundance, physiology, metabolic needs
and movement of the crabeater populations in both locations. The data will be
combined to build models that will quantify the existing differences between
northern and southern populations, as well as predict their future change, and
compare present-day measurements with those collected by the British Antarctic
Survey in the mid-1900s. The project is a collaboration between an international
and interdisciplinary team from the United States and United Kingdom,
benefitting NSF goals to facilitate collaborative geoscience research projects
involving these two countries as well as aligning directly with U.S. Global
Change Research Program (USGCRP) to better understand the forces shaping the
global environment, both human and natural, and their impacts on society. To
further increase polar literacy and education, Principal Investigators will
train at least 2 graduate students and several undergraduates across two US
institutions, as well as one UK-based post-doctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical description: Crabeater seals
(Lobodon carcinophaga) are considered an excellent sentinel species through
which to examine the effects of a changing climate on the extended Antarctic
krill-dependent predator community and the structure of the entire ecosystem of
the western Antarctic Peninsula. Over the last forty years, there have been
significant changes in the temporal and spatial patterns of primary
productivity, and shifts in the population dynamics of Antarctic krill, the
dominant mid-trophic level species. The impact of such changes on year-round
resident species of crabeater seals (the most important predator of Antarctic
krill) is more difficult to understand as they are not associated with breeding
colonies where their population fluctuations could be more readily observed. The
proposed research is conceived under the premise that environmental change has
accentuated the differences between the northern and southern western Antarctic
Peninsula crabeater seal populations due to differential reductions in sea-ice
and its possible effect on prey availability. To address this question, this
research will combine measurements on animal movement, stable isotope analyses,
whole-animal physiology, and novel survey technologies (small Unmanned Aircraft
Systems, satellite imagery) to build models. The project is a collaboration
between an international and interdisciplinary team from the United States and
United Kingdom. These studies will be essential to detect past, and project
future, changes in the ecology of this species in response to changes in sea ice
when comparing present-day measurements with those collected by the British
Antarctic Survey in the mid-1900s. To further increase polar literacy and
education, Principal Investigators will train at least 2 graduate students and
several undergraduates across two US institutions, as well as one UK-based post-
doctoral researcher. Students involved with this project will gain invaluable
research experience in the lab and will have a unique opportunity to participate
in Antarctic fieldwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.