* 2042526
* CAREER: Understanding the conservation and restoration potential of retired agricultural land: An ecoinformatics approach
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Ashley Larsen, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 593,418.00

The conversion of land both to and away from agriculture is a central component
of global environmental change, with implications for both people and natural
systems worldwide. In developed countries including the US, land area in
agricultural production is contracting leaving millions of hectares of former or
“retired” agricultural land often nested in a mosaic of productive and semi-
natural lands. It remains unclear whether, where, and when retired agricultural
lands are beneficial to biodiversity and ecosystem services in these landscapes.
Given the ubiquity of agricultural landscapes and the dramatic biodiversity
declines therein, such a gap is crucial to fill. Using a combination of data-
driven methods, this research will advance understanding of the drivers of
revegetation and the potential conservation value of retired agricultural lands,
which can help policy-makers and scientists manage these lands for the well-
being of human and natural communities. The training component of this CAREER
award will include curriculum development and workshops on the application of
data-driven techniques to ecological and environmental problems targeted at high
school through PhD students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will leverage
remote sensing, causal inference, and connectivity modeling methods applied to
intensively managed agricultural landscapes to 1) elucidate the mechanisms
governing revegetation and succession on retired agricultural lands, 2)
understand how the spatial distribution of retired lands influences landscape
fragmentation and connectivity, and 3) test whether retired land functions as a
net source or sink of crop pests. The education component will engage local high
school and first year undergraduates in hands-on research and training in
spatial ecology and data-driven environmental science, and train professional
master’s and PhD students in managing, processing and analyzing large spatial
datasets and data products to address tractable but complex agricultural ecology
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.