* 2042814
* RUI: Studying B-bodies, a novel type of nuclear domains: from organization to practical exploitation.
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2025
* Anton Bryantsev, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 01/31/2025
* USD 419,789.00

This project studies basic principles that govern organization of the cell
nucleus. The nucleus has a special importance for biotechnology because it
stores genetic information that controls traits of cells and organisms.
Continuous success of biotechnology greatly depends on better understanding of
the processes inside of the nucleus. This project will specifically focus on
studying the sorting mechanism that enables certain proteins to form distinct
and isolated structures within the nucleus. In a separate set of experiments,
the information learned in this project will be applied to improve the current
biotechnology methods. The desired outcome is to make genetic manipulations more
efficient and safer. As a broader impact, this project will offer an educational
platform at Kennesaw State University (KSU) to train undergraduate and graduate
students with contemporary methods of molecular biology and genetic engineering.
KSU is a dynamically developing, predominantly undergraduate institution that
strives to enhance its research environment and expand graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the absence of internal membranes in the
nucleus, nuclear proteins are organized into compact, distinct areas with sharp
boundaries that are called nuclear domains (NDs). The regulation and functional
significance of protein sorting into NDs is not clear. This project will use a
newly discovered Drosophila ND called a B-body and its resident RNA-binding
protein called Bruno, as a model to study ND assembly and function. It is
hypothesized that a combination of Bruno’s protein sequence and non-coding RNA
is sufficient to create B-bodies. Molecular biology techniques, including
mutagenesis and in situ RNA hybridization, will be applied to identify the
essential components to reconstitute B-bodies. Next, B-bodies will be tested for
their role as safe overflow sites for ectopically expressed nuclear proteins.
Heterologous proteins including DNA enzymes and transcription factors will be
targeted to B-bodies. Biochemical assays and genetic reporters will
quantitatively indicate whether protein trafficking into B-bodies can reduce
non-specific effects and toxicity that often plague overexpression
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.