* 2042150
* CAREER: Experimental Investigation of Morphogenesis and Locomotion of Multicellular Magnetotactic Bacteria
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Alexander Petroff, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2026
* USD 236,119.00

The study of Multicellular Magnetotactic Bacteria aggregates will elucidate the
physical mechanisms underlying the evolution of multicellular life. These
aggregates are unique in their ability to coordinate the growth and collective
motion of their constituent cells. Understanding this ability will contribute to
the design of biomimetic micro-systems. The proposed research is the first
integrated experimental and theoretical study of the growth, form, and
hydrodynamics of Multicellular Magnetotactic Bacteria. The PI will design a new
course on "Modeling Biological Complexity." Unlike traditional biophysics
courses, the course will focus on the tools and techniques necessary to study
and model uncultured bacteria, microbial communities, ecosystems, and nutrient
cycles. This course will help prepare students to address the challenges of
climate change. Students of all levels will be recruited to join the PI's
research group. The PI will participate in science expositions. The PI will
design new demonstrations that will allow members of the public to observe
living Multicellular Magnetotactic Bacteria under a microscope and guide them
using magnets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to understand the physical
mechanisms that facilitate the evolution of multicellular life. The research
focuses on Multicellular Magnetotactic Bacteria, which represent an intermediate
between unicellular and multicellular life. These bacteria live exclusively in
spherical aggregates composed of 10–60 cells, which quickly die when separated
from the aggregate. Cells in an aggregate precipitate magnetic crystals, which
align in a common direction. The cells work together to push the aggregate along
magnetic field lines. As cells in an aggregate reproduce, the aggregate grows,
elongates, and divides into two similarly sized aggregates. The physical
mechanisms that underlie this remarkable cooperative behavior are poorly
understood. It is not known how cells coordinate their growth, align their
magnetic moments, and coordinate their motility. The project will investigate,
through a combination of experiment and theory, how the interactions between
cells as they grow and rotate their flagella allow the cells to behave like a
single multicellular organism. These types of interactions may have facilitated
the evolution of complex life by allowing cells in a proto-multicellular group
to cooperate before the evolution of shared chemical signaling
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.