* 2042055
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Leveraging Advanced Cyberinfrastructure and Developing Organizational Resilience for NSF Large Facilities in the Pandemic Era
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Kerk Kee, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 169,491.00

The COVID-19 global pandemic in 2020 has created major disruptions to the
research enterprise. NSF-supported large facilities are critical elements of US
research infrastructure and are increasingly dependent on advanced
cyberinfrastructure (CI) – comprising advanced computing, data and software
assets, networking, and the related specialized workforce – to accomplish their
science missions. This study investigates how large facilities are impacted by,
and are responding to, the pandemic challenge with a focus on understanding
factors related to the use of existing CI. This project will also explore the
value of CI in the broader social context of how people and the facilities
perceive and respond to major disruptive events. The goal is to determine how to
design large facility organizations to be more resilient during crises and major
disasters and what CI capabilities are needed to support these and other large
science projects to accomplish their science missions during such
disruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study comprises three main research
questions related to NSF large facilities and CI during the pandemic: (a) What
types of research activities remain "business as usual" and what types of
activities must adapt or stop completely under pandemic conditions? (b) If
facilities could turn back time, what would they have done to better prepare?
And (c) What lessons are facilities learning from the current disruptions, and
how can these be best disseminated to the facility, CI, and research
communities? The approach is grounded in Weick's Theory of Organizing, and
examines disruptions from the environment (ecological change) through the stages
of enactment (immediate actions), selection (rules establishment), and retention
(identification of approaches worth re-utilizing in future events), with
feedback loops linking the stages and the environment. The project’s goals will
be accomplished primarily through interviews with domain scientists, CI users,
developers, and administrators who are engaged in NSF large facility science and
operations. The project will also analyze and document the organizational
structures of the facilities to identify the key engagement points with national
CI resources and services, towards enhancing the ability of the broader CI
community to engage with the facilities. The ultimate objective of this project
is to provide a framework for facilities and other large science projects to
mitigate disruptions to their scientific and operational activities in current
and future times of crisis. Study outcomes and findings will be widely
disseminated to the stakeholder communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.