* 2042807
* Management and Operations of the IceCube Neutrino Observatory 2021-2026
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Francis Halzen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 03/31/2026
* USD 20,144,877.00

This award funds the continued management and operations (M&amp;O) of the
IceCube Neutrino Observatory (ICNO) located at the South Pole Station
(Antarctica) in the deep ice. The core team of researchers and engineers
maintain the existing neutrino detector infrastructure at the South Pole from
their home institutions that guarantee an uninterrupted stream of ICNO's
scientifically unique, high-quality data. Effective coordination of joint
efforts by the M&amp;O personnel and scientists from within the IceCube
Collaboration has yielded significant increases in the performance of this
cubic-kilometer detector with time. The broader impacts of the ICNO/M&amp;O
activities are strong, involving postdoctoral, graduate, and (in some cases)
undergraduate students in the day-today operation and calibration of the cubic-
km neutrino detector. The outstanding physics results produced by ICNO in the
past decade and its extraordinary location at South Pole have a high potential
to excite the imagination of high school children and the public in general at a
national and international level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IceCube cubic-km
detector, designed as a discovery instrument, has delivered world-leading
scientific results across six orders of magnitude in neutrino energy - from
measurements of atmospheric neutrino oscillations in the previously unexplored
10 to 60 gigaelectronvolts (GeV) energy range to observations of cosmic
neutrinos with energies exceeding 10,000 teraelectronvolts (TeV). Among them is
the first detection of a Glashow resonance event, a 6,300-TeV antielectron
neutrino interaction with an atomic electron in the ice producing a W boson. The
discovery of high-energy cosmic neutrinos by IceCube has established an
appropriate role of neutrino astrophysics as "a window" in observing the extreme
Universe. Above 100 TeV, neutrinos are unique messengers to pinpoint cosmic
accelerators that power the large fluxes of observed cosmic rays, and on
September 22, 2017, an IceCube alert led to such a cosmic ray potential source -
the blazar TXS 0506+056. IceCube will remain a unique tool for the delivery of
the neutrino component of multimessenger astrophysics as well as a broad range
of neutrino and cosmic ray science. The ICNO has set limits on Dark Matter
annihilation, made precision measurements of the angular distribution of cosmic
ray muons, and characterized in detail physical properties of the Antarctic
2.6-km thick ice sheet at South Pole. The discovery of high-energy cosmic
neutrinos by IceCube with a flux at the level anticipated for those associated
with high-energy gamma- and cosmic-ray accelerators brightens the prospect for
identifying the sources of the highest energy particles. The prospect to do
neutrino physics with a cosmic beam at PeV energies may turn IceCube into a tool
to explore neutrino physics beyond the Standard Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.