* 2042758
* The Nature of Coupled Heat and Mass Transport in Porous Carbon Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Iryna Zenyuk, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 09/30/2021
* USD 54,945.00

The goal of this project is to understand coupled heat- and mass-transport
processes in porous carbon electrodes for applications in energy-conversion and
storage. Energy-conversion devices, such as polymer electrolyte fuel cells
(PEFCs), hold great promise for minimizing the environmental impact of the
transportation sector. However, water management is still a large problem at low
operating temperatures. As liquid water accumulates in the thin, porous carbon
layers, current density decreases due to inadequate reactant delivery. One of
the challenges in successful PEFC design is understanding the coupled mass and
thermal transport phenomena in porous carbon layers to optimize water management
and increase power output, improving PEFC performance. The proposed project will
determine the fundamental mechanisms of water transport in porous, mix-
wettability carbon materials. Greater understanding of evaporative mechanisms
via temperature gradients will be achieved on the nano- and micro-scales. The
results of the project will advance the understanding of water transport
mechanisms under thermal gradients and provide a roadmap of optimal electrode
design for a large class of energy-conversion and ?storage technologies, such as
fuel cells, redox-flow batteries and solar-fuel generators. The topic of
renewable energy will be brought into K-12 classrooms through available energy
kits integrated with the PI's energy software platform. The concepts of waste
heat, efficiency, cost/benefit analysis, and renewable energy will be taught
with hands-on design activities. Additionally, research findings will be
disseminated by PI's undergraduate mentoring and incorporation in an
electrochemical energy-conversion and -storage
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water management in mix wettability, porous carbon
layers is critical to developing and manufacturing cost-effective PEFCs. To
achieve maximum water permeation, and consequently higher fuel cell current
densities, it is necessary to understand the interplay between pressure- and
capillary-driven liquid-water transport and phase-change induced (PCI) flow due
to evaporation/condensation in the porous electrodes and gas-diffusion layers
(GDLs). GDLs serve multifunctional roles, and heat and mass transport in GDLs
depends on both material morphology and transport properties, such as electrical
and thermal conductivity, gas diffusivity, and fluid permeability. Although some
aspects of water transport in GDLs have been explored with modeling and
experiments, evaporation and PCI flow within these materials are still poorly
understood. This fundamental knowledge is lacking primarily due to the challenge
of taking experimental measurements and visualizing evaporating water front
within these porous materials. Recent reports suggest that PCI flow is even more
significant at lower water levels in GDLs, however the physical reasons for this
are not fully comprehended. It is imperative to quantify water transport under
induced thermal gradients to find exact liquid front distribution within these
porous layers. In this project, the evaporation rate-limiting step will be
identified with in-situ experimental instrumentation and evaporating water-
fronts will be visualized using X-ray computed tomography (X-ray CT). The
mechanisms of PCI flow in hierarchical electrodes will be explored by imposing
thermal-gradients across the thickness of the porous electrode. Water
recirculation is expected and will be visualized and quantified in the through-
thickness direction utilizing nano- and micro- X-ray CT. The precise techniques
of X-ray CT allow the gathering of an unprecedented level of detailed
information on the exact location of water clusters under varied thermal
gradients. Simultaneously, heat and mass-transport through these electrodes will
measured. Pore-network and continuum models will be used to help interpret the
gathered data and predict novel material architectures. This new understanding
will be leveraged to identify nano- and micro-scale characteristics of optimal
GDL morphologies for heat and mass-transport. Through combined novel
experimental and modeling capabilities the PIs will engineer GDL designs to
modulate phase-change induced flow and effectively manage water transport in
PEFCs, thereby increasing the attainable power density.