* 2042117
* Collaborative Research: Glial scar morphology informed tunable biomimetic platforms toward spinal cord injury repair
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Nic Leipzig, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2024
* USD 306,999.00

Spinal cord injury (SCI) results in loss of cells and blood supply, disruption
of brain connectivity to various tissues, and formation of a dense scar around
the injury site, ultimately resulting in permanent loss of mobility. There are
no proven clinical solutions or pharmaceutical interventions to reverse SCI. To
develop successful treatment options for SCI, it is important to first
understand the physical, chemical, and biological changes occurring over time in
the injured tissues. This information would in turn help in developing improved
mimics of such injured tissues (combining important structural, mechanical, and
inflammatory aspects) to test the response of various cells resident to the
spinal cord, as well as to evaluate the efficacy of pharmaceutical drugs in
promoting tissue regeneration to ultimately improve the success of downstream
clinical applications. Successful implementation of these objectives will lead
to the development and validation of physiologically-relevant integrated systems
that improve our fundamental understanding of SCI, while also enabling new
testing platforms. The broader impact of this work will include the generation
of new insights into how nerve cell outgrowth and targeting is inhibited in an
inflammatory SCI tissue, and may be overcome for reparative benefit,
specifically in the context of SCI. Besides opportunities for research
dissemination to the scientific community, this project will lead to training of
diverse undergraduate and graduate students through development of
research/educational modules and through the auspices of established summer
internship/outreach programs at the investigators’ respective
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Injury to the central nervous system (CNS)
has profound, long-term physiological consequences due to the tissue’s low
innate regenerative ability and formation of a glial scar around the injury
site. This scar has large soft regions, is inhibitive to axonal/neurite
outgrowth, confers an anti-regenerative environment, and is marked by gliosis
and production of inhibitory chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans. The underlying
mechanisms for such altered characteristics at the injury site are unclear. The
goals of this study are to (1) elucidate and correlate spinal cord tissue-scale
mechanical properties, architecture, and mechanochemical signaling at key phases
following CNS injury, and (2) identify the mechanochemical response of CNS cells
to scar-like physical properties measurable via defined signaling pathways,
altered membrane tension, and tension-regulated behaviors. This multi-
disciplinary, comprehensive strategy establishes hitherto undefined multi-scale
relationships between glial scar structure, micromechanical properties, ECM
composition, and CNS cell mechanochemical responses. The newly identified glial
scar characteristics will be utilized to develop tunable biomimetic hydrogels
for the isolation of CNS cell function, mechano-chemical profiles, membrane
tension, and regulated behaviors, towards mimicking the acute injury phase in a
humanized in vitro platform. The broader research impacts of this project
include generation of new mechanistic insights into how cell functions are
dysregulated in an inflammatory milieu, while offering new targets for
regeneration. By emphasizing mechanobiological knowledge-driven formulation of
glial scar-biomimetic scaffolds, this project represents a paradigm shift in CNS
repair and regeneration strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.