* 2042955
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Financial Technologies, New Financial Markets, and Socio-Economic Life
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Carlos Forment, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 12,500.00

Credit bureaus and scoring agencies have played an active part in the impressive
growth of consumer credit in the United States at the turn of the twenty-first
century. Companies like Equifax (America’s oldest credit bureau) or FICO
(providers of the most widely used consumer credit score) have managed to
compile a massive volume of consumer histories and translate them into a
standardized and objective three-digit number meant to predict the
creditworthiness of a person. These companies grew beyond the US borders and
expanded to Latin America, where they implemented similar methods. However, they
were not as effective in seizing and refining consumer information in a region
where almost half of the population lacks access to formal banking networks.
This half, furthermore, has been better captured by local or regional financial
technology (fintech) firms, that, assisted by artificial intelligence (AI), have
managed to successfully lend to and assess borrowers without robust credit
histories via the use and sophistication of other sources of information. The
goal of this project is to understand the role of credit scoring and other
financial technologies in the recent but sustained expansion of credit and
indebtedness in the Southern Cone region of Latin America, which includes
Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay. This is explored by empirically tracking and
comparing the work of Equifax with that of local and regional fintech firms. By
tracing the development of financial technologies in South America, this
research makes intelligible the role of STEM disciplines in generating new forms
of credit and indebtedness in a context where indebtedness rates are on the rise
worldwide and credit remains crucial to access education, healthcare, housing,
and subsistence. This project contributes to understanding the potential of
financial technology to continually reshape socio-economic
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on qualitative data collected through in-
depth interviews with local experts and industry insiders; participant
observation in fintech conferences and seminars; and archival research on
company, industry, and public polices, this project responds to two main
research questions: a) How are AI and related technologies expanding financial
services and reshaping socio-economic life in Latin America? b) What techniques
have local fintech firms employed to capture excluded populations, generating
knowledge regimes that far surpass what information giants like Equifax can
assemble? These questions are explored by looking at the combination of
technologies, innovation, and expertise that bring Latin American consumer
credit markets into being. Such an approach yields valuable insights on how
value and knowledge are produced through technical innovation and on how
algorithms generated through machine learning are used to predict economic
behaviors, especially in contexts of socio-economic uncertainty. This project
builds on a hypothesis that states that the shallow reach of formal financial
infrastructures in South America placed limits on Equifax’s capacity to expand,
whereas regional fintech firms were able to take advantage of this
infrastructural deficit by developing techniques for assessing creditworthiness
by translating novel forms of data into commercially useful
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.