* 2042563
* CAREER: Three-dimensional super-resolution light microscopy of thick, unprocessed biological samples
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Ana Doblas, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 02/28/2026
* USD 401,855.00

An award is made to the University of Memphis to develop an innovative imaging
system for unstained cells, tissues, and organs. Current imaging systems cannot
image thick samples with high resolution. This project will overcome this
limitation by developing an instrument that will provide thick-sample imaging
with high resolution. This project will integrate research and education to
stimulate interest in Optical Engineering, providing students with a unique set
of skills for succeeding in their professional careers. Optical Engineering is
the field of study that focuses on the development and application of optics and
photonics, including instrumentation. In this project, five educational
activities are focused on transferring the knowledge of Optical Engineering.
These educational activities include the following: (1) an online Optical
Engineering Certificate; (2) a Summer Workshop in Advanced Optical Microscopic
Techniques; (3) the creation of a STEM club in Lausanne Collegiate School so
high-school students can develop science projects that are generally not
possible in science classrooms; (4) a partnership with the Pink Palace Museum to
expose the public to optics and microscopy; and (5) summer internships to
undergraduate students, exposing them to research activities and new career
paths. This project has several broader impacts. The most important broader
impact is the enhancement of the imaging infrastructure for biological research
and expanding our knowledge of cell behavior. Another significant broader impact
is the increase in career opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.
During this project, the PI will create research, education, and scientific
outreach videos using the YouTube platform. These videos will provide hands-on
demonstrations of building imaging systems and the use of optical tools to align
them. Students involved in this project will participate in these videos,
allowing them to develop a deeper understanding of the topic and improving their
communication skills. The videos will be available in English and Spanish audio
to support the educational growth of Hispanic students across the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Available methods of light microscopy do not enable
three-dimensional (3D) super-resolution (SR) imaging of thick (&gt;50 Î¼m)
biological samples without staining. This limitation results in a significant
gap in our understanding of dynamic changes occurring in the 3D cell-shape and
behavior of unstained specimens. This project will enable biological
investigators to advance their knowledge of a large number of biological
questions relating to cell growth and dynamics as well as for investigating cell
behavior in thick tissue slices. The intellectual merit of the proposed imaging
system includes novel advances in hardware and computational methods. The
evaluation of the proposed system will be performed using calibrated
manufactured objects and relevant biological specimens including human
neuroblastoma cells, primary murine stem cells, and murine blastocysts. The
interdisciplinary team involved in this project will systematically compare
images obtained with the proposed system with images from existing methods
including confocal microscopy, the Lionheart FX system, and the NanoLive
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.