* 2042079
* US-Ireland Joint R&amp;D Partnership: Strained Engineered Germanium Quantum-Well Laser on GaAs and Si for Optical Coherence Tomography
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Mantu Hudait, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2024
* USD 390,841.00

Optical-coherence-tomography (OCT) is a powerful technique with a wide range of
applications, from imaging live tissue to non-destructive industrial testing.
Coherent light sources for OCT in the short wave infra-red (SWIR) wavelength can
achieve much higher resolution with wider bandwidth and penetration in opaque
living tissue, such as, brain and lung tissues. However, there is a lack of SWIR
sources with the combined intensity and bandwidth to further enhance the OCT
performance. The continued development of affordable and compact coherent light
sources in this spectral range is important in many areas of modern technology.
The combination of different semiconducting materials and light source
architectures offers new paths for highly efficient SWIR sources at reduced
cost. The central thrust of the proposed collaborative research is to
investigate the design of germanium (Ge) based coherent light sources, with
heterogeneous integration of InGaAs/Ge/InGaAs quantum-well structures on GaAs
and large area, cost-effective Si substrates. Our objective is to develop
tunable SWIR light sources capable of significantly higher penetration depth,
image contrast and resolution than available from existing light sources, which
will benefit a wide range of important medical, industrial and consumer
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To demonstrate the viability of the proposed
approach, several key technical and scientific challenges must be addressed,
including: (i) design and numerical simulation of the proposed strained ε-Ge-
based quantum-well (QW) device architectures; (ii) materials synthesis and
analysis of InGaAs/ε-Ge/InGaAs QW heterostructures on GaAs and Si using III-V
strain template for modified bandgap of Ge; (iii) fabrication and demonstration
of ε-Ge QW coherent light sources in wavelength ranges from 1.7 μm to 2.5 μm on
GaAs; and (iv) implementation of an integration scheme on large area, cost-
effective Si substrates. An international partnership of scientific groups from
USA, Ireland and Norther Ireland brings together a synergistic mix of expertise
and specialized facilities in materials science, semiconductor fabrication, test
and simulation. To address (ii), (iii), and (iv), the proposed research will
utilize the state-of-the-art in-house epitaxial growth (interconnected group-IV
and III-V molecular beam epitaxy chambers), collaborative materials
characterization and simulation (e.g., high-resolution x-ray diffraction,
transmission electron microscopy, photoluminescence spectroscopy, deep level
transient spectroscopy, and electronic band structure simulation), and in-
house/partner fabrication facilities. To address (i), a combination of numerical
simulations and electronic structure theory will be leveraged to develop
experimentally-calibrated InGaAs/ε-Ge/InGaAs QW device models necessary for
broadband light emission in SWIR range. By investigating these topics, this
research will elucidate numerous as-of-yet unexplored avenues of fundamental
research, including: (a) the amount of strain and doping density in Ge to
optical gain and emission wavelength; (b) the role of Ge layer thickness as a
function of strain to optical gain; (c) the reduction of current density arising
from non-radiative recombination; (d) the threshold current density with amount
of strain in Ge; and (e) the realization of device-quality epitaxial Ge QW
heterostructures on Si through minimization of dislocations and anti-phase
domains in in-situ III-V buffer architectures on Si. Through a comprehensive
examination and understanding of the above challenges, this research will
establish a pathway to achieving new high performance coherent light sources in
the little explored SWIR spectral range that will benefit society as well as
industry via medical imaging and non-destructive testing. Furthermore, this
international scientific partnership allows for a comprehensive project that
trains and mentors students in the field of photonics and nanotechnology through
exchange programs. The outcomes of the proposed research results will be
disseminated to public through National Science Foundation and lay a foundation
for continued and growing US-Ireland collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.