* 2042498
* CAREER: Mechanics of Recyclable Thermoset Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Shailendra Joshi, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2026
* USD 524,654.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will aim to fundamentally
understand the microstructure-property linkages of novel recyclable thermoset
polymers (vitrimers). The ubiquity of plastics in our daily lives presents
challenges due their potential threats to the environment and natural habitats
arising from their low recyclability. Conventional thermoset polymers, whose
attractive physical and mechanical properties make them important structural
materials, are particularly insidious. The irreversible crosslinking at the
molecular level seriously impedes their reprocessing and recycling ability.
Novel vitrimer chemistries offer exciting avenues to develop mechanically
robust, recyclable thermosets. However, predicting the emergence of defects
(microstructure) during reprocessing and their impact on the mechanical
characteristics (property) is difficult. The challenge is rooted in unraveling
the damage processes associated with the statistics of microscale defect
structures resulting from vitrimer chemo-mechanics at various length-scales and
time-scales. The research project addresses these principal issues via novel
multiscale computational mechanics. Its technological relevance is rooted in the
need for a predictive modeling and simulation framework to enable damage-
tolerant vitrimers for structural applications. The research program is
integrated into a broader educational goal of creating an immersive learning
experience at two levels: (i) underrepresented student groups including students
with disabilities, (ii) an integration of granular art in education (K-12), and
(iii) development of a graduate course on the microstructure-sensitive failure
mechanics of materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transesterification based covalent
adaptive network polymers (vitrimers) derive their reprocessing ability via bond
exchange reaction chemistry. An attractive approach to recycling such vitrimers
involves pulverizing them into granular powders and reprocessing them via
thermomechanical compaction. During this process, individual particles undergo
non-linear, dissipative deformation, and welding at inter-particle contact
regions through novel chemo-mechanical healing processes. The resulting new
solid embodies fingerprints of recycling in the form of micromechanical defect
populations. These defect microstructures redefine their viscoelastic
stiffening, strengthening, and damage tolerance, which depends on the mechanics
at multiple length-scales: (i) granular thermo-chemo-mechanics of healing; (ii)
defect micromechanics of damage evolution, and (iii) continuum micromechanics of
recycled components. This project will address fundamental questions associated
with the mechanics of recycled thermosets via a multiscale computational
mechanics platform: (a) at the mesoscale, by discrete element modeling and
simulation of granular ensembles endowed with vitrimers chemo-mechanics to
quantify emergent statistics of the defect-damage linkages, and (b) at the
macroscale, by formulating and computationally implementing a micromechanically
informed statistical viscoelastic damage mechanics. The computational frameworks
will be calibrated, validated, and assessed against a suite of existing
experimental datasets while offering mechanistic predictions for the design of
damage-tolerant recyclable thermosets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.