* 2042114
* RUI:  DEVELOPING A PREDICTIVE MODEL OF STRAIN ACCOMMODATION FOR SEGMENTED NORMAL FAULT EVOLUTION, SEVIER FAULT ZONE, SOUTHERN UTAH
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Benjamin Surpless, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 192,830.00

When tectonic stresses build within the Earthâ€™s crust, faults form to relieve
those stresses. These faults move bodies of rock past each other, commonly
resulting in earthquakes that cause significant damage to nearby areas. Faults
that produce large earthquakes are commonly composed of many smaller fault
segments that interact with each other. These fault segments affect the rock
around them, fracturing it such that fluids can more easily flow below the
ground surface; fluid flow in this context has implications for geothermal
energy, groundwater flow, and petroleum resources. This project will investigate
the Sevier fault zone in southern Utah and develop a predictive model of fault
zone development that can be used to address issues related to earthquake
hazards and to better target potential energy resources. The project will
integrate field instruction, field research, and computer modeling, to help
undergraduate researchers learn fundamental geological processes in the context
of their own research. The PI will recruit and retain research students from
under-represented groups and will measure student learning throughout the
research process. All scientific and educational results from this project will
be disseminated as broadly as possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the kinematic and dynamic evolution of segmented normal faults,
which is critical for the assessment of earthquake hazard, energy resources, and
groundwater flow and storage. The project team will use a range of methods to
elucidate the relationship between mechanical stratigraphy, structural position
relative to propagating fault segments, and damage zone evolution during segment
propagation and linkage. Field and remote-sensing methods will be integrated
with petrographic analysis, mechanical stratigraphy, and structure-from-motion
(SfM) modeling to develop testable models of fault zone evolution. The
variations in fault segment and relay ramp geometries along the Sevier fault
zone, related to changes in along-strike fault displacement, will provide an
opportunity to document the sequential development of fractures, deformation
bands, and minor faults during segmented fault zone evolution. Computer
kinematic and dynamic modeling of documented fault geometries and displacements
will permit hypothesis testing in the context of collected field data. This
project will provide a new and detailed understanding of how permeability
evolves during segmented fault zone evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.