* 2042490
* CAREER: Understanding the evolution and genetic basis of meiotic recombination rate
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Sen Xu, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 01/31/2026
* USD 749,180.00

Meiotic recombination is an important source of genetic diversity and plays a
key role in organismal adaptation. Meiotic recombination rate varies greatly at
the individual, population, and species level. However, the genetic basis and
evolution of recombination rate variation remains poorly understood. Using
state-of-the-art genomic techniques such as single-cell sequencing and CRISPR-
Cas9 gene editing, this project will identify the genes responsible for
recombination rate variation and will illuminate whether recombination rate
evolves due to natural selection. Moreover, this project will disseminate
cutting-edge genomic knowledge through an innovative, inquiry-based
undergraduate curriculum, engaging students of diverse backgrounds in research,
and hosting public outreach events for K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will examine the evolution and genetic basis of meiotic recombination
rate variation in the freshwater microcrustacean species Daphnia pulex and D.
pulicaria, which experienced strong divergent selection during their divergence.
Standard procedures for constructing genetic maps are laborious and difficult to
scale up for population surveys. This project will develop a novel high
throughput system for mapping based on single-sperm genomic sequencing with
combinatorial indexing. This will enable the construction of hundreds of genetic
maps in an economical and efficient manner. Using this approach, this project
will perform comprehensive population genomic analyses of recombination rate
variation both within- and between-species. It will also examine the genomic
signatures of adaptive vs. neutral evolution of recombination rate. This will
help bridge the gap between empirical data and evolutionary theory on
recombination rate evolution. Lastly, this project will identify causal genes
and genetic variants for recombination rate variation in Daphnia by combining
association mapping analyses and CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing, thereby enhancing
understanding of genetic regulation of meiotic
recombination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.