* 2042060
* Collaborative Research: Treatment of Cyanotoxins by UV/Chlorine: Optimizing Removal While Developing Strategies to Minimize Disinfection Byproducts and Toxicity
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Dionysios Dionysiou, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 139,996.00

Harmful algal blooms (HABs) occur when harmful algae grow out of control in
surface water systems including lakes, rivers, and estuaries. This causes a
large decrease in oxygen levels in the water and the release of toxic chemicals
commonly referred to as cyanotoxins. These toxins can cause illness and death in
fish, animals, and humans. HABs are increasing in frequency and severity
throughout the world and are often triggered by excessive nutrients (phosphorus
and nitrogen). In recent years, severe HABs have occurred in more than 20 states
throughout the United States. However, traditional drinking water treatment
processes (coagulation, flocculation, sedimentation, and chlorination) cannot
fully remove cyanotoxins (to below the concentrations considered as toxic by
federal and state agencies) especially during massive HAB events. The
overarching goal of this collaborative research project is to evaluate and
optimize the performance of a new water treatment process that combines UV light
with chlorine (UV/chlorine) to break down cyanotoxins present in drinking water.
The successful completion of this project will benefit society through the
development of new fundamental knowledge that could lead to a new water
treatment technology (UV/Chlorine) for the removal cyanotoxins to safe levels
while minimizing the formation of toxic disinfection by-products (DBPs). Further
benefits to society will be achieved through outreach and educational activities
including 1) workshops and interactions with drinking water treatment
professionals and relevant stakeholders, 2) course development, and 3) the
mentoring of three doctoral students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyanotoxins,
released by cyanobacteria during harmful algae blooms (HABs), are major threats
to human and ecosystem health in the United Stated and worldwide. Various water
treatment technologies, including sorption with granular activated carbon,
membrane filtration, chlorination, ozonation, and advanced oxidation processes
(AOPs), have shown potential to remove or degrade cyanotoxins. However, cellular
lysis can occur during treatment thus increasing exposure to toxins from treated
drinking water. In addition, toxic disinfection by-products (DBPs) might be
generated when disinfectants such as chlorine react with cyanotoxins and/or
algal/planktonic organic matter. Thus, a detailed and careful examination of
cyanotoxin degradation during water treatment is critically needed to ensure
safe drinking water for the public. The overarching goals of this project are to
evaluate the performance of UV/chlorine treatment to degrade cyanotoxins in
drinking water sources and elucidate the mechanisms of DBP formation and
toxicity under relevant process and environmental conditions. To advance these
goals, the collaborative research team proposes to 1) investigate the
degradation of two common classes of cyanotoxins (microcystins and
cylindrospermopsin) along with a group of 70 related DBPs (including regulated
and priority unregulated DBPs); 2) evaluate the role of process conditions
(i.e., radiation dose and wavelength, chlorine dose) and water quality
parameters (algal organic matter, presence of halides, and solution pH) on
degradation efficiency, and 3) determine the reaction kinetics, formation
pathways of transformation products including DBPs, and their potential toxicity
to human and ecosystems using transcriptomics. The successful completion of this
project has potential for transformative impact through the development of new
fundamental knowledge about the UV/Chlorine water treatment process that could
lead to the effective removal cyanotoxins from drinking water sources to safe
levels while minimizing the formation of toxic DBPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.