* 2042475
* CAREER: Investigating how discourse tools conceptualize rules of microbial life
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Erika Szymanski, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 07/31/2026
* USD 291,029.00

While microorganisms have long been studied as isolated species, microbiome
research has become an important new way to understand microbial life and
manipulate the environments these microbes inhabit, from the human gut to
wastewater. This project investigates words as scientific tools in microbiome
research, focusing on how metaphors shape microbiome science and its
applications. While the central role of language in shaping scientific knowledge
is well-established, few studies have explored how different language choices
may enable different scientific practices. This project links descriptive,
experimental, and pedagogical approaches to investigate how metaphors shape
scientific knowledge of microbial social relationships, how these relationships
are investigated, and how scientists and others work with the capacities of
microorganisms. It advances science and technology studies by linking theory and
practice around how scientific language choices participate shape what
microorganisms become, in science and in wider social spaces, as human
relationships with microorganisms are changing. Ultimately, this project aims to
identify how language and metaphor matter for how scientists conceptualize and
research microorganisms, and to help promote productive, sustainable relations
among humans and the microorganisms on which human wellbeing depends. Broader
impacts will come from increased capacity for critical reflection in microbiome
studies, new interdisciplinary methods, evidence-based recommendations about
microbiome communication, and graduate science writing training that
deliberately foregrounds relationships among science and diverse communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project draws on multispecies and materialist STS
theory, relational and processual theories of biology, and the move from deficit
to dialogue in science communication to consider microbiome research in terms of
the ongoing development of multispecies relationships. Its aims to: 1)
investigate peer-reviewed publications to assess how microbial relationships are
described, 2) experiment with the capacity of alternative metaphors in
scientific practice, and 3) use a science and technology studies-informed
approach to science writing to enable early-career scientists to communicate in
ways that invite dialogue with diverse audiences. These objectives are linked by
seeing words as not just tools for delivering content, but as tools for building
relationships among humans and between humans and other species. Juxtaposing
computational, qualitative, and interview-based textual analyses enables a rich
and systematic understanding of existing microbiome discourses. These
descriptive studies yield a foundation for experimental studies of metaphors
that may suggest different scientific approaches while prompting scientists to
reflect on unseen values and assumptions embedded in their language choices.
Together, descriptive and experimental findings will result in shareable
materials for graduate science writing training that connects practical writing
strategies, science and technology studies theory, and science communication
goals for connecting scientists and other audiences. Because students from
diverse language backgrounds and marginalized populations are systematically
disadvantaged by a lack of formal science writing training, these activities
particularly benefit students in these groups, while supporting the widespread
science communication move from deficit to dialogue with specific practical
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences(MCB)cluster Cellular Dynamics and
Function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.