* 2042299
* CAREER: Defining the chemical contributions of Val29 and Tyr30 in Mycofactocin Biosynthesis for the Development of Novel Redox Molecules.
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Sandra Eaton, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2023
* USD 283,698.00

With the support from the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry (CHE), Dr. John A. Latham from the University of Denver
will investigate how the chemistry is carried out in the synthesis of the
bacterial vitamin, mycofactocin. Bacteria produce numerous compounds, or natural
products that enable competition for resources, detoxifying environments, and
carrying out critical cellular processes. Mycofactocin, a bacterial vitamin
which is required for shuttling electrons in critical cellular processes in
Mycobacteria. Mycofactocin is made from a peptide using a powerful enzyme, MftC,
in a way that is unusual in comparison to other peptide natural products. This
study is expected to result in new understanding of this chemistry and a new
class of bioengineered redox cofactors, which in turn will help to elucidate
mycofactocin-dependent physiological processes. This work allows for graduate
students and middle school science teachers to gain specialized training in
mechanistic enzymology and rational bioengineering. In addition, through
outreach programming, this work will incorporate products produced by high
school and middle school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mycofactocin maturase,
MftC, is a radical S-adenosylmethionine enzyme (rSAM) that catalyzes the most
critical steps in mycofactocin biosynthesis. It is just one of a broad class of
radical SAM enzymes in Nature and so mechanistic insights gleaned in this
project will likely have much broader scientific impact upon studies and
understanding of other members of this important enzymatic class. MftC modifies
the precursor peptide, MftA, by oxidatively decarboxylating the C-terminal
tyrosine and by the formation of a lactam between the penultimate valine and the
C-terminal tyrosine. The reaction scope of MftC will be evaluated to determine
the requirement of an electron sink (tyrosine) on the C-terminus and if the
conservation of valine tunes the midpoint potential of mycofactocin. Objective 1
focuses on defining the mechanistic role of tyrosine by evaluating kinetic
isotope effects and pKa effects of tyrosine analogs. Objective 2 establishes the
chemical logic for the conservation of valine by evaluating substituent effects
on the midpoint potential of mycofactocin. The project will advance the
understanding rSAM mechanisms and establish the framework for the rational
design of a new class of redox cofactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.