* 2042203
* Planning IUCRC Stevens Institute of Technology: Center for Building Reliable Advances and Innovation in Neurotechnology (BRAIN)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/22/2020,03/31/2023
* Ramana Vinjamuri, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 03/31/2023
* USD 15,000.00

Age-related diseases, neurological disorders, such as stroke, spinal cord injury
and traumatic brain injury can have debilitating effects on cognitive-motor
function, significantly decreasing quality and length of life. There is a
critical need for technologies to effectively address the care and
rehabilitation. However, innovation in these neurotechnologies faces several
challenges: slow rate of evaluation when compared to invention, lack of
standards for safety, efficacy, and long-term reliability, longer time-to-market
and lack of affordable technologies. To address these challenges, the Stevens
Institute of Technology (SIT) site will partner with Arizona State University
(ASU) and the University of Houston (UH) to join a multi-institution
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Building Reliable
Advances and Innovation in Neurotechnology (BRAIN).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BRAIN’s
vision is a synergistic, interdisciplinary approach to develop and validate
affordable patient-centered technologies. BRAIN will leverage expertise in
neurotechnologies at SIT, UH and ASU to 1) enhance testing and validation of new
technologies through industrial partnerships 2) develop standards for
technologies using system-level approaches 3) characterize innovative
technologies such as biosensors and quantitative analysis tools for systems and
behaviors 4) evaluate the impact of these technologies on quality of life and 5)
reduce the cost of neurotechnologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BRAIN’s mission is
multifold: to accelerate the progress of science and advance national health by
transferring engineering innovations in neurotechnology to the end users, and to
rectify underrepresentation in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
fields by broadening new participation and retaining current participants in
STEM. It also will focus on problems in the neurological space that affect
underrepresented groups disproportionately. BRAIN will become an innovative
neurotechnology hub, creating a pipeline from discoveries to solutions while
helping talented students, scientists, and engineers in the region take their
innovations to the next level and solve one of the greatest unmet medical and
health care needs of our time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BRAIN will leverage unique
research and development ecosystems with industrial partnerships to design and
validate neurotechnologies that can effectively transform the lives of
individuals with disabilities. The SIT IUCRC site will contribute in five
primary themes – cyber human systems, artificial intelligence, neurobionics,
nerve repair and regeneration and neuromechanics. The site will bring in
expertise in artificial intelligence, big data analytics, cloud computing,
computational modeling, neural interfaces, biomechanics, wearable robots,
virtual and augmented reality and other noninvasive solutions. The site's data
management plan will ensure data integrity, data sharing, and data mining
according to institutional and federal guidelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.