* 2042704
* CAREER:  Structural dynamics and mechanisms of photoreceptor signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Jarrod French, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 04/30/2024
* USD 564,122.00

Photoreceptors enable organisms to mediate a vast range of biological responses
to light, including photosynthesis, cell and organelle motility, visual
transduction and circadian rhythms. These important cellular mediators are
implicated in biofilm formation and can alter the virulence of organisms.
Photoreceptors are also the prototype for light driven devices. Elucidating the
underlying mechanisms of operation of photoreceptors remain a key driver for the
development of the field of optogenetics. In most cases, the absorption of light
results in chemical and structural changes of the proteins involved that
ultimately produce the biological output. Despite extensive studies, many of the
details of how this signal is propagated are poorly understood. The objective of
this project is to determine the underlying molecular mechanisms that couple
light absorption to the activation of downstream biological processes in a
specific class of photoreceptors. This work will generate the first time-
resolved molecular description of the dynamic transition between states for the
Blue Light Using Flavoprotein (BLUF) class of proteins and by providing
structural tools that will enable more efficient and effective serial
crystallography experiments. The educational objective of this project is to
generate a hybrid research/educational structural proteomics pipeline, involving
groups of undergraduates and high school students. This crowd-sourcing program
will not only provide an opportunity for groups of students to conduct hands-on,
'real' research in a controlled setting, but will leverage the strength in
numbers to address a challenging and fundamentally important research problem.
The research and educational objectives will be integrated through their
parallel use of X-ray crystallography and through graduate student involvement
and oversight in both aspects of the proposed
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is
to determine the intrinsic molecular determinants and dynamic structural
features that drive structural changes and signaling events in blue-light using
FAD (BLUF) proteins. In particular, the molecular changes that drive signal
transduction during the dark to light transition will be elucidated and the
mechanism of photo-induced complexation of specific BLUF receptor proteins and
complexes will be determined. These studies will integrate time-resolved
spectroscopic methods with static and dynamic structural characterization to map
the spatial and temporal changes that occur during photoreceptor activation. In
addition, an acoustically-mediated serial crystallography approach will be
developed and implemented. This approach will be used to generate molecular
movies of the structural changes that occur during signal transduction in BLUF
proteins and will be broadly applicable as a means to conduct efficient time-
resolved structural studies on a broad range of samples at any X-ray
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.