* 2042146
* RUI: Unraveling the Developmental Genetics that Underlie Anuran Limb Initiation
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* John Young, Simmons University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 03/31/2024
* USD 315,757.00

Most organisms with arms or legs hatch, or are born, with limbs that are largely
functional. Accordingly, these animals make their limbs during embryonic
development. The study of how limbs develop has taught us much about how cells
interact and how changes in developmental processes result in different limb
shapes. For example, differences between the leg of a mouse and the wing of a
bat can be traced to subtle changes in limb development. Surprisingly missing
from our understanding is how animals, such the tadpoles of frogs, are capable
of making a limb when they are no longer embryos. This project aims to discover
what part of the tadpole body generates the limbs of the frog prior to its
metamorphosis. Combining traditional methods with newly available genetic tools
this research will reveal what cells in the tadpole generate the limb and how
the genes that regulate its development are controlled. The findings from this
work will reveal alternative methods by which nature makes the limbs of animals.
Further, they will show us the possibilities of growing limbs during different
stages of an animal’s life according to the rules of nature. Finally, this work
will have impacts beyond scientific discoveries as many of the experiments will
be carried out by undergraduates from a woman centered university, student
researchers that comprise the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of the vertebrate limb have
provided a deep understanding of the cellular, genetic, and molecular mechanisms
that generate an appendage. They have also revealed how the basic pattern of
tetrapod limbs can been modified through evolution to give rise to the myriad of
arms, legs, wings, and fins we observe in nature. The majority of limb
experimentation has been in animals where the limb forms early in embryogenesis.
Yet, several tetrapods, most notably frogs, form their limbs well after
embryonic patterning and differentiation has occurred. Surprisingly, we know
very little about the processes that initially direct limb formation in
amphibian tadpoles since most limb research in these animals has focused on
regeneration. Recent technological advancements now allow for us to use the frog
Xenopus to determine how a tadpole generates a limb when embryonic tissue is no
longer present. Overall, this project seeks to answer this question by testing
the hypotheses that frogs generate their limbs from multiple embryonic origins
and genetically delay the typical tetrapod limb initiation program. This
hypothesis will be tested by first determining the embryological origins and
induction stage of the limb buds. Then limb gene enhancers will be interrogated
to discover how the initiation of frog limbs is controlled. Taken together, this
work will provide a fuller understanding of tetrapod limb diversity and
plasticity. Finally, the experiments conducted here will be at the forefront of
developing new technologies for use by both the Xenopus community as well as
those studying the limb more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.