* 2042641
* Transforming Integrative Makerspace Education for STEM Pre-service Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Kamryn York, POINT PARK UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 281,830.00

This project aims to serve the national interest of improving the quality and
effectiveness of STEM education for pre-service teachers (education college
majors) through a focus on integration of makerspace pedagogy. Makerspace
education involves students working with their hands collaboratively to make,
learn, explore, and share to advance their learning and success in STEM areas.
Education and STEM faculty will collaborate to integrate makerspace pedagogy
into 10 interdisciplinary education core and methods courses to emphasize STEM
experiential learning. While this project primarily focuses on undergraduate
students majoring in elementary education, undergraduate pre-service teachers
preparing for teacher certification in grades 4-8 or 7-12 may also benefit from
curricular improvements in these required courses. The project intends to build
knowledge about teaching and learning by developing, implementing, and assessing
faculty development, interactive instruction, and STEM lesson plan development.
This project offers a valuable opportunity to improve STEM thinking skills by
formally integrating STEM concepts throughout the pre-service teacher curriculum
using an interdisciplinary approach. The project utilizes a makerspace
laboratory at Point Park University (PPR). However, the project design is such
that other institutions of higher education should be able to replicate the
program with or without a physical makerspace lab as the project’s findings and
“maker mindset” are employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Community partners, the
Children’s Museum of Pittsburgh, the Matt’s Makerspace Organization, and the
Allegheny Intermediate Unit, will provide maker pedagogy professional
development to PPR faculty in the School of Education and the Department of
Natural Sciences, Engineering and Technology. These faculty members will attend
10-15 professional development sessions in STEM learning in makerspaces, and
then revise the course content of 10 courses, as well as develop lessons and
assessments for the assignments. Utilizing qualitative research methodology, the
project intends to investigate the following research question: What do pre-
service teachers and faculty members identify as areas of pedagogical growth in
STEM learning and teaching in a makerspace environment? This research aims to
highlight the impact of makerspace pedagogy on improving STEM education learning
outcomes through an interdisciplinary constructivist approach. The project is
expected to have a multiplier effect as it impacts STEM disciplinary and
education faculty at PPU, pre-service teachers, and teacher preparation programs
at other universities that benefit from what is learned at PPU. Ultimately, the
future students of the well-prepared pre-service teachers steeped in maker
pedagogy and STEM content will have the potential to develop higher level
thinking skills and improve their mathematics and scientific achievement, which
are essential for the 21st century STEM workforce. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship (Noyce) Program is
providing co-funding for this IUSE: EHR project to support the project's
preservice teacher preparation goals, which are well-aligned with Noyce Program
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.