* 2042249
* CAREER: A Triple-Isotope Approach to Unraveling Subsurface Food Webs
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Magdalena Osburn, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 05/31/2026
* USD 441,698.00

A vast ecosystem of bacteria and other microorganisms live beneath your feet.
This biome extends kilometers deep into the Earth's crust and contains as much
organic carbon as surface life. While scientists know a lot about who these
microbes are, understanding what they do for a living is a harder question.
Ecologists use chemical signatures of plants and animals to map food chains. In
this work, Prof. Osburn will develop a new tool to similarly map microbial food
webs, focusing on those found 100s to ~10,000 feet underground. Just like the
signatures in fingernails distinguish carnivores from vegetarians, this tool
will reveal which carbon and nitrogen sources are uses in the shallow vs. ultra-
deep places underground. The implications of what subsurface microbes eat are
surprisingly global. If they eat mostly organic matter made by surface plants,
then they are sequestering carbon in huge amounts and depend on surface
ecosystems. If these microbes instead eat and breathe inorganic materials and
use CO2, then these ecosystems could be very ancient indeed. The scientific
concepts underlying this work (food chains, microbial ecology, earth system
science, and field-based inquiry) are well suited to be adapted for high school
classrooms. Prof. Osburn will develop activities featuring these concepts in
collaboration with Science in Society and Chicago Public Schools, with the
ultimate goal of introducing Earth Science and field-based inquiry to students
with a diversity of backgrounds and perspectives. She will also host some of
these students as interns for immersive laboratory
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The continental subsurface harbors vast and
active microbial biospheres; however, the net dependence of these microbes on
surficial inputs remains unknown. This work will interrogate the dependency of
subsurface microbial food webs on surface carbon, within a gradient of
subsurface environments (shallow to 2.9 km deep). Ultimately the questions are:
Are subsurface ecosystems dependent on surficial inputs, how does this change
with depth, and how might it have changed with time? Ultra-deep continental
ecosystems may live independently of surficial organic matter and record
signatures of dark primary productivity in their biomass. Prof. Osburn will
develop a novel amino acid (AA) triple isotope fingerprint and apply it to
deconvolve trophic relationships in a range of deep subsurface environments. To
accomplish these ends, first she will calibrate the isotopic fingerprint with
relevant heterotrophic and chemoautotrophic microbes (Objective 1), then analyze
subsurface biomass from three well-characterized localities including shallow
(1-150 m), intermediate (250-1500 m), and ultra-deep (2.4-2.9 km) environments
(Objective 2). Education and outreach activities center on addressing the grave
problem of diversity in Geoscience by building interactive, analytical content
modules for diverse Chicago public high school classrooms (Objective 3) and
creating immersive laboratory experiences for high school students via
internships and field opportunities (Objective 4). By incorporating research
products into the K-12 classroom and inviting high school interns into research
arenas, she directly links research and education
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.