* 2042253
* PlantSynBio: Optimized CAM Engineering for Improving Water-use Efficiency in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* John Cushman, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,557,879.00

Crassulacean acid metabolism and tissue succulence are metabolic and anatomical
adaptations that improve water-use efficiency and drought (and salinity) stress
tolerance in plants. These traits are among the most widespread and successful
adaptations in the plant kingdom for mitigating drought stress, and thus,
represent highly useful traits for the design of climate-resilient crops. The
goal of this project is to test optimized synthetic versions of crassulacean
acid metabolism alone and in combination with engineered tissue succulence. The
proposed synthetic gene circuits developed by this project can be applied widely
to other food, feed, fiber, and biofuel crops to improve their productivity,
improve water-use efficiency, and drought/salinity stress tolerance under the
hotter and drier environments of the future. The project will also provide
training of an increasingly diverse scientific workforce through student
recruitment efforts that target students from historically underrepresented
groups in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. In addition, the
project will provide training and preparedness of future scientists in evidence-
based, visually focused, scientific communication through unique training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars
in plant biochemistry, synthetic biology, and biotechnology blended with
infographics, interactive visualizations, and visual social media. The
investigators will increase public awareness of the need for more climate-
resilient crops through the production of two high-quality videos describing the
project deliverables to showcase the societal benefit of these biotechnological
innovations. Lastly, the training and outreach activities will be evaluated
through robust assessment activities to appraise their impact on public science
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future increases in drought severity and duration
will significantly slow the rate of crop productivity increases needed to
satisfy future projected crop demands and threaten global food security.
Therefore, innovative synthetic biology approaches for curtailing
photorespiration and improving water-use efficiency via the introduction of
synthetic crassulacean acid metabolism into C3 photosynthesis crops are
essential. The proposed research will generate optimized synthetic
carboxylation, decarboxylation, starch degradation, and complete crassulacean
acid metabolism gene circuits. The resulting plants will be evaluated for
improved growth, productivity, water-use efficiency, and water-deficit and
salinity tolerance. In addition, plants expressing optimized crassulacean acid
metabolism gene circuits will be evaluated with and without engineered tissue
succulence in Arabidopsis and soybean, a critically important C3 photosynthesis
crop for the U.S.. Empirical testing will be accompanied by detailed, genome-
scale transcriptomic and metabolome profiling and diel flux balance analysis
modeling to corroborate energetic efficiency predictions for each iteration of
the synthetic crassulacean acid metabolism gene circuits. The broader impacts of
the project include improving national food, feed, fiber, and biofuel security
by enhancing crop productivity, water-use efficiency, and drought/salinity
tolerance in a changing environment. Outreach and training goals include
ensuring the training of an increasingly diverse scientific workforce through
recruitment of underrepresented students, providing training and preparedness of
future scientists in scientific communication, increasing public awareness of
the need to improve the climate-resiliency of crops using videos describing the
concepts of synthetic CAM and engineered tissue succulence, and assessing
training, outreach and engagement activities for didactic and societal
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Plant Genome
Research Program and the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program in
the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.