* 2042257
* CAREER: Complex organic molecules in cold interstellar clouds-- A laboratory kinetics study
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2027
* Kyle Crabtree, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 06/30/2027
* USD 651,202.00

Complex organic molecules are the ultimate building blocks of life on Earth, and
they are ubiquitous throughout the Galaxy. One of the more surprising places
they are found is in cold, dense pre-stellar cores. Current state-of-the-art
chemical models fail to accurately reproduce the observed abundances of nearly
all complex organic molecules or to predict their presence in pre-stellar cores.
Dr. Crabtree and his students will examine chemical processes that form these
molecules at the temperatures found in the interstellar medium and in pre-
stellar cores. High formation rates at these low temperatures could imply that
prebiotic chemistry is ubiquitous throughout the Universe, which could have
important implications on the search for life. This work will lead to a minimum
of three PhD theses, and undergraduate students will participate this project
through UC Davisâ€™s CURE Summer Research Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team
will conduct experiments with a powerful new instrument based on a uniform
supersonic expansion coupled to a chirped-pulse Fourier transform microwave
spectrometer to gather rate data and chemical products of hydroxyl and sulfanyl
reactions with small O-, N-, and S- bearing molecules. These data will be
crucial in forming astrochemical models and comparing them to ALMA observations
of star forming regions. The experimental work will create thesis opportunities
for graduate students and summer research opportunities for undergraduate
students at UC Davis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.