* 2042423
* CAREER: Tubularenes: A Novel Class of Conjugated Molecular Nanotubes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Raul Hernandez Sanchez, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 11/30/2022
* USD 679,989.00

Dr. Raúl Hernández Sánchez of the University of Pittsburgh is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Division
of Chemistry at the NSF to design, synthesize, and characterize nanomaterials
composed of cylindrical conjugated organic molecules. These molecules form well-
defined wire-like nanosystems with diameters around one nanometer, which is
about 100,000 times smaller than a human hair. The project goals are to gain
fundamental understanding of the chemistry involved and to enable the
development of critical nanocomponents, with potential long term practical
applications, for example, in electronic device miniaturization and membrane
technology for liquid or gas separations. Students working on the project will
gain technical skills across many disciplines from macromolecular chemical
synthesis and product characterization to basic computational analysis. In
addition, Prof. Hernández Sánchez and his students are actively involved through
the Alliance for Diversity in Science and Engineering at Pittsburgh in inspiring
members of underrepresented minorities to pursue STEM careers and in increasing
general public awareness of science through symposia, local fairs and
conventions. Prof. Hernández Sánchez is also active as faculty in Eureka Street
Corporation dedicated to mentor applicants from underrepresented minorities and
in Clubes de Ciencia México (Science Clubs Mexico) to conduct STEM Workshops for
high school and undergraduate students from Chihuahua City,
México.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Hernández Sánchez and
his research team are supported to develop synthetic protocols to construct
molecular wire-like systems termed tubularenes. The project will follow bottom-
up template-assisted approaches to build conjugated nanotubes using select
aromatic building blocks and macrocycles end-caps. The selected templates would
ideally hold the precursor aromatic building blocks close in space to limit
their degrees of freedom and orient them in a geometry that best promotes the
desired reactivity. The first aim of the project seeks to validate the
scaffolding approach by testing a range of aromatic building blocks and
macrocycles. The second aim will focus on the promotion of axial conjugation.
Strain energies of intermediates and expected products will be assessed to
inform the design of viable synthetic routes for radially and axially extended
conjugated surfaces. The third aim involves the incorporation of heteroatoms
into the aromatic framework as dopants to tune electronic structure.
Computational chemistry will be used throughout to guide the project and allow
for better informed design/modification/tuning
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.