* 2042098
* CAREER: Developing a Multi-Parameter Seismic Model of North America
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Hejun Zhu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2026
* USD 366,604.00

Jointly constraining and interpreting multiple seismic parameters enables
geophysicists to better investigate physical properties of Earth materials. Such
studies may allow scientists to infer distributions of temperature, water
content, and deformation. This project aims to develop a multi-parameter seismic
model for North America by using state-of-the-art full waveform inversion
technology and high-quality waveform records collected by the USArray over the
past decade. This community-shared, multi-parameter seismic model will include
3-D variations in velocities, anisotropy, shear attenuation and the associated
uncertainties. Jointly interpreting these parameters will enable the
investigators to address important scientific problems related to depth-
dependent anisotropy and water distribution within the mantle transition zone.
Solving these issues is important for our understanding of the physical
characteristics of the lithosphere, asthenosphere and mantle transition zone.
Furthermore, this CAREER project will support an early career PI and several
Ph.D. graduate and undergraduate students. The PI will promote high-performance
computation in Geophysics education, engage undergraduate students in research
and participate in UTD STEM summer camps for high school students. The Dallas
area has large African, Hispanic and Asian American communities, the PI will
attract high school students from these communities to participate this summer
camp program. The developed multi-parameter seismic model will be shared online
for public and research usages. Results from this project will be disseminated
via peer-reviewed publications and presentations at national/international
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine full waveform inversion
and high-quality USArray records to construct a comprehensive seismic model for
North America, which will enable the team to tackle the following scientific
problems. (1) The 3-D azimuthal anisotropy structure in the developed
comprehensive model will enable us to distinguish “frozen-in” lithospheric
deformation and present-day asthenospheric flows. In addition, jointly
interpreting radial and azimuthal anisotropy enables them to test the anisotropy
cause hypothesis for the mid-lithosphere discontinuity; (2) Considering the high
water solubilities of wadsleyite and ringwoodite, the mantle transition zone
might act as a huge water reservoir inside the Earth. Seismic attenuation has
been considered as an important proxy for delineating the distribution of water.
By jointly interpreting velocity and attenuation results taken from the
developed comprehensive model, this project aims to answer the question: “Is the
mantle transition zone underneath North America highly hydrated?” (3)
Quantifying uncertainty and resolution is still challenging in full waveform
inversion applications. This project will develop algorithms to efficiently
evaluate the posterior covariance and resolution matrix, which will be applied
to quantify uncertainty of the developed, multi-parameter seismic model of North
America. The PI will also promote interactions between students and experts from
the energy industry through workshops and summer internships. This project will
enable the PI to train graduate and undergraduate students for seismology
related research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.