* 2042416
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Fostering Cybersecurity Professionals in Rhode Island
* EDU,DGE
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Victor Fay-Wolfe, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 01/31/2026
* USD 2,522,034.00

There is an urgent need to enhance the capacity of government workforces to
implement cybersecurity both in their own organizations and in support of the
citizens that they serve. Strategic plans outlined by the federal government,
including the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014, National Defense
Authorization Act of 2018, and the US National Cyber Strategy, call for an
increase in the quality and quantity of cybersecurity professionals. This
project directly addresses the goal of increasing the number of cybersecurity
professionals prepared to join the government workforce by supporting Computer
Science students working to complete their Professional Science Master’s (PSM)
degree in Cybersecurity at the University of Rhode Island (URI). URI has been
designated as both a National Security Agency/Department of Homeland Security
Center of Academic Excellence (CAE) in Cyber Defense Education and a CAE-
Research since 2013 and is the only institution in Rhode Island with either
designation. URI is well positioned to mount a Scholarships for Service program
given their partnership with the Community College of Rhode Island and the
number of potential cybersecurity jobs available within the state. The Naval
Undersea Warfare Center and Naval War College Cyber Institute are located in
Rhode Island, and there are also opportunities within state government.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;URI’s PSM degree in Cybersecurity is designed with the
specific goal of preparing students for the cybersecurity workforce through
training in both advanced technical skills and professional skills.. This
project provides scholarships for a total of 20 students to complete their PSM
either through URI’s five year program with support while both undergraduate and
graduate students, or as graduate-only students. The URI scholarship program
plans a targeted recruitment approach to promote the participation of
underrepresented groups and therefore increase diversity in the cybersecurity
workforce. The plan includes working with the National Center for Women in
Technology as well as URI’s chapters of the Society for Women in Computing and
Society for Black Engineers. The experience for URI cybersecurity scholars
includes a combination of undergraduate coursework and research, graduate
coursework, a program of activities focused on cybersecurity career readiness,
and a cybersecurity internship. Coursework also addresses professional skills
including training in project planning, communication, and organizational
behavior. Scholars also have the option to obtain professional certifications in
cybersecurity and to attend relevant events and professional meetings. The
project team plans to disseminate lessons learned and cyber career readiness
materials within the cybersecurity community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which
funds proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity
and aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior
cybersecurity workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are
required to work in cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal
Government organization for the same duration as their scholarship
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.