* 2042854
* Conference Proposal: Promoting Scientific Research and Development in the United States and Engaging Invested Stakeholders, Policymakers, and Students
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Kenneth Evans, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 48,732.00

An enterprising science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) research
and development (R&amp;D) infrastructure is vital to a healthy and secure nation
and its economy. In an effort to highlight R&amp;D, the American Academy of Arts
and Sciences is publishing in September 2020 The Perils of Complacency: America
at a Tipping Point in Science and Engineering. This award, Promoting Scientific
Research and Development in the United States, will facilitate engagement
between the scientific community and the public, highlighting recommendations
from The Perils of Complacency report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Perils of
Complacency builds a case for promoting science as a public good for all
Americans. The report addresses a number of particularly challenging issues:
recognition of the vital role of scientific research in supporting the health,
economy, security and overall wellbeing of Americans; several indicators that
the United States may be in danger of losing its position as a global leader in
R&amp;D; STEM education outcomes; diversity in the US STEM workforce; and the
importance of international cooperation in science. While the report is written
for policymakers and other invested stakeholders who are well versed in STEM
education and federal research policy, the conference series will provide an
opportunity for the American public to learn more about the issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed series of online conferences, Promoting
Scientific Research and Development in the United States, will carry that
message to the general public and, especially, to young people, whose future
depends on how the nation addresses these challenges. The conferences aim to
connect the STEM community with students at all levels, state and national
policymakers, and the broader public, in conversations about the important role
of science, especially fundamental research, in our daily lives. To achieve this
goal, three types of webinar series will take place: 1) six to eight lectures
with distinguished STEM professionals discussing timely science, technology, and
innovation policy issues of serious public concern; 2) two or more STEM graduate
student-led events with panel discussions including STEM professionals
addressing key science policy issues of specific interest to early-career
scientists; and 3) twenty or more school outreach webinars to engage the next
generation of STEM workers to demystify science and promote the role of science
in society. Through these events, this project will engage a diverse set of
audiences on science and technology policy issues and highlight critical issues
facing the US R&amp;D enterprise, as well as broader societal challenges where
R&amp;D can provide solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.