* 2042284
* CAREER: A Novel Computational Thermodynamics Framework with Intrinsic Chemical Short-Range Order
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Bicheng Zhou, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2026
* USD 383,377.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports computational and
theoretical research, experiment, and education to advance the ability to
calculate phase diagrams of materials. Phase diagrams are roadmaps of materials
that indicate how atoms organize themselves at different temperatures,
compositions, pressures, or other variables. Computational thermodynamic
modeling of metals and alloys could reveal their stability under various
temperatures and compositions, providing guidance for manipulating the
properties of alloys. However, currently missing in the mathematical models
commonly used by computational thermodynamic approaches is the description of
atomic-scale short-range order. When atoms bond with each other to form a solid,
they prefer to have specific kinds of atoms as their neighbors which leads to
atomic-scale (short-range) order. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports the PI and his team to pursue a fundamental improvement in
computational thermodynamics by developing a new cluster-based model which
incorporates atomic-scale order into the mainstream thermodynamic modeling
framework. This new framework is implemented in a software platform and
accessible to the broad materials science community. The computational
prediction of atomic-scale order is experimentally validated in several alloys
with experiments that use intense high-energy X-rays to obtain different kinds
of images of the locations of atoms. The developed computational framework
represents a new methodology that enables atomic-scale order to be exploited for
materials design, which potentially leads to novel complex concentrated alloys
or improved commercial alloys that may appear in automobiles, airplanes, or
other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award provides support for
education and outreach activities including: mentoring local K-12 students
through the NanoDays events at the University of Virginia, holding annual summer
programs for underrepresented minority students through the Virginia-North
Carolina Alliance for Minority Participation, developing a thermodynamics-
related course and learning modules, and creating a Python code library for 3D
visualization of concepts in thermodynamics, making this subject fun and
intuitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHINICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports computational and theoretical research, experiment, and education to
advance the ability to calculate phase diagrams and thermodynamic properties of
materials, particularly metals and alloys. The PI aims to explore a cluster-
based thermodynamic approach that enables the prediction of chemical short-range
order (SRO) in multicomponent materials using the CALculation of PHAse Diagram
(CALPHAD) method. CALPHAD is a leading method for computational thermodynamic
modeling of materials. However, the current approach used in CALPHAD, the
sublattice model, is a mean-field model with the ideal entropy of mixing. This
makes CALPHAD inadequate for properly describing order-disorder transitions or
chemical SRO in alloys, such as the Guinier-Preston zones or nanoscale clusters,
which are critical for alloy mechanical properties. First-principles alloy
theories, using the cluster variation method (CVM) or the cluster expansion
method, can describe SRO but are generally limited to binary or ternary systems
due to the large number of configuration variables.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI
plans to develop a hybrid framework by marrying unique advantages from CVM and
CALPHAD through incorporating SRO into CALPHAD with a novel cluster-based
solution model. The key is to use the Fowler-Yang-Li transform to decompose the
cumbersome cluster probabilities in CVM into fewer site/point probabilities of
the basis cluster, thereby considerably reducing the number of minimizing
variables for multicomponent systems. The configurational and non-
configurational, for example vibrational and elastic, free energies are modeled
separately to gain insight into their respective effects on phase stability.
Modern, efficient algorithms are employed to minimize the non-linear cluster-
based free energy functions. The resulting codes are implemented in an open-
sourced platform, OpenCALPHAD. The predicted chemical SRO is validated in
selected alloys with synchrotron X-ray experiments. This hybrid CVM-CALPHAD
framework represents a new methodology for thermodynamic modeling that enables
atomic-scale order to be exploited as a dimension for materials design, which
potentially leads to novel complex concentrated alloys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award provides support for education and
outreach activities including: mentoring local K-12 students through the
NanoDays events at the University of Virginia, holding annual summer programs
for underrepresented minority students through the Virginia-North Carolina
Alliance for Minority Participation, developing a thermodynamics-related course
and learning modules, and creating a Python code library for 3D visualization of
concepts in thermodynamics, making this subject fun and
intuitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.