* 2042635
* CAREER: Elastohydrodynamic lubrication of soft patterned interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Lilian Hsiao, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2026
* USD 413,878.00

Haptic technology creates the perception and experience of touch by applying
forces to a user. It is used commonly in applications such as remote surgery and
robotics. In some applications, the forces are generated as two surfaces slide
over each other, lubricated by a thin film of liquid between the surfaces. This
CAREER award focuses on elastohydrodynamic lubrication (EHL), which refers to
the special case where the two surfaces are deformable (“elasto”) and the forces
on them depend both on their deformation and the flow (“hydrodynamic”) of
lubricating fluid between them. In many cases of interest, the surfaces are not
smooth, but, instead, have patterns embedded in them. Although the goal of
haptic engineering is to produce forces exerted on the length scale of human
fingers, the origin of the EHL forces associated with fluid-solid friction on
very thin lubricating layers is not well understood, which makes it a challenge
to recapitulate the full haptic perception for humans. This project comprises
experiments and computer simulations that will determine the various forces that
occur in EHL for well-defined model geometries that contain the essential
features of haptic applications. The results of the work will aid practitioners
in the design of haptic technology that more realistically reproduces sensations
of touch. In addition, the project will include activities to stimulate interest
in fluid mechanics and soft matter among the public through interactive citizen
science sessions, through virtual perception demonstrations for science camp
participants, and through instruction in haptic applications and soft matter for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A set of experiments will be conducted to
test the central hypothesis that the shear, bending, and compression of two
surfaces are decoupled by patterns with different spatial dimensions. The
proposed research will address three outstanding questions in EHL tribology: 1)
Is it possible to sense complex rheology using surface patterns? 2) Is it
possible to measure film thickness in soft tribopairs during sliding? 3) How
does the bending of patterns influence film thickness? Experiments will be
designed to characterize the friction of patterned soft materials such as
elastomers and hydrogels. Tribo-rheometry and a haptic device will be used to
correlate tribology to forces and torques measured with human hands. Lubrication
hydrodynamics and direct visualization will be used to model the film thickness
between tribopairs. The effects of sliding orientation, bending, and surface
topography on fluid flow profiles will be investigated using a combination of
experiments, scaling theory, and computational fluid dynamics simulations.
Constitutive models for non-Newtonian fluids will be used to compute the stress
tensor and fitted to the experimental data. These research aims will provide the
analytical foundation for haptic engineering involving
liquids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.