* 2042080
* I-Corps: Smart Mask for Respiratory Monitoring and Prevention of Airborne Diseases
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Kaushik Chowdhury, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a data collection system called Smart Mask, which provides senior
care communities with a safe operational environment and identifies actions that
may help caregivers understand the risk of respiratory disease transmission. The
overall goal is to combat the seasonal resurgence of COVID-19-like diseases by
tracking the health and safe practices followed by essential workers in such
facilities. At a societal level, this technology will help to monitor an active
hotspot region where symptomatic cases spike suddenly. The technology will also
assist decision-makers in setting up corrective actions. The proposed mask has
several wireless connectivity options with the option to share data with third
party apps for reporting health abnormalities and give public health officials a
real-time awareness of possible breakouts. Additionally, Smart Mask assists in
raising awareness of harmful hygiene habits, to help in preventing contamination
and leading to a healthier society. The Smart Mask offers essential care
facilities a way to ensure their own health, sustain business growth by reducing
the risk of facility spread, and inspire trust among potential customers and
current employees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-corps project provides a data
collection and analysis system using a network of Smart Masks. Each Smart Mask
has wireless connectivity with a smartphone and the following sensors: health
metric sensors to non-invasively measure respiratory rate, oxygen saturation and
body temperature. The Smart Masks provide notifications of abnormal readings to
the user. They also have gesture sensors that track the gestures of touching or
moving hands close to the face, using thin film and flexible capacitance
coupling plates on the mask. Finally, the Smart Masks have proximity sensing
using capacitive coupling that performs mask-to-mask and mask-to-infrastructure
distance ranging using signal strength measurements and coupling of capacitive
fields. The I-Corps customer discovery activities will explore the commercial
potential of the proposed Smart Mask technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.