* 2042935
* Spectrophotometric Determinations of Carbonic Acid Dissociation Constants for Estuarine Conditions
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Robert Byrne, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2024
* USD 339,608.00

Human health and well-being are linked in many ways to the health of our
estuaries and coastal ocean waters. Yet surprisingly, we know less about some
aspects of these important waters than we do the more distant waters of the deep
ocean. This project will use state-of-the-art spectrophotometric methods (that
is, light- and color-based methods) to advance our understanding of the
fundamental and ever-changing chemistry of these waters and, eventually, the
effects of these changes on marine life. The focus of this study will be to
understand the chemistry of carbon dioxide in seawater. The new tools we will
use are recently characterized pH indicators — chemicals that change color in
seawater depending on the acidity of that water. These specially selected,
purified indicators can be used to measure pH with unsurpassed precision and
accuracy. We will use the indicators in laboratory experiments to determine how
a critical parameter of the carbon dioxide system (a dissociation constant known
as “K2”) changes depending on the temperature and salinity of the water.
Characterizing K2 has been a goal of marine chemists for more than 50 years. The
better we know K2, the better we can understand and predict how carbon moves
through and cycles within natural waters. These measurements will expand our
understanding of not only K2 but also the many other seawater characteristics
that can be calculated from K2. Ultimately, this work will facilitate the
interpretation and prediction of many ocean processes relevant to human health
and coastal economies, such as ocean acidification (the lowering of ocean pH due
to increasing carbon dioxide in the atmosphere) and calcium carbonate
dissolution (the resulting dissolution of seashell material). The results will
thus lay the groundwork for new perspectives on how ocean acidification affects
the various shelled organisms that serve as food for economically important
marine animals/fisheries and for people. The results of this work will also help
to improve models of carbon dioxide dynamics in lakes, rivers, underground pore
waters, and physiological fluids. As regards broader impacts, this work will
help the PI continue to transfer his knowledge on this important topic to the
next generation via his training of graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students. This project would support one graduate and one undergraduate student,
as well as help the current research projects of two minority doctoral students.
Lastly, the PI plans to continue his involvement in the Bridge to the Doctoral
Program aimed at getting minority students involved in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In seawater, two carbonic acid dissociation
constants (K1 and K2) describe the relationship between solution pH and the
relative concentrations of dissolved carbonate ions, bicarbonate ions, and
dissolved carbon dioxide. Accurate characterization of these CO2-system
constants over broad ranges of environmental conditions has been a much sought-
after goal for more than 50 years because knowledge of these terms is essential
for quantitatively interpreting and predicting the biogeochemical cycling of
carbon in all natural aqueous systems. The accuracy of CO2-system calculations
is especially sensitive to uncertainties in K2, the equilibrium constant that
describes the dissociation of bicarbonate ions to produce hydrogen ions and
carbonate ions. This research project is designed to use spectrophotometric pH
measurements (solely) to characterize this important constant. The purified pH
indicators to be used in this work provide seawater pH measurements of
unsurpassed precision and accuracy. Using select indicators whose properties
have recently been characterized over freshwater-to-seawater ranges of salinity
and temperature, we will determine K2 over similar ranges so as to improve the
accuracy of CO2-system calculations in estuaries and coastal ocean waters. The
resulting insight into equilibrium characteristics will facilitate
interpretations and predictions of pH buffering in aqueous systems, provide an
improved understanding of calcium carbonate solubility behavior, and lead to
improved models of CO2-system behavior in freshwater lakes, rivers, soil and
sediment pore waters, and physiological fluids. The longer-term benefits of this
project will extend to assessments of the influence of ocean acidification on
the life cycles of carbonate-bearing organisms that serve as food for
economically important marine organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.