* 2042384
* CAREER: Partial Differential Equation and Randomness
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,11/30/2021
* Yu Gu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 11/30/2021
* USD 20,209.00

This research aims at carrying out mathematical studies of some dynamics in
heterogeneous environments, such as crystal deposition, spreading of pollutants
in inhomogeneous flows, and sound propagation in the ocean. Partial differential
equations (PDEs) serve as the principal mathematical tool to model such
phenomena, and to account for lack of information or model uncertainty it is
natural to add randomness to the equations. A ubiquitous feature of such
problems is a wide range of temporal and spatial scales, extending all the way
up to the scale of observational interest. As numerical simulations are
practically impossible on the microscopic scale, a simplified and effective
description of the physical quantities, such as the surface height, the density
of pollutants, and the wave intensity, is extremely desirable for these
problems. The goal of the project is to study the relevant random PDEs, and to
lay down mathematical foundations for simplified effective models in various
approximation regimes. Organic part of this project is the educational program
that is integrated with research. The educational program includes a sustained
training of graduate and undergraduate students at the intersection of
probability theory, analysis, and applications, through designing advanced
courses, supervising undergraduate research, and organizing workshops for early
career researchers. The goal is to introduce students to the analytic and
probabilistic tools that are indispensable for both academic research and
engineering applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is in
the areas of stochastic PDEs, diffusion in random environment, and wave
propagation in random media. By combining tools, such as asymptotic expansions,
functional inequalities and stochastic analysis, the principal investigator will
study (i) nonlinear stochastic PDEs modeling interface growth; (ii) behavior of
directed polymers in random environment; (iii) effective models of wave
propagation in random media. One of principal themes of the project is to
analyze the dependence of observables on the random perturbations, and to
understand the interplay between the nonlinearity and the
randomness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.