* 2042503
* CAREER: Real-time Control of Cell Differentiation Using Reinforcement Learning
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Nigel Reuel, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/28/2026
* USD 554,338.00

Therapeutic cells are being developed to treat chronic diseases. These cells are
most often derived from stem cells. Two things must happen before this
technology can be made available outside of clinical trials. First, the quality
of the therapeutic cells must be improved. Second, the manufacture of these
cells must be improved so all cells have a necessary level of therapeutic
activity. Reproducibility in large scale manufacturing of therapeutic cells is
the ultimate objective of this project. This project tests the hypothesis that
active control will improve the reproducibility of therapeutic cell manufacture.
This research will also improve student and public understanding of machine
learning (ML) approaches through an interactive art exhibit. This work will
enable practical manufacture of regenerative medicines as well as education of
ML-based numerical methods and process control strategies for engineers. This
project will train graduate students and 10 to 20 undergraduates with the skills
required for tool design, cell culture, and reinforcement learning, thereby
strengthening our nation’s biomanufacturing
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a modular framework
that can be applied to any pathway, and can be updated as new sensors are
developed, stimulation cues are discovered, and new cell targets are identified.
Three research aims will determine the impacts of dynamic control and RL
training iteration number on differentiation improvement. These are (1) build
the control framework, (2) enable training of the control framework, and (3)
benchmark dynamic control against static recipes on model cells. Four model cell
lines span three germ layer targets and have established chemical, physical, and
electrical differentiation recipes. In the first aim, the reinforcement learning
agent will be built on the TensorFlow package. Markov (memoryless) and non-
Markov reward functions will be tested along with latest RL algorithms on an in
silico simulator built from literature-based assumptions. In parallel, the
second aim focuses on development of a real training environment that includes
multiple sensing modalities along with three control elements (chemical,
physical, and electrical). These will be parallelizable environments to allow
for efficient training of the RL agent. In Aim 3, the RL-trained dynamic control
strategy will be benchmarked against static recipes for intra- and inter- batch
variability. These experiments will determine if such dynamic control improves
manufacture consistency and will likewise provide average time needed for
training a new differentiation route.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.