* 2042547
* Fear at the top - risks discernment and mitigation by an apex predator in a cityscape
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Nyeema Harris, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2025
* USD 0.00

Cities are highly heterogeneous landscapes of risks and rewards for wildlife, a
duality that can induce changes in animal behavior. Species navigating urban
environments may benefit from reduced natural competitors and food subsidies,
but they must also mitigate heightened anthropogenic pressures (e.g., roads,
lights). Despite the burgeoning field of urban ecology and a surge of research
on the behavioral ecology of fear, these works almost exclusively focus on
predation or competition in subordinate species. The dearth of studies on fear
in apex predators in urban environments limits our understanding of coexistence
strategies and our capacity to anticipate ecosystem ramifications caused by
behavioral consequences of urbanization. The central goal of this proposal is to
test fundamental theories of fear on risk management in coyotes, a common and
newly ascended apex mammalian predator in North American cities. Specifically,
this work includes: a) non-invasive camera surveys to obtain population-level
data on the coupled distributions of risks and rewards; b) collaring an apex
predator in the city to obtain individual-level, fine-scale data on risk
management and implications of rewards; and c) experimental manipulation of
perceived threat and food quality to characterize effects on behavioral
adaptations and tradeoffs. Project outcomes will lead to enhanced understanding
of risk-aversion foraging and its association with fitness by testing
expectations from risk allocation theory. This project partners with the Detroit
Zoological Society and will involve public engagement opportunities through the
production of a multi-lingual children book on fear and a middle-school adopt-a-
coyote program as well as video series showcasing scholars of color doing
science in urban environments. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Cities have emerged as a
unique and risky habitat for wildlife, as urbanization and land cover conversion
rates continue to increase worldwide. To date, the science of risk management
remains largely disjointed across theories, outside urban environments, and
narrowly focused on subordinate species, which constrains application to species
“at the top” of the food web. By using coyotes as a model system that exhibit
high levels of behavioral plasticity, this research will inform how an apex
predator discriminates with risk-specific behavioral responses and how resource
availability mediates the type and strength of such responses. This research
integrates non-invasive camera surveys to estimate changes in temporal overlap
and occupancy with human pressures across 25 urban parks as well as
environmental DNA (eDNA) and isotopic ratios to assess diet at the population-
level in Detroit, Michigan. To account for individual variation, differences in
home-range, movement, and activity budgets will be determined from radio-collar
data obtained from 12 adult coyotes. The project also involves two experiments
to determine how threat frequency and resource availability influences the
management and response of coyotes to risks. This project partners with the
Detroit Zoological Society and will involve public engagement opportunities
through the production of a multi-lingual children book on fear and a middle-
school adopt-a-coyote program as well as video series showcasing scholars of
color doing science in urban environments. Ultimately, this research is at the
frontier of behavioral and urban ecology, and will elucidate risk assessment,
discrimination, and mitigation strategies of apex predators in cities – a newly
emerging environment where 81% of America’s population
reside.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.