* 2042796
* CAREER: Neural circuit mechanisms of inference: how brains learn and use hidden structure
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Christine Constantinople, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,100,000.00

Remarkably, animals can exhibit sophisticated behaviors in novel environments,
despite having limited experience with them. How does the brain make inferences
about the underlying statistics and generative structure of environments, and
use those inferences to guide behavior? While specific brain regions have been
implicated in this capacity, it is unclear how patterns of neural connections
and activity in these regions mediate inference and sophisticated reasoning.
This project delineates the neural circuit mechanisms spanning multiple brain
regions by which animals make inferences and use those inferences to guide their
behavior. The research group of this study has recently developed a high-
throughput behavioral training facility for rats that trains dozens of rats
(~60) per day on sophisticated cognitive behaviors. The group leverages this
high-throughput approach to relate individual differences in ratsâ€™ strategies to
differences in neural connectivity and neural activity recorded during behavior.
In parallel, the principal investigator develops a workshop for high school
students in New York City that applies lessons from neuroscience, psychology,
and economics to improve financial literacy and decision-making. Financial
literacy provides a unique outreach opportunity for increasing awareness of
neuroscience research and communicating cutting edge neuroscientific results to
the broader public, in the context of a highly salient and relatable topic:
personal finance. While the research project seeks to understand the neural
mechanisms by which brains make inferences to guide decision-making, the
educational activities synergistically seek to educate students about the
neuroscience behind their economic choices, and empower them to make better
ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines whether and elucidates how
neurons in the lateral orbitofrontal cortex (lOFC) make synaptic connections
with genetically-defined cell types in the dorsomedial striatum (DMS) in service
of model-based reinforcement learning. Rats are trained on a novel task with
hidden structure that, if inferred, provides a clear behavioral read-out of
model-based reasoning. Viral tracing, multi-regional paired recordings during
behavior, and projection-specific recordings and inactivations are deployed to
identify the dynamics and connectivity of subcircuits within the lOFC that
generate model-based inferences. These experiments are performed in dozens of
rats, and leverage individual differences in behavior to identify projection-
specific prefrontal subnetworks that subserve model-based reinforcement
learning. The project provides a circuit- and synaptic-level understanding of a
core computation, that of an economic reference point against which outcomes are
evaluated, compared, and chosen, in rats that infer reference points according
to an internal model of the task. The results of this work will have broad
implications for the fields of neuroscience, psychology, and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.