* 2042239
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of Anomalous Transport Phenomena During Evaporation from Nano-Engineered Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Vladimir Ajaev, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2024
* USD 225,000.00

This project focuses on transport phenomena leading to unexpectedly high
evaporative fluxes at nano-engineered surfaces such as nanoporous membranes and
nanofin surfaces. Design and optimization of such surfaces is important for
diverse thermal management applications from electronics cooling to defense,
including profound social and health impacts related to the use of high-powered
wearable and portable electronic devices. The project also contains educational
and outreach components, such as “Touching Nano”, an interactive software that
will interface real-time molecular dynamics simulation data with a haptic force
feedback device to teach size and scale effects in nano-transport to school
children, undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
objectives of the proposed work include (i) bridging the gap between the recent
experimental results on evaporation in nanostructured surfaces and theory of
thin film evaporation by quantification of interfacial transport from surface
adsorbed layers and revision of the conventional thin film evaporation models;
(ii) Utilization of two independent (bottom-up and top-down) numerical modeling
approaches and validation of their predictions by leveraging experiments
conducted using high-speed and high-resolution measurements. Novel development
and testing protocols will be implemented using an experimental platform by
integrating Surface Plasmon Resonance and confocal scanning microscopy
techniques to measure the transient evaporation mass flux along with high-
density temperature nano-sensor arrays for local temperature measurements; (iii)
Design and optimization of nanofin and nanoporous surfaces for enabling the
highest possible rates of heat transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.