* 2042454
* CAREER: Analysis and Numerics for the Dynamics of Fluids under Magnetic Forces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Franziska Weber, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 180,062.00

While invisible to the eye, magnetic fields contribute to many phenomena in
nature and aspects of daily life, such as ocean tides, solar flares, or electric
motors. Additionally, they are used to manipulate materials for industrial
applications like precision sensors, liquid-metal cooling of nuclear reactors,
or magnetic drug targeting. The goal of this project is to study several
mathematical models involving fluids forced by magnetic fields, and develop
numerical algorithms for their simulation on a computer. This will benefit
practical applications in engineering and in physical and biomedical sciences.
Educational components targeting students at the high school, undergraduate and
graduate level, are integrated with the research activities. The research
program includes projects suitable for graduate and undergraduate research.
Curriculum development for undergraduate courses in computational mathematics,
and outreach to high school students in the form of an interdisciplinary math
and engineering summer camp, will be undertaken. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is the mathematical investigation of three important
problems motivated from science and engineering. The first is the numerical
simulation of liquid crystals subjected to magnetic fields, which are used in
LCD screens. The second deals with mathematical aspects of magnetohydrodynamics
turbulence in order to gain more insight into the emergence and existence of the
magnetic field of the earth. The third problem concerns the question of how
experimental data affects mathematical models: Probabilistic tools will be
employed to develop algorithms for uncertainty quantification in compressible
flows applications. These problems are described mathematically by nonlinear
systems of mixed type partial differential equations (PDEs). The mathematical
treatment of these systems requires the development of new analytical techniques
and innovative algorithms for their simulation. The finite difference and finite
volume schemes constructed in this project will be analyzed with mathematical
tools such as energy estimates, compensated compactness and relative entropy
methods to prove robustness and convergence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.