* 2042260
* CAREER: INTEGRATING FORM AND FUNCTION IN THE COEVOLUTION OF COPULATORY TRAITS
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Patricia Brennan, Mount Holyoke College
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 08/31/2026
* USD 499,909.00

This CAREER project addresses the structure, function and coevolution of male
and female reproductive structures in snakes. Reproductive structures perform
the most critical function for the evolutionary success of a species. However,
fundamental knowledge, particularly of the mechanical functions of reproductive
structures in females and how they interact with male structures during
reproduction, is lacking. This project uses an integrative approach that
includes developing new analytical tools to explain the physical properties of
reproductive structures, particularly how the tissues are arranged, and how they
perform their functions. Snakes are an excellent model system in which to
address these questions, because they have diverse ecologies and mating systems
that can be leveraged to test hypotheses about how these forces shape the
morphological and functional diversity of reproductive structures and their
interactions. The principal investigator will train a number of undergraduate
students, targeting recruitment of students from groups underrepresented in
science. These students will learn a range of biological techniques, develop
skills in mathematics and engineering, and complete publishable thesis projects.
The students will also participate in the creation of a podcast to disseminate
knowledge about reproduction to the general public and will prepare 3-D printed
materials for an exhibit at Mount Holyoke College. The project will involve
participation and training of a post-doctoral scholar who will help mentor
students. The principal investigator will develop a Faculty Seminar involving
diverse Humanities and Biology professors from five regional colleges to foster
cross-disciplinary conversations and to develop a new interdisciplinary
undergraduate course on biological and social aspects of reproduction; the
course materials will be made available to others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
integrative project examines male and female reproductive morphology in snakes
to understand how biomechanical, morphological, and sensory features affect
function and coevolution of copulatory structures that have a direct mechanical
interaction. The project develops a comprehensive framework for the study of
genital coevolution, by explicitly including analysis of female copulatory
structures which are often not considered in this type of research. The project
uses high-resolution 3-D shape measurements, materials science-based
characterization of reproductive tract tissues, and quantification of sensory
innervation of genitalia to examine snake copulatory organs and genital shape
covariation between males and females, as well as their integration with life
history traits. The integration of these multiple data streams to test specific
hypotheses provides a novel framework to differentiate among mechanisms of
genital coevolution that remain difficult to disentangle. The project is led by
a Latina junior faculty member at Mount Holyoke College, a gender-inclusive
women’s college that serves a diverse student body and has a strong track record
of sending women to PhD programs in the life sciences. This research will
increase engagement of undergraduate students of color in science by supporting
summer research programs aimed to increase participation in honors theses
leading to publication. Students will participate in a combined biology and
mathematics independent research experience in collaboration with faculty from
the Math Department. In addition, a postdoctoral researcher will be mentored in
all aspects of running an independent laboratory at a liberal arts college.
Students and the post-doc will travel to national conferences to present their
research every year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.