* 2042346
* CAREER: Sheared stratified turbulence: novel mechanisms and models of complex wave-vortex interactions that impact our environment
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Andrew Bragg, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Environmental turbulent flows are strongly influenced by stratification of air
or water density, complex interactions between shearing motions, internal waves,
and turbulence. Such flows may be categorized as Sheared, Stably Stratified
Turbulence (SSST). Understanding SSST is crucial for a plethora of environmental
problems, such as accurately describing vertical mixing in ocean circulation
models, which are key for climate predictions, for weather forecasting, for
predicting the dispersion of pollutants in the atmosphere or harmful plankton
blooms in water systems. However, many fundamental questions about the physics
of SSST remain, and robust, physics-based models are lacking. These issues must
be addressed in order to make progress in predicting SSST and its role in
environmental applications. This research will lead to new discoveries about the
fundamental physics of SSST, and the development of predictive models for
solving environmental flow problems. Outreach and education activities will
include undergraduate summer projects, exciting and interactive new lessons and
mini-projects for K-12 children, and public lectures that explain the
fascinating and important subjects of turbulence and complexity science through
connections with art. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While aspects of SSST have been
investigated, recalcitrant fundamental questions remain. When both
stratification and shear are large, the flow may be composed of patches of
turbulent and non-turbulent motion. How this “patchy” behavior
originates/interacts with the kinetic and potential energy cascade mechanisms,
and its implications for the transport of scalars and particles, remains a
frontier to be confronted here. The research objective is to provide
transformative insights into the fundamental mechanisms governing the energy
cascades, intermittency, mixing efficiency, and particle transport in SSST,
through new analysis, models, and Direct Numerical Simulations. Specific goals
are - Goal 1: Conduct a new analysis of the kinetic and potential energy cascade
mechanisms using filtering and slow-fast manifold decompositions to unravel
contributions from internal waves, mean-shear, and nonlinearity. Goal 2: Use new
Navier-Stokes-based, Lagrangian models for the filtered fluid velocity and
density gradients to capture the nonlinear term exactly and which are robust for
arbitrary Reynolds and Prandtl numbers. Goal 3: Develop new models of particle
transport, that extend and apply the models of Goal 2 to predict multi-scale
clustering and particle orientations. One of the undergraduate summer internship
projects will involve coupling the models of Goal 2 to the Weather Research and
Forecasting (WRF) model to predict turbulence at scales not resolved by WRF and
explore the impact of variations in large-scale flow conditions on these
unresolved scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.