* 2042544
* Collaborative Research: A multiplexed microbiosensing platform for understanding real time neurotransmitter dynamics in the brain
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Stephanie Schuckers, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2024
* USD 295,905.00

Neurotransmitters (NTs) are responsible for biological and physiological
functions controlling mood, memory, behavior and coordination in the brain.
Understanding NT dynamics is essential to understanding brain function but the
means by which specific neurotransmitters achieve their behavioral effects is
still largely unknown and requires accurate, real-time quantification in brain
structures. To meet this challenge, in this project funded by the CBET,
Biosensing program of the CMMI division, a collaborative team of biosensing
experts, computer engineers and neurophysiologists at Clarkson University and
the White River Junction VA Medical center are developing novel electrochemical
enzyme biosensors that can measure multiple NTs with increased accuracy with
little or no false detection. The biosensors will be integrated with statistical
and machine learning methods and will be used to study the neurochemical
environment in a rat model of Parkinson’s Disease. The research will enhance
education and training of life sciences and engineering students at Clarkson
University who will work synergistically with the team of investigators to
develop next generation biosensing technologies for monitoring neurotransmission
in the brain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop biosensing devices
that incorporate NT-specific materials and electrode surfaces for in vivo
monitoring of neuronal activity. The research team will engineer an oxygen-rich
nanoarchitecture containing an enzyme-like biomimetic catalyst and NT-specific
enzymes, stabilized within a conductive network and develop automatic
fabrication procedures to ensure scalable and reproducible manufacturing of
these biosensors. These materials will be designed to ensure long-term
bioactivity and operability for recognition of specific NTs and are expected to
improve our ability to study the complex neural mechanisms involved in signaling
in the brain. Research will involve the following tasks: 1) develop selective
NT-specific nanostructures with high durability and sensitivity for enzyme-based
microbiosensors that can measure dopamine, glutamate and acetylcholine, 2)
computational work to produce predictive fingerprint models of NT dynamics using
electrochemical data, and 3) in vivo work to determine the temporal profile of
changes in NT concentrations during high frequency stimulation in normal and
‘hemi-parkinsonian’ animals. Educational activities will involve 1) student
participation in research and dissemination through presentations and
publications, 2) hands on education though implementation of a biosensing module
in the new interdisciplinary Biomedical Engineering and Biomedical Science and
Technology degree programs at Clarkson, 3) sites and virtual visits and
demonstrations of neuromonitoring and neurostimulation experiments in live
animals at Dartmouth College. The broader impacts of this work include potential
societal benefit from the discovery of new NT-specific materials and the
development of novel biosensing tolls that could be used broadly by the
biomedical community for studying neurochemical changes in the brain, as well as
the education and training of students who will be uniquely trained to tackle
grand challenges in neuroscience and device
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.