* 2042353
* CAREER: Enantioselective Syntheses of Organoboron Compounds via Transition-Metal Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Ming Chen, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 685,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Ming Chen of Auburn University is studying new ways to make organoboron
compounds, which are important chemical building blocks. Professor Chen and his
research group are developing reactions to make molecules with two distinct
boryl groups on the same carbon atom (diboryl reagents) with control of
handedness or stereochemistry and then to sequentially and selectively utilize
each boryl group to attach new molecular fragments to the central carbon. This
strategy has the potential to facilitate modular access to novel molecular
building blocks that are valuable to organic synthesis, material science, as
well as the agrochemical and pharmaceutical industries. Professor Chen and his
team are also engaged in outreach activities through the Auburn University
Summer Science Institute to provide K-12 students with hands-on research
opportunities and an introduction to chiral molecules (non-superimposable mirror
images like right- and left-hands) to help boost motivation in pursuing careers
in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)-related
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chiral, non-racemic organoboron compounds are
important building blocks in organic synthesis, material science, and medicinal
chemistry. The versatile synthetic utility of chiral organoboron compounds
provides an excellent platform for further derivatization to generate valuable
downstream products for chemical synthesis. Dr. Chen and his research group are
developing new asymmetric transformations to prepare chiral, non-racemic
organoboron compounds from 1,1-bisborylalkanes with two chemically distinct
boryl groups. A cobalt-catalyzed hydroboration is also being studied to access
enantioenriched 1,1-bisborylalkanes to support the investigation of these
compounds as building blocks for more complex organoboron structures.
Fundamental studies on the reactivity of 1,1-bisborylalkanes with two chemically
distinct boryl groups are expected to provide insight into how to best leverage
the properties of these reagents to access classes of enantioenriched
organoboron compounds that are not accessible through current methodologies.
These activities are providing an excellent training ground in modern,
stereocontrolled synthetic chemistry for a diverse group of graduate and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.