* 2042208
* ADVANCE Catalyst: Improving Gender and Foreign-Born Equity among STEM Faculty at the University of North Dakota
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Carolyn Ozaki, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 274,571.00

University of North Dakota will implement an ADVANCE Catalyst project to conduct
an institutional self-assessment of existing inequalities among its STEM
faculty, particularly as experienced by women, racial and ethnic minorities, and
foreign-born individuals. These demographic groups constitute over half of the
STEM faculty at UND. Existing differences in salary and tenure and other
employment conditions hinder individual, and consequently institutional,
advancement. To better understand the complex and important sociocultural
processes and policy structures that generate these relative and objective
disadvantages among its STEM faculty, UND will use an intersectionality
perspective that analyzes how individuals who self-identify with multiple social
statuses simultaneously interact within an organization that systematically rank
orders social groups, from promotion and tenure to laboratory space. UND will
use the information from the institutional self-assessment to design a five-year
strategic plan that promotes sustainable equity in its STEM disciplines and may
serve as a reference point for non-STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
two-year project aims to identify the types of, extent of, and reasons for,
inequality through a range of methodological techniques, including university
analytics, policy analysis, faculty surveys, focus groups, and individual in-
depth interviews. The different strategies are advantageous with respect to
identifying objective individual differences, organizational arrangements, and
intergroup perceptions, all of which aim to shed light on the context of
inequality and the mediating sociocultural processes that link micro social
identities with systemic advantage or disadvantage. With these results, the
broader scope of the project, which is to communicate sustainable strategies for
equity in STEM disciplines, may contribute to the advancement of current and
future STEM scholars. An additional implication centers on advancing theoretical
understanding of dynamic social identities in the workplace, knowledge which may
empower diverse individuals and improve research and labor market innovations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty
in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist
in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate.
ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional equity assessments
and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic plans at an academic,
non-profit institution of higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.