* 2042304
* CAREER: Linking Molecular Structure and Lubrication Mechanism in Halogen-Free, Boron-Based Ionic Liquids
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Filippo Mangolini, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 05/31/2026
* USD 603,518.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant supports
fundamental research on ionic liquids (ILs), which are salts with tunable
composition and melting point below 100ÂºC. Owing to their unique properties and
good lubrication performance, ILs are promising additives for cutting fluids
used in green manufacturing approaches. A critical challenge in the use of ILs
for lubrication purposes is the lack of understanding of the relationship
between IL molecular structure and lubrication performance. This grant supports
fundamental research aiming to fill this knowledge gap by identifying the
lubrication mechanism(s) of a class of tribologically-promising ILs, namely
halogen-free, boron-based ILs (hf-BILs), and establishing links between their
molecular architecture and tribological properties. The new knowledge emerging
from the project enables the rational design of ILs with enhanced lubrication
performance, which will contribute to increasing the U.S. industrial
productivity and competitiveness by improving the sustainability and efficiency
of machining processes. Complementary to the research goal of this project are
the educational programs which will increase the inclusion of veterans in STEM
programs and collaborate with elementary school teachers to increase the
exposure of K-5 students to science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research project addresses two major open questions in the use of ILs for
lubrication purposes: a) the dependence of the lubrication performance of ILs on
the IL chemistry; b) the interrelationship between the stress-induced,
thermally-activated reactions of ILs at sliding interfaces, the
chemistry/structure of the resulting surface reaction layers, and IL molecular
structure. The study involves the synthesis of ILs with systematically varied
composition, which are used in in situ atomic force microscopy experiments
involving well-defined, single asperity sliding contacts. This experimental
framework tests the hypothesis that the growth rate of sacrificial, low-shear-
strength layers at sliding interfaces increases exponentially with normal stress
and temperature but is significantly affected by the IL molecular structure. The
ex situ characterization of the chemistry and nanomechanical properties of the
reaction layers shed light on the interrelationship between chemical changes in
hf-BILs, their chemical reactivity at sliding interfaces, and properties of the
tribologically-induced reaction layers. The findings of this study are
instrumental in enabling the predictive design, development, and implementation
of ILs with enhanced tribological properties in next-generation lubricants for
advanced manufacturing methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.