* 2042213
* CAREER: Mechanistic Understanding of Organic Carbon and Nitrogen Transformations in Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Ziming Yang, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 02/28/2026
* USD 344,632.00

Hydrothermal fluids venting from the oceanic crust are a source of organic
carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) for the deep biosphere. Organic C and N provide food
and energy for the deep ocean ecosystems and play an important role in oceanic C
and N cycles. This project will explore how organic C and N are generated and
degraded in seafloor hydrothermal systems, and in particular, how Earth-abundant
minerals and metals influence the fate and transformations of these organic
compounds. This project aims to establish an interdisciplinary program between
geoscience and chemistry, with a strong integration between research and
education. The proposed project will provide training and research opportunities
for both undergraduate and graduate students, especially for those from
underrepresented groups and ethnic minorities. The education plan will also
contribute to the development of a new graduate program in geoscience and
environmental science at Oakland University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying
the hydrothermal chemistry and pathways of organic C and N is vital for
understanding the input and output of deep ocean organic inventory, uncovering
food and energy sources in the deep biosphere, and predicting future C and N
emissions from the oceanic lithosphere. Unlocking these hydrothermal pathways
and mechanisms represents the first step toward a comprehensive understanding of
organic C and N synthesis, transformation, and cycling in the deep ocean. This
project will develop new chemical approaches and model organic systems to
address the knowledge gaps in: (i) C-C bond breaking and forming mechanisms and
hydrothermal redox chemistry of organic C; and (ii) hydrothermal synthetic
pathways of organic N and their interconversions. The research will particularly
focus on the roles of minerals and dissolved metals in organic transformations
in hydrothermal fluids, and a suite of analytical techniques including gas and
liquid chromatography, high-resolution mass spectrometry, Raman spectroscopy,
electron microscopy, and X-ray diffraction will assist in investigating these
organic-inorganic interactions. In addition, the project will innovatively
bridge hydrothermal geochemistry to sustainable chemistry via incorporating the
concept of sustainability into geoscience research. Geomimicry toolbox that uses
Earth-abundant materials as green catalysts/reagents for chemical synthesis will
also be further developed to address challenges in industry and expand the range
of sustainable resources for green chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.