* 2042834
* A microscale study of turbulent flow in the porous medium and at the porous/fluid interface: combining LES, DNS, and Neural Network approaches
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Andrey Kuznetsov, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 320,393.00

The dynamics of microscale turbulence transport in porous media (at the scale
smaller than the pore size) is not understood even for simple porous matrix
geometries. This understanding requires connecting turbulence transport in
porous media to the microscale flow physics. This project will elucidate the
flow physics of turbulence inside a porous medium. Preliminary results show that
microscale turbulence in porous media constitutes a new physical phenomenon. The
scientific outcomes of the project will have significant socio-economic impacts
by enabling an improved systemic modeling of porous media flows. Immediate
applications include combating COVID-19 through the design of more effective
filter layers in masks. There are also long-term applications in energy storage
and conversion. The project will also contribute to education and training of
students. The investigator plans to engage undergraduate and high school
students in the development of computational fluid dynamics code and neural
network models. The exposure to lab work and academic research will allow the
undergraduate and high school students improve their computational skills and
help cultivate their research interests. Finally, the research results will be
incorporated into the investigator's graduate class on advanced convection heat
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from this project are vital for
modeling turbulent flow associated with engineering porous media. The flow field
will be phase-averaged to obtain the true turbulence statistics decomposed into
non-stationary mean and fluctuation components. The proposed research will also
combine traditional direct numerical simulation and large-eddy simulation with
neural networks to interpret and model the flow physics of microscale
turbulence. Neural networks will be used because they are superior to
traditional methods for processing the intricate, inhomogeneous structure of the
flow field. Supervised classification will be used to visualize 3D turbulent
structures which are classified according to their turbulence kinetic energy and
anisotropy. A supervised autoencoder will be used to develop the first
macroscale model that takes the contribution of the inhomogeneous microscale
flow field into consideration. By implementing the proposed methodology with
rigorous parameter variation, the observations about the microscale flow physics
will lead to understanding the main features of microscale
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.