* 2042030
* I-Corps:  Behavioral Biometrics for Preventing and Detecting Digital Frauds
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Daqing Hou, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project empowers
eCommerce owners, digital bankers, and healthcare service providers alike with a
behavioral biometrics-based solution and service to more effectively prevent and
detect fraudulent activities after account takeovers. The demand for online
fraud detection is strong due to the continuing growth of eCommerce, banking,
and healthcare, and the rising of account takeovers and related fraud. Moreover,
industrialized fraudsters can weaponize a vulnerability in matters of minutes
once a breach is exploited, and exponentially scale it to cause high financial
loss for organizations and more importantly, undermine their credibility and
reputation. Unfortunately, currently organizations rely on dedicated fraud
detection teams to perform manual reviews to handle fraudulent cases, which is
both time consuming and costly; they also rely on simplified, rules-based
approaches for fraud detection, which unfortunately result in a high number of
false positives and ultimately hurt customer experience and retention.
Leveraging behavioral biometrics collected unobtrusively when a user conducts
online business, the proposed innovation will provide additional user
authentication and thus help businesses prevent and detect more fraudulent
activities in a more reliable and effective fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project seeks to perform customer discovery of business entities such as
eCommerce owners, digital bankers, and healthcare service providers, to identify
the most valuable product parameters before formulating the proposed innovation
into a market-ready product. A common problem is that these businesses are all
obligated to safeguard user data and online transactions but are plagued by the
continuous stream of account takeover attacks on their IT systems and the
ensuing financial fraud. The proposed innovation produces a software solution
and service that provides additional capability of user authentication to help
businesses to significantly reduce such fraud despite of account takeovers. This
innovation distinguishes between users by leveraging behavioral biometrics that
unobtrusively capture a user's unique computing behavior, such as how they type
on keyboards or how they move the mouse. The proposed software product packages
state-of-the-art authentication algorithms so that existing business
applications can access them via API calls. In addition, the end user is
provided with full control over their own biometric data for privacy protection.
The technological implementation of the proposed approach uses JavaScript in the
web browsers and integrates with legacy applications at the server
end.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.