* 2042287
* CAREER: A Probabilistic Framework for the Nucleation of Recrystallization
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Victoria Miller, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 01/31/2026
* USD 343,282.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When metals are heated and deformed
into engineering components by processes such as forging, it is not just a
macroscopic shape change—the properties of the metal itself can be tuned by
controlling the local temperatures and deformation rates. These external
parameters can be used to control the material’s microscale structure
("microstructure"); however, the relationships are complicated as there are
numerous mechanisms simultaneously active. In this research program, PI Miller
uses statistical methods and machine learning to identify the most likely sites
in the material for the microstructure changes to initiate. The ability to
predict the initiation sites for microstructure changes can help to prevent
material failure during service in extreme environments, such as in aircraft
engines or powerplants. It can also be used to optimize materials processing
during manufacturing, potentially reducing the cost of metals processing. The
core concept of this research—measurement and quantification of the micro-scale
structure of materials—has been integrated into education and outreach modules
for use from middle school to university. Through partnerships with existing
programs at the University of Florida, the PI will distribute kits to middle
school teachers. These programs specifically target districts with a high
fraction of historically under-represented groups or a low socioeconomic status,
seeking to improve the diversity of students exposed to materials science early
in their academic careers. Additionally, digital versions of the modules
targeted to different age groups will be broadly disseminated through a relevant
professional organization, the International Metallographic Society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
program enables unprecedented control of solid-state microstructural evolution
during thermomechanical treatment by introducing a probabilistic framework for
the prediction of likely recrystallization sites. This is a key component of PI
Miller’s career-long goal of developing a quantitative, mechanism-based
understanding of the statistical accumulation of dislocations and deploy this
knowledge to define processing paths that result in microstructures with unique
properties. A priori prediction of likely nucleation sites allows for greater
fidelity in modeling of recrystallization-related failure mechanisms or the as-
recrystallized microstructure. The PI hypothesizes that the likelihood of
recrystallization at a given microstructural site can be captured by a
"recrystallization indicator parameter (RXIP)", similar to the concept of a
fatigue indicator parameter in fatigue and fracture. This dimensionless
parameter describes the probability of nucleation at a given microstructural
site by quantifying and weighting the contributions of local features that
promote or inhibit nucleation, e.g., curvature, slip system alignment, Schmid
factor, misfit, etc. The core concept of this research—measurement and
quantification of the microstructure of materials—has been integrated into
education and outreach modules for use from middle school to university. The PI
will partner with existing programs at the University of Florida to pilot and
iteratively refine physical kits through teacher training programs funded by the
Department of Education and the Cornell Lending Library of Experiments. For
broader dissemination, digital demonstrations and data-processing only versions
of the modules will be distributed as an educational tool through the
International Metallographic Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.