* 2042518
* CAREER: Computational methods to improve our understanding of the diversity of genomic structural variation
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Fereydoun Hormozdiari, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2026
* USD 397,483.00

Structural variations (SVs) are defined as medium and large genome
rearrangements. A growing body of evidence has shown that SVs are a major
contributing factor to diseases, complex traits, population genomics, and
evolution. However, there are many unknowns about SVs including their diversity,
complexity, distribution in a population, and exact impact in biology. The
recent progress on genome technologies, especially high-throughput sequencing
technologies, has provided an opportunity to investigate the complexity of SVs
in genomes. However, a lack of computational approaches for efficient discovery
and genotyping of different types of (complex) SVs has hindered our ability to
comprehensively study the complexity and diversity of SVs in genomes. The goal
of this project is to develop novel combinatorial methods to provide researchers
with necessary tools to better capture the diversity of SVs and their potential
biological impact. The results of this research will have application in a wide
range of foci in genomics, from evolution to disease. This project will also
achieve broader impact by providing training opportunities for both
undergraduate and graduate students interested in computational genomics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop novel computational methods
to address some of the main challenges in studying SVs. As part of this project,
novel combinatorial methods will be developed for efficient and accurate
genotyping of any SV using ever changing sequencing technologies. This project
will provide researchers with the necessary tools for ultra-efficient genotyping
of a set of polymorphic SVs in a large cohort of sequenced samples using short-
read sequencing technologies. Furthermore, novel mapping-free approaches for
comparative SV discovery using long-read sequencing data will be developed. This
will provide the necessary methods for studying the diverse set of SVs
(including hard to detect and complex SVs) in sequenced samples of any species
using these technologies. A combinatorial approach will also be developed to
predict the functional impact of SVs by altering the chromatin structure of the
genome. Finally, to establish the utility of these methods, these investigators
will analyze publicly available data from diverse sets of species using the
methods developed. The results of the projects will be available at
www.hormozdiarilab.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.