* 2042105
* AGS-PRF:  Warm Rain in Complex Coastal Terrain--Improving Process-level Understanding and Model Representation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Robert Conrick, Conrick, Robert John Cuson
* Fellowship Award
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/28/2023
* USD 130,880.00

Terrain-forced precipitation in coastal regions is sensitive to a variety of
factors, and the amount of precipitation that is produced remains difficult to
model and forecast. On the Pacific coast of the United States, this
precipitation can be a hazard though flooding and mudslides, but it also
provides a significant fraction of the water resources used for agriculture and
human consumption. This postdoctoral research fellowship project will improve
understanding of terrain-forced precipitation with the eventual goal of
improving forecast accuracy. The project will support an early career researcher
while also containing plans for community engagement to more broadly improve
public understanding of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
specifically for an analysis and modeling effort to improve understanding of
rain-producing microphysical processes, especially in areas with coastal
terrain. The 2015-2016 Olympic Mountains Experiment (OLYMPEX), based in coastal
Washington state, provided a wealth of data regarding precipitation over
topographically complex regions. The researcher plans to produce a comprehensive
description of warm rain processes offshore of and over windward slopes of the
Olympic Mountains by using radar retrievals to promote a three-dimensional
understanding of microphysics and precipitation production. The main sources of
data will be radar, satellites, disdrometers, and rain gauges. A set of case
studies of individual events will be conducted, and comparisons made to
numerical data from the Weather Research and Forecast
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.