* 2042694
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Variation in English Intonational Acoustic Phonetics from Grammatical Perspectives
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2025
* Sunwoo Jeong, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2025
* USD 206,574.00

Spoken language consists of multiple streams of information – including a
segmental stream (for example, the consonants and vowels that make up words,
suffixes, and prefixes) and a suprasegmental stream (such as the pitch,
amplitude, and timing that define stress and cadence) which is often called
"prosody". All speakers (consciously or not) know prosody can be used to
communicate meaning – a single sequence of words can be pronounced many ways,
often with importantly distinct meanings. Despite this, most formal and
computational linguistic investigations into meaning have primarily dealt with
meanings encoded by the segmental stream (in words, suffixes, and prefixes).
This project addresses this issue by exploring questions of how prosody and
meaning relate. For example, what sorts of prosodic changes map onto changes in
meaning? And what sorts of meanings? To explore these questions, the research
team makes use of contemporary empirical methodologies, analytic tools, and
formal theories, and particular attention is paid to intonational aspects of
prosody.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project encompasses three sets of experimental
tasks of speech production and speech perception. Each of these sets of tasks
corresponds to a different domain of semantic/pragmatic meanings: Common Ground
management, Information Structure signalling, and scope ambiguity resolution.
Different semantic/pragmatic contexts correspond to different experimental
conditions, and these contexts are presented to participants as visual, comic
strip-like, stimuli. These experiments measure prosodic characteristics of
speech (e.g., pitch movements, coded with a recently developed annotation system
called PoLaR) and/or reactions to speech (e.g., acceptability ratings). These
data are then subjected to quantitative analysis as well as to formal linguistic
models to uncover how different meaning-based conditions and different prosodic
patterns are related. This work has important implications for improving human-
computer interactions that are mediated by natural language, as well as for
deepening understanding of various speech pathologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.