* 2042479
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Code-switching in Three Groups of Bilinguals
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Ariel Chan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2023
* USD 17,588.00

Language provides people with a unique means to conceptualize the world and
interact with their fellow members in a society. How is this process affected
when individuals speak more than one language? Although more people in the world
are bilingual than are monolingual, bilingualism has only recently received
attention from researchers, particularly in the U.S. Studies of language
processing have shown that the interactions across the bilingual's two languages
produce dynamics that are not evident in monolingual speakers, such as code-
switching across the two languages in the middle of a sentence. In addition, the
rich sociocultural contexts in which bilinguals use the two languages
distinguish them from monolingual speakers. To better understand how bilingual
language processing is influenced by the context in which languages are used,
this dissertation project will examine the code-switching behavior in bilinguals
who use both languages with a high level of proficiency but who live in
locations in which the two languages are used differently. By demonstrating the
diverse competencies of bilingual speakers, this study will investigate the
cognitive benefits of bilingualism and contribute to the documentation of one of
the largest minority language communities in the U.S. and around the world that
has received little attention. The project will also support educational
diversity by engaging a group of undergraduate research assistants who are drawn
from the relevant bilingual community and who are often first-generation college
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An increasing number of studies show that there
is variation among bilinguals who speak the same two languages. Adopting both
psycholinguistic and sociolinguistic approaches, the planned research examines
bilingual speakers' practice of code-switching in three groups of highly
proficient bilinguals, with different contexts for the two languages they speak
: homeland bilinguals raised in a context in which one language is dominant
while being educated in the other language; heritage bilinguals raised in a
household that speaks one language within an environment where the other
language is dominant; and immersed bilinguals raised in an environment in which
one language is dominant but later moved for higher education to an environment
in which the other language is dominant. By examining code-switched word
perception and production, this study will address three questions: (1) How do
variations across language acquisition and sociocultural context affect
speakers' perception and production of words in the code-switching context? (2)
What do code-switching practices reveal about the impact of linguistic
structure? (3) What do differences in code-switching patterns across the three
types of bilingual speakers reveal about the interaction between sociocultural
context, cultural identity, cognition, and language processing broadly? Using
code-switching as a tool to examine bilinguals' speech processing holds the
promise of revealing fundamental principles of language, cognition, and social
interaction that may require a revision of the traditional understanding of
culture and context in language use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.