* 2042011
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Advancing Pedagogy and Inclusivity through Multimodal Upper Level Geophysics Education
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2021
* Stefany Sit, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2021
* USD 5,556.00

Today, classrooms are challenged by the need for flexible learning due to the
COVID-19 pandemic and for dynamic course materials that attract students from
diverse backgrounds and allow them to thrive. This EAGER initiates a pilot
effort to develop research-based learning modules for the upper level geophysics
classes that can be used by geophysics programs across the country. At the upper
level there are fewer resources for teaching and course development guides, and
there is a notable drop off in students from underrepresented groups. This EAGER
will explore how to implement high quality teaching materials to create a more
equitable and inclusive learning environment that can build student confidence
and allow students from a variety of diverse backgrounds to succeed. The PI team
brings together complementary academic expertise facilitating the creation of a
broad range of teaching modules and the convergence between upper level
geophysics students and students in core STEM disciplines such as physics,
mathematics, and computational science, which are fundamental disciplines on
which global seismology relies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will design
multimodal pilot modules on (1) Elastodynamics, (2) Seismology and Plate
Tectonics, and (3) Near surface seismological methods and applications to the
developed environment. The work has the potential to transform the traditional
teaching mechanisms for upper level geophysics courses, and be used as a means
to attract underrepresented groups to geophysics who may not have otherwise
considered Earth science as a research focus. The project will incorporate
flipped course design and mastery learning to help build student confidence,
with the materials created in such a way that they are adaptable to both on-line
and in-person teaching. In addition, the team will further develop inclusivity
through the creation of biographies featuring scientists from underrepresented
groups that will be incorporated directly into the learning modules. The pilot
modules will specifically focus on upper level geophysics courses to address and
support students transitioning from undergraduate training to graduate school or
to professional work in the geosciences, thus extending the pedagogical support
from lower level to upper level geophysics teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.