* 2042362
* CAREER: Chromatin Folding from the Bottom-up
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Bin Zhang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 01/31/2026
* USD 645,000.00

Chromatin, the seemingly inert structure that packages the DNA, plays an active
role in regulating gene expression. Multiple chromatin states with distinct
patterns of histone modifications and selective protein accessibility have been
identified. This research will lead to a detailed structural characterization of
the differences between these states to reveal the chromatin structure-function
relationship and elucidate the molecular mechanisms of gene regulation. Insights
from this study could inspire the design of new cancer therapeutic strategies
using small molecules to target chromatin regulators and modulate chromatin
structure to restore normal gene expression profiles. Technological innovations
from our study will be of great interest to the more general modeling community.
They can be applied to other systems with activated processes that occur over a
wide range of timescales. Molecular simulation techniques used in the research,
when combined with virtual reality toolsets, could produce demonstrations for a
memorable and interactive learning experience. These demonstrations could
inspire students’ interest in chemistry and molecular biology. They will be
incorporated into an outreach program and presented to middle school and high
school students in the Greater Boston area.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to study the chromatin organization using a near-atomistic force
field with implicit solvation. The force field's accuracy in describing protein-
protein and protein-DNA interactions will be systematically improved. Using
advanced sampling and free energy computation algorithms, we will compute the
most probable pathways for fibril structure formation to study the dynamics and
mechanism of chromatin folding. Comparing the stability between fibril
structures with that of disordered configurations along the folding pathway may
provide insight into the challenge of detecting the 30nm fiber in situ. The
research will also investigate the impact of key protein regulators on chromatin
organization by characterizing both facultative and constitutive
heterochromatin. High-resolution structures for protein/chromatin complexes can
elucidate how chromatin regulators mediate long-range nucleosomal contacts for
histone mark propagation. They can further reveal how phase separation drives
chromatin into condensed but dynamic conformations revealed in FRAP experiments.
Close collaboration with experimental groups will also prove crucial for
validating model accuracy and falsifying predictions. The proposed research will
significantly enhance our understanding of the molecular determinants that drive
chromatin folding in vitro and situ and help move chromatin modeling towards
quantitative and predictive directions. This project is supported by the
Molecular Biophysics and Genetic Mechanisms Clusters of the Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences Division in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.