* 2042655
* CONFERENCE: HSI Strategic Innovation Summit for Advanced Research and Instruction in Artificial Intelligence and Quantum Information Sciences (HSI-SIS)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Damon Tull, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,923.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program) and the Division of Graduate Education, this
conference project aims to bring together professors, senior university
officials, industry experts, and government sponsors, to explore ways to
accelerate research in artificial intelligence (AI) and quantum information
sciences (QIS), and introduce learning activities in AI and QIS early in the
education of students at Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs). AI and QIS will
have long term and cross-cutting influence on future technologies, education,
the workforce, and our lives. HSIs are colleges and universities with more than
25% Hispanic student enrollment, educating more than two-thirds of America’s
Hispanic students. Connecting faculty and senior leadership at HSIs, and
minority serving institutions in general, to the networks and resources to
support national needs, is expected to increase the number of underrepresented
science and engineering students who will contribute to the future STEM
workforce. The expected outcomes of this conference will be roadmaps that define
pressing research questions and create educational initiatives in AI and QIS for
the institutions in attendance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
California, Davis will host the HSI Strategic Innovation Summit for Advanced
Research and Instruction in Artificial Intelligence and Quantum Information
Sciences (HSI-SIS). HSI-SIS, a virtual, two-day summit, will assemble computing
faculty, institutional leaders, sponsoring agencies, and industry, to exchange
ideas and foster partnerships to enhance HSI participation in the latest AI and
QIS initiatives. HSI-SIS will use a 3-pillar interactive feedback model for
convening groups across 3 areas: curriculum, research, and broadening
participation. This model will be used to identify ways to develop or expand
infrastructures needed to perform research and include AI and QIS into first and
second-year college students’ experiences. The long-term goal of this summit is
to increase the number of graduates from HSIs who are equipped with hiring-level
knowledge of deep learning, big data analytics, quantum computing, and other
evolving topics in AI and QIS. Pre- and post- event surveys will be developed
and administered, with a report produced by an evaluator to understand the
impact of this summit on meeting participants and their institutions. Meeting
outcomes will be disseminated at relevant convenings of, for example, the
Computing Alliance of Hispanic-Serving Institutions, the accrediting board’s
ABET Symposium (which includes the Computing Accreditation Commission),
Conference for Undergraduate Research, the American Educational Research
Association, the Association for the Study of Higher Education, and the Hispanic
Association of Colleges and Universities. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.
The project is being supported by funds contributed by the Division of Graduate
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.