* 2042311
* CAREER: Interface-mediated Ionic Transport in Mismatched Complex Oxide Heterostructures: Role of Misfit Dislocations
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Pratik Dholabhai, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 05/31/2026
* USD 270,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports integrated
research, educational activities, and outreach initiatives focused on utilizing
computer simulations to advance the fundamental understanding of the movement of
ions at interfaces in oxide heterostructures. In solids, this ionic movement
offers the basis of operation for electrochemical energy conversion and storage
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxide heterostructures are an intriguing
class of nanomaterials created by joining two dissimilar oxides that are
significantly smaller than the width of a human hair. As a whole, they exhibit
superior properties than their individual constituents, and they are responsible
for novel applications in numerous nanoscale energy technologies. A vital
application of oxide heterostructures is their use as solid oxide fuel cell
electrolytes, which facilitate easy passage of oxygen ions for generating
electricity in the cell. At these electrolyte interfaces, crystallographic
imperfections known as "misfit dislocations" are formed to alleviate the strain
that would otherwise arise when joining two materials with dissimilar sizes.
Misfit dislocations at interfaces of oxide heterostructures are often held
accountable for behaving as pathways for oxygen ion transport. However, standard
approaches cannot predict if misfit dislocations enable faster movement of ions
or slow them down. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop advanced
theoretical and computational tools to understand the fundamental ionic
transport mechanisms at misfit dislocations. Various computer models will be
implemented to trace the motion of ions and predict the fundamental atomic scale
factors that lead to either faster or slower movement of ions across oxide
interfaces. This basic knowledge will be instrumental for designing fuel cell
electrolytes based on advanced oxide heterostructures that exhibit enhanced rate
of ion mobility and thus better performance. The computational framework
developed in this research will serve as a paradigm for future design of
superior electrolytes and accelerate the use of environmentally friendly solid
oxide fuel cell technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of this
project will be tightly integrated with the educational activities to increase
public awareness regarding alternative energy resources and their benefits to
the society. This project will train the next-generation renewable energy
workforce by offering interdisciplinary training to graduate and undergraduate
students. Students will receive opportunities to visit national laboratories to
gain valuable experience in modeling of energy materials and broaden their
horizons. Female and minority students will be recruited to engage in renewable
energy research, thus promoting underrepresented communities in science and
engineering by providing pathways into and retention in advanced degrees.
Research output will be used to develop undergraduate and graduate coursework,
and short courses and simplified computer demos for K-12 students, thus reaching
a broader pool of students interested in energy research. The computational
tools developed in this project will be made accessible to the scientific
community as open source software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports integrated research,
educational activities, and outreach initiatives focused on developing a
multiscale computational framework to advance the fundamental understanding of
ionic transport mechanisms across interfaces in oxide
heterostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxide heterostructures, an intriguing
class of nanomaterials fabricated by joining two dissimilar oxides, have
numerous applications in a wide range of energy technologies. An important
application of oxide heterostructures is their use as solid oxide fuel cell
electrolytes. The research component of this project is motivated by
experimental observations: Several experiments report that misfit dislocations
ubiquitous at interfaces of mismatched oxide heterostructures enhance ionic
transport, while some experiments suggest that they slow down ionic transport.
Conventional approaches cannot predict the atomistic origin for this enhancement
or impediment since the basic atomistic mechanisms governing ionic transport at
misfit dislocations are not well understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this research is to elucidate the fundamental ionic transport mechanisms at
misfit dislocations by studying their intricate interaction with point defects
and dopants. The principal hypothesis is that the fundamental nearest neighbor
model of defect diffusion will come into play at misfit dislocations. The PI and
his team will build a novel multiscale framework that integrates density
functional theory and molecular dynamics to study defect thermodynamics with a
new kinetic lattice Monte Carlo model to study defect kinetics at misfit
dislocations. This multiscale framework will assist in establishing the basic
connection between misfit dislocation structure and functionality. The research
will advance the state of knowledge pertaining to the crucial role of interfaces
and extended defects in shaping new functionalities of oxide heterostructures.
The fundamental science thus unraveled will offer strategies to ultimately
control the impact of misfit dislocations and guide future design and synthesis
of next-generation solid oxide fuel cell electrolytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research component of this project will be tightly integrated with the
educational activities to increase public awareness regarding alternative energy
resources and their benefits to the society. This project will train the next-
generation renewable energy workforce by offering interdisciplinary training to
graduate and undergraduate students. Students will receive opportunities to
visit national laboratories to gain valuable experience in modeling of energy
materials and broaden their horizons. Female and minority students will be
recruited to engage in renewable energy research, thus promoting
underrepresented communities in science and engineering by providing pathways
into and retention in advanced degrees. Research output will be used to develop
undergraduate and graduate coursework, and short courses and simplified computer
demos for K-12 students, thus reaching a broader pool of students interested in
energy research. The computational tools developed in this project will be made
accessible to the scientific community as open source
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.