* 2042853
* SBIR Phase I:  Operational Seasonal Forecasting of Environmental Data using Machine Learning and Statistical Methods
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Carlos Gaitan Ospina, BENCHMARK LABS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project is to
extend weather forecasting capabilities beyond the current 14-day window. The
project will leverage publicly available information from global gridded
seasonal forecasting numerical models and in-situ observations from sensors for
the Internet of Things (IoT) for a machine-learning based forecasting system
that delivers seasonal and sub-seasonal forecasts. This asset-specific
information is needed as weather, especially extreme weather events, continue to
affect various industries and a wide range of individual assets. Accurate
forecasting can improve logistics, supply-chain, labor scheduling and affect
seed selection of a variety of crops important in the US economy, including
stone-fruits, apples and pears. In addition, the technical innovation has the
potential to improve local estimates of environmental variables relevant to the
agricultural, energy and insurance industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will bring into operation an in-situ seasonal and sub-seasonal forecasting
system of environmental variables. The proposed innovation includes systems and
methods for environmental forecasting using data-driven analog forecasting
methods based on machine learning approximation of Koopman operators, governing
the evolution of observables in nonlinear dynamical systems. The project will
improve the forecasting accuracy beyond that of coarse resolution dynamical
models by exploring sub-monthly timescales and a by expanding the predictor set
beyond the traditional sea surface temperature used by most statistical
approaches. Specifically, the project will create transfer functions that link
the coarse resolution predictors from the dynamical models with local
information (predictands) from IoT enabled environmental sensors. Furthermore,
the project will apply and assess this framework for seasonal and regional
predictions of the U.S. Pacific Northwest and Hawaiiâ€™s climate such as
cumulative precipitation or onset of the given season, and probabilistic
forecast of extreme events such as frosty days or drought, across a range of
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.