* 2042918
* Real-Time and Adaptive Chemical Kinetic Model Reduction Coupled with Turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Peyman Givi, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 01/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Combustion of fossil fuels remains the primary means of providing power needs of
high energy density applications in this country and all industrial nations. The
chemistry of combustion involves a very large number of molecular species. To
fully understand the physics of combustion, one must know how these species
behave and evolve in a given operating condition. This is a dauting task,
especially if the operation involves turbulent mixing. The interaction between
chemical reaction and turbulence is very complex and has been a subject of
intense study for over many decades. In recent years, easier access to
supercomputing resources has enabled the research community to develop
sophisticated and efficient computational tools to model complex chemical
reactions. However, the computational power remains far less than what is needed
for including turbulent transport of chemical species. This project will
systematically address these limitations in order to enable modeling of
processes involving chemical kinetics and unsteady dynamics. Such problems are
also common in biology, atmospherics, climatology, and medicine. This project
will also help train a new generation of researchers with the most modern tools
in applied mathematics and computer science for modeling and simulation of
engineering problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is
to develop an on-the-fly reduction scheme that enables modeling and simulation
of reactive turbulent flows involving a very for a large number of species. The
thesis of this research is predicated on the fact that the compositional
elements in turbulent reactive flow are highly correlated, and these
correlations can be exploited to reduce the computational cost of solving
species transport equations. The methodology presents a fundamentally different
workflow from current practice in chemistry reduction schemes, in that the
correlated structures are extracted on the fly. For that reason, it offers the
following advantages: (i) The reduction is not done a priori; therefore, it is
general and not restricted to a particular operating condition. (ii) It accounts
for the full turbulent chemistry interactions with inclusion of all of the
important reactions. (iii) The resulting manifolds are suitable for turbulent
reactive predictions in all flame regimes. (iv) The method facilitates a
significant reduction of the computational cost and storage as compared to those
currently in use. This research crosses several disciplines: turbulent
combustion, data driven modeling, reduced order modeling, and high-performance
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.