* 2042120
* I-Corps: Remote COVID-19 Diagnosis Using a Smart Device
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Jo Woon Chong, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the
development of a remote COVID-19 diagnosis technology using a smart device.
Current testing methods are face-to-face, expensive, time-consuming, and unsafe
for healthcare providers and patients due to high transmission risk. In
addition, getting test results is time-consuming and often requires a wait time
of several days to get the result. The proposed technology provides a remote,
safe, instant, reliable, portable, and cost-effective diagnostic test for
COVID-19 that may be readily shared with healthcare providers. This technology
may be extended to disease detection and health management via
telemedicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of the COVID-19 diagnosis solution that may remotely detect COVID-19
symptoms. This innovation uses sensor technology and biomedical engineering
technology to acquire a subject’s physiology data pertinent to COVID-19 symptoms
using a smart device. The technology uses signal processing, image processing,
and machine learning algorithms to detect COVID-19 symptoms from the subject’s
physiological data acquired by the sensors in the smart device. In addition, the
technology includes forming a database from those who test both positive and
negative to increase the accuracy of COVID-19 symptom
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.