* 2042882
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Preparing Future Cybersecurity LeADERS through Applied Learning Experiences
* EDU,DGE
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Hongyi Wu, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 01/31/2026
* USD 2,502,427.00

The Old Dominion University (ODU) School of Cybersecurity will address the need
for qualified government workers in cybersecurity fields through its CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) Cyber LeADERS program. This initiative will align
faculty from ODU, Tidewater Community College (TCC), and Thomas Nelson Community
College (TNCC) to fully integrate applied experiences into the academic
programming of 24 SFS students. The SFS students will include community college
students planning to transfer to ODU and ODU students seeking Bachelor’s and
Master’s degrees in cybersecurity. Using ODU’s LeADERS program as a foundation,
participating SFS Cyber LeADERS will receive guidance and experiences that put
them on a pathway to a government career in cybersecurity. More specifically,
LeADERS are encouraged to take courses or engage in applied experiences related
to leadership, academic internships, diversity, entrepreneurship, research, and
service learning. Students chronicle and demonstrate their learning through the
development of an electronic portfolio (e-portfolio), which is represented by
the lower case “e” in the acronym “LeADERS”. The combination of an
interdisciplinary academic program that employs active learning and other high
impact teaching strategies is expected to produce experienced graduates who are
prepared to enter a wide range of governmental careers and address the national
need for skilled cybersecurity professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Offering both
undergraduate and graduate programming, the ODU School of Cybersecurity is one
of the first interdisciplinary cybersecurity schools in the country. The partner
institutions, TCC and TNCC, both offer associate’s degrees and have been
designated as National Security Agency (NSA) Centers of Academic Excellence
(CAE) in Cyber Defense Education and ODU’s Cyber Operations major has been
designated as an NSA CAE in Cyber Operations. ODU’s interdisciplinary
undergraduate and graduate cybersecurity programs include courses in law,
policy, leadership, interdisciplinary writing, criminology, philosophy,
information technology, computer science, and computer engineering. The approach
will leverage ODU’s innovative LeADERS program, which incentivizes students to
participate in integrative and applied learning experiences. In addition to
developing an e-portfolio, completing internships, and engaging in service
learning, SFS Cyber LeADERS will participate in mentoring activities, structured
research projects, interdisciplinary programming, and other activities provided
by the School of Cybersecurity and the Commonwealth Cyber Initiative. Student
co-curricular activities will be coordinated with the Coastal Virginia Center
for Cyber Innovation that is part of the Commonwealth Cyber Initiative (CCI).
This project has the potential to inform future models of transferring students
between NSA CAE designated programs. The project will also contribute to
improving the diversity of the government’s cybersecurity workforce as African
American and Hispanic students make up more than half of ODU cybersecurity
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.