* 2042700
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Secure Embedded Systems
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Michel Kornegay, Morgan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 2,200,200.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Connected embedded systems are prevalent throughout
society and range from baby monitors to smart cars to critical infrastructure.
Hackers frequently target embedded systems for exploitation, threatening
individual security and privacy and critical pieces of infrastructures. As a
result, there is a growing need for cybersecurity professionals prepared to
protect these systems. To address this need, Morgan State University (MSU) will
provide students with a unique educational program in secure embedded systems
that integrates active learning experiences and mentoring. The Secure Embedded
Systems Scholarship Program (SES2) will recruit, mentor, and financially support
students pursuing bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral degrees with a keen
interest in cybersecurity. SES2 utilizes peer and professional mentoring, active
and experiential learning activities, and a comprehensive, secure embedded
systems curriculum to prepare students for government careers in cybersecurity.
The establishment of a pre-freshman through doctorate student pipeline is a
unique aspect of the program. SES2 will enhance MSU's strategic vision of
preparing a diverse workforce that can meet the government's cybersecurity needs
and help to protect the nation's critical infrastructures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cybersecurity Assurance &amp; Policy (CAP) Center at
MSU is a university-wide research center hosted by the Electrical and Computer
Engineering department. MSU students can pursue multiple academic program
offerings in cybersecurity, including Bachelor of Science in Electrical
Engineering with Cybersecurity Track, Master of Engineering in Cyber
Engineering, and Ph.D. in Secure Embedded Systems. . The proposed SES2 program
will prepare students by combining an innovative curriculum in secure embedded
systems, challenging research opportunities, active and experiential learning
opportunities, and peer and professional mentoring. In addition, students will
benefit from access to industrial relationships with partner companies and
unique opportunities to engage in collaborative team projects with government
partners, including the National Institute of Standards and Technology, MITRE,
and the National Security Agency's Laboratory for Telecommunication Sciences.
MSU is a Historically Black College and is well-positioned to address the
critical need for a diverse cybersecurity workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program,
which funds proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in
cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a
superior cybersecurity workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients
are required to work in cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal
Government organization for the same duration as their scholarship
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.