* 2043095
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): Strengthening Cyber Community and Pathways Using Research Experiences, Technical Training and Institutional Outreach
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* David Benjamin, Pace University New York Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,427,050.00

This project supports the continuation and expansion of Pace University’s
CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program. Over the next five years, the
program will recruit new SFS scholars to study cybersecurity in order to support
the government in securing its cyber defense and operations. The new scholars
will come from the bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral levels of the
institution’s academic programs in computing and from community college
partners, including the State University of New York - Westchester Community
College, a minority-serving institution. Students will form a community of
cybersecurity scholars who inspire each other and work together in various
activities, including workshops, competitions, and conference participation. In
addition, the program will support the cybersecurity student club as a means to
further broaden the community. The SFS scholars will engage in research,
technical training, and professional certification preparation to ensure they
will be ready to meet rapidly evolving cybersecurity challenges. Lastly, the
project will continue its commitment to diversity through institutional outreach
to K-12 schools and community colleges and focusing on recruiting students from
underrepresented minority backgrounds and on women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pace
University’s program has produced cybersecurity professionals working at various
levels of the government. The objectives of the project are 1) to produce twenty
or more cybersecurity professionals who will enter the government workforce upon
graduation, 2) to prepare cybersecurity professionals with diverse educational
backgrounds through five cyber pathways, 3) to support diversity in the field by
providing opportunities for minority students and women, 4) to mentor non-SFS
institutions and their students through institutional partnerships, 5) to
strengthen collaboration between Pace University and its government partners,
and 6) to generate interest in becoming cybersecurity professionals among
broader student populations both at Pace University and at partner institutions.
The program consists of five cyber pathways ranging from an associate’s degree
to the PhD. The pathways allow the program to prepare scholars differently based
on their background and interests. In addition, scholars will engage in research
projects that reinforce their cybersecurity competencies. These research
projects, with support from the cybersecurity scholars, have the potential to
contribute to research innovation in the areas of open-source intelligence, data
analytics, machine learning, computer forensics and robotics. Professional
development activities will expose scholars to cybersecurity professionals from
academia and industry. This project will use competency-based advising, using
digital badging to provide scholars with a roadmap aligned to their strengths
and interests and with the NICE Cybersecurity Workforce Framework. This advising
approach, accompanied by the five cyber pathways, curriculum integration and the
research program, will enable the project team to recruit and prepare students
to satisfy diverse needs for cybersecurity professionals in the
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.