* 2043250
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): Advancing a Successful Cybersecurity Education and Workforce Development Program
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Luc Longpre, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,752,724.00

The central role of software in the operation of defense, energy, communication,
transportation, and manufacturing systems makes it increasingly important that
these systems are designed in a way that integrates cybersecurity principles.
The renewal of the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program at the
University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) will continue the support of highly
qualified students, in particular Latinx and female students, who complete a
cybersecurity-focused program and graduate with the ability to apply disciplined
software development principles and processes. UTEP is uniquely positioned to
contribute to efforts to improve diversity in the cybersecurity workforce due to
the population it serves, which includes Hispanic, first generation, and lowest
income quartile students. UTEP students do not fit the “traditional” student
profile of a full-time student transitioning directly from high school to a
four-year college or university as many students transfer from local community
colleges and pursue their education part-time. Over the past five years, UTEP
has made significant advances in developing cybersecurity educational programs,
research, and outreach activities at UTEP and beyond. These efforts have
resulted in recognitions including the National Security Agency designation as a
Center of Academic Excellence in both Cyber Defense and Cyber Operations (only
one of 21 across the nation), as well as the designation as an Army Research
Lab-South remote campus in cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UTEP’s SFS
Scholars complete rigorous educational programs with a focus on cybersecurity
and complement the knowledge gained in the classroom through significant
involvement in cybersecurity research, training, competitions, and hands-on
activities. All UTEP SFS Scholars are also required to engage in service to the
community to build cybersecurity awareness and capabilities among UTEP students
and beyond. The goals of the UTEP SFS program are to 1) recruit and retain at
least 30 students into UTEP’s Master of Science in Software Engineering and the
doctoral computer science programs; 2) graduate students who will enter the
workforce with the ability to transfer state-of-the-art cybersecurity techniques
and approaches into practice; 3) place students in government positions that
utilize their knowledge and capabilities in cybersecurity, with a focus on
placing graduates in federal/executive entities; and 4) advance cybersecurity
awareness and competencies among K-12 students and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.