* 2043168
* Collaborative Research: A Digital Manufacturing Platform to Democratize Biological Tissue Access Using Smart Two-Photon Polymerization
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Chenhui Shao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 04/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Universal access to biological tissues for fundamental studies is limited,
thereby constraining both the type and number of experiments that can be readily
carried out. This is a particularly challenging problem for U.S. colleges and
universities that do not possess the necessary infrastructure to further their
tissue engineering research. This grant supports research to mitigate this
challenge by extracting and storing tissue-structure information, which will be
made broadly accessible to researchers, teachers, and students at any
institution. The detailed information is obtained through the sequential process
of imaging (reading), digitally storing, and laser-based manufacturing (writing)
of the tissue architecture. Data obtained from this process will be uploaded
onto an accessible data repository to facilitate broad dissemination. The
project will also provide a platform to recruit students from diverse and
underrepresented groups in STEM fields to learn about the emerging field of
advanced biomanufacturing through strategic partnerships with local university
chapters of engineering and science-based student affinity groups. Aspects of
the research methods, as well as materials learned, will also be incorporated
into both new and existing courses, and lecture modules developed for a new
interdisciplinary online course on the freely accessible nanoHUB.org
cyberinfrastructure platform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award utilizes a
convergence of disciplines to create a digital manufacturing platform, based on
two-photon polymerization (TPP), that will enable cloud-based reading and
writing of scaffolds with varying complexity in 3D collagen-fiber organization.
Long-wavelength (near-infrared) optical pulses and long-working distance
objectives will be used to enable penetration depths greater than 5x that has
previously been reported, resulting in printed scaffolds volumes of 1 mm x 1 mm
x 0.5 mm, which would be on the same scale as biologically relevant 3D in vitro
models. The use of optical wavefront-shaping technology enables parallelization
and reduction of writing artifacts, respectively. The machine-learning-based
process control framework advances the fundamental understanding of TPP process
variability, and facilitate high-throughput, high-fidelity biomanufacturing of
scaffolds. This research contributes to the fields of statistics and machine
learning by linking these disciplines to complex, unique data structures and
types in biomanufacturing, as well as permit prototyping of collagen-based
mechanical metamaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.