* 2043904
* LS Conference Award: Computer Science and Law Workshop
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2021,12/31/2022
* David Pennock, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 12/31/2022
* USD 28,500.00

As sophisticated computation has become essential in more and more fields of
human endeavor, interdisciplinary research has grown in importance and value.
The interdisciplinary research area of computer science and law has risen to
prominence in the last two years. To make progress, researchers must co-develop
computational techniques and legal principles, using the strengths of each
approach to compensate for weaknesses in the other. Doing this requires building
shared understanding, methodology, and vocabulary to improve communication and
catalyze research across the two disciplines. In November 2021, the DIMACS
Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science will hold a
second workshop on the topic of co-development of computer science and law,
following a successful first online workshop held in November 2020. The second
workshop will emphasize technology platform content moderationâ€”a topic that sits
squarely at the interface of the two disciplines and must address the
fundamental tension between freedom of speech and truth in media. Content
moderation poses massive technological challenges arising from the sheer volume
of social media content, the imperfect nature of automated moderation, and the
impracticalities of manual moderation. The problem is equally daunting from a
legal and constitutional perspective that must simultaneously address the rights
and responsibilities of citizens, companies, organizations, law enforcement, and
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to the study of computer science and
law is the replacement of one-sided approaches with an emphasis on co-
development. Ideally, computer scientists and lawyers should collaborate to
create legislative language and technical definitions that are consistent and
that capture broadly agreed-upon principles. For example, technical
considerations and definitions embedded in legislation should reflect what is
technically feasible and not mandate vague or impossible requirements, while
implementations of such requirements should produce sufficient evidence that
their behavior sits within stated requirements and thus complies with the law.
Existing work on privacy, fairness, freedom of expression, community standards,
and other essential social values demonstrates the importance of co-development
and provides examples of both success and failure. This DIMACS workshop will
continue the development of a research community in computer science and law and
will have impact on a broad range of societal issues including communication
among citizens. The workshop will support participation by a demographically and
intellectually diverse group of researchers reflecting a broad range of
interests: computer scientists, statisticians, law scholars, and social
scientists studying sociotechnical assemblages and their governance. Enabling
the co-development will support the creation of computing-oriented
sociotechnical systems of societal importance including the online media
platforms serving as the public squares of today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.