* 2043084
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): Cross Disciplinary Cybersecurity Education for a Modern Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Marc Liberatore, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2026
* USD 3,236,410.00

This project supports the continuation of the CyberCorps® Scholarship for
Service (SFS) program at the University of Massachusetts Amherst (UMass
Amherst). This program leverages the University's advanced programs to achieve
its main objective of educating and training cybersecurity researchers and
professionals for service career placement. It will support approximately 31
undergraduate and graduate level scholars, primarily from Computer Science and
Electrical and Computer Engineering. The program aims to foster successful
cohorts through strong peer-mentoring, faculty advising, and academic and
professional support. By educating cybersecurity scholars across disciplines,
this program will help create a new generation of professionals and researchers
to address novel and challenging problems facing society and industry. These
students will help to modernize the Executive-branch workforce, advance science
and technology at government laboratories, and secure our national defense.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will prepare students for successful careers
in cybersecurity through a combination of strong curricula, personalized
professional development, interdisciplinary enrichment, unique research
opportunities, and high-quality teaching. The program will continue to actively
recruit and retain women and underrepresented minorities into UMass Amherst’s
undergraduate and graduate programs as a primary objective. The program includes
faculty and staff external to UMass Amherst to create a pipeline of students
from minority-serving institutions, including Bunker Hill Community College,
Holyoke Community College, and Springfield Technical Community College, as well
as Brookdale Community College, which is a National Science Foundation Community
College Cyber Pilot site. The program also includes a partnership with the
Collaborative for Educational Services, a Massachusetts-based non-profit that
recruits high school students for STEM careers, particularly those who are
students of color or are low-income. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds
proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and
aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity
workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.