* 2043272
* Collaborative Research: The Relationship between El Ni√±o-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Diversity and Tropical Cyclones in a Hierarchy of Models
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Christina Patricola, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/29/2024
* USD 221,003.00

Hurricanes are the most devastating natural disasters facing many coastal
communities in the US and around the world. Since these storms, also called
tropical cyclones (TCs), develop in warm air over warm sea surface temperatures
(SSTs), it is natural to ask wether they will pose a greater threat as the world
warms. Basic thermodynamics implies that the strongest hurricanes in a cooler
climate are weaker than their counterparts in warmer climates, and this
strengthening with warming has now been detected in the observed record. But the
strengthening of the strongest storms may be just one of a number of changes in
TC activity that result from warming. One question here is how TC activity will
be influenced by the pattern of ocean surface warming, as observations and
simulations both show an uneven pattern of tropical ocean warming accompanying
greenhouse gas increases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some clues to how the regional
distribution of SST increases is likely to affect TC activity can be found in El
Nino events(also called El Nino/Southern Oscillation events, or ENSOs), in which
the equatorial Pacific warms between the west coast of South America and the
dateline. Prior work by the Principal Investigators (PIs) and others shows that
the influence of El Nino events on TCs is different depending on whether the El
Nino-induced warming is greatest in the central or eastern equatorial Pacific.
In particular they found that all El Nino events can suppress TCs in the
Atlantic, but the central Pacific "flavor" of El Nino is substantially more
effective at Atlantic TC suppression. The El Nino-TC connection can thus serve
to guide expectations as to how the regional pattern of future SST warming might
affect TC activity. It may also have direct implications if future warming
affects either the frequency and intensity of El Nino events or the relative
occurrence of the central and eastern Pacific flavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work
performed under this award examines the El Nino-TC relationship and its
implications for climate change using a combination of climate model
simulations, machine learning techniques, and hybrid dynamical-statistical
models. One goal of the project is to develop "emergent constraints" that
connect the El Nino-TC relationship found in climate models to the relationship
found in the observed record. If models show a strong connection between the El
Nino-TC relationship in present-day climate and future TC change, then future TC
change projections from models which correctly simulate the present-day El Nino-
TC relationship are more credible. The physical mechanisms through which El Nino
events influence TC activity are also explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
has societal value given the risks posed by TCs for coastal communities and the
value of guidance as to how that risk might change in the future. The project
also builds a research network spanning three institutions from the eastern
seabord to Hawaii. In addition to its scientific value the network helps to
overcome the geographical isolation of the University of Hawaii, a minority-
serving institution. The project also supports a graduate student in Columbia
University's Bridge to the PhD program, which helps college graduates from
underrepresented groups with the transition to graduate school. Finally, the PIs
are developing an online class titled "Machine learning applications across
weather and climate" which will take advantage of tools and results from the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.