* 2043616
* Collaborative Research - Characterizing the Role of Spatial Thinking in Learning Hydrogeology: A Classroom, Field, and Expert-Novice Study
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Joel Moore, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 04/30/2024
* USD 150,567.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the education of
geoscience and environmental professionals in hydrogeology, which focuses on
understanding the flow of surface and subsurface water. The nation has a growing
need for hydrogeologists to ensure clean and sustainable water sources. As they
work to understand and predict the movement of water and other molecules,
hydrogeologists must integrate three-dimensional data from maps, wells, and
other sources. Research in some STEM disciplines shows that training students in
three-dimensional thinking can improve their persistence and retention,
especially among women and students of color. However, the specific three-
dimensional thinking skills used in hydrogeology have not yet been defined,
hampering efforts to train students for hydrogeology careers. This project will
explore how expert versus student hydrogeologists use three-dimensional spatial
thinking skills to predict the movement of water and contaminants. It will
define the critical three-dimensional thinking skills used by professional
hydrogeologists to solve water and contaminant flow problems. It will then
characterize how students use (or do not use) these skills when learning
hydrogeology in the classroom. This information is a critical first step toward
creating teaching materials to better prepare a diverse and capable
hydrogeologist workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogeology deals with surface
and subsurface water flow and the transport and fate of environmental
contaminants within those flows. Graduates with hydrogeological training are in
high demand in the environmental and geosciences labor market. In addition to
requiring specialized knowledge, hydrogeology is a heavily visuospatial
discipline that requires practitioners to integrate disparate data from maps,
cross-sections, stratigraphic columns, geological and numerical models, well
data, water level data, and contaminant concentrations. These data are
synthesized to form a three-dimensional model of the subsurface and groundwater
flow and contaminant transport. This project seeks to address two research
questions: (1) What spatial thinking skills are essential to successfully
completing a site characterization and contaminant plume task in hydrogeology?
(2) How do students use these skills while completing this task in classroom and
field settings? Question 1 will be addressed using a dominantly quantitative,
descriptive, cross-sectional expert-novice study in which upper-level
undergraduate students, graduate students, and industry and academic experts in
hydrogeology complete a suite of spatial thinking and knowledge tests, as well
as a site characterization hydrogeology task based on typical classroom
exercises. Question 2 will be addressed with a qualitative investigation of how
students complete the same hydrogeology task in field and classroom contexts
using (or not using) spatial thinking skills identified as essential in Question
1. An external advisory board of experts in cognitive science, geoscience
education research, and hydrogeology will advise and provide feedback on the
course of the research. Study results will be disseminated in conference
presentations and journals. Project deliverables will include identification of
specific spatial thinking skills essential to hydrogeology, development of a
hydrogeology concept inventory to assess student knowledge, and an evidence-
based model of how students use hydrogeology knowledge and spatial thinking to
solve water and contaminant flow problems in field and classroom settings. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.