* 2043535
* Enhancing Community College STEM Teaching through Faculty Development
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Heather Price, Bellevue College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high quality undergraduate
STEM education by improving a faculty professional development model focused on
improving STEM teaching. Specifically, this project will support faculty to
create STEM course modules that include issues of civic engagement and equity.
Community colleges provide STEM education to an increasingly diverse audience.
This education needs to provide students with STEM knowledge and skills, as well
as equip them with both systems thinking and civic engagement tools. To achieve
these educational goals, the project will help faculty improve their STEM
courses by developing course modules that address the science of environmental
change within a socially relevant context. This approach may provide a scalable
model for strengthening STEM teaching and learning, while simultaneously
broadening participation in STEM and preparing citizens and scientists for 21st
century challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon and extends
Bellevue College’s and North Seattle College’s successful faculty professional
development efforts by incorporating two curriculum design frameworks: Science
Education for New Civic Engagement and Responsibility and the Equity Ethic. The
project will develop a new professional development curriculum intended to
support STEM faculty as they modify environmental lessons to build students'
civic engagement, systems thinking, and equity-minded skills. The project will
analyze the effectiveness of this course module approach versus a traditional
whole-course approach. The project plans to engage at least 35 STEM faculty and
1,800 STEM students at the two colleges, with the potential to impact many more
faculty and students if the model is adopted by other institutions. The design
of a transferrable professional development curriculum will benefit from the
two-college collaboration, which enables the investigators to pilot, revise, and
implement the curriculum in two different community college contexts. These two
contexts will enable large scale implementation and comparative evaluation. The
project team will conduct a comprehensive evaluation of the effects of the
professional development curriculum on STEM teaching, the impact of the modules
on student learning outcomes, and how incorporation of the modules affects
students’ systems thinking skills as related to civic engagement and equity. All
materials and results from this project will be broadly disseminated at local,
regional, and national scales. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. This Level 1 project is situation within the Engaged Student Learning
track, through which the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.