* 2043981
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B Strengthening Community Resiliency through Extended Reality (XR):  Engaging Small, Under-Resourced Municipalities in Planning & Execution of Government
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Christopher Spilling, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,986.00

Remote governing as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic creates the need for new
approaches to effective collaboration and governance during crisis, particularly
for under-resourced municipalities that typically have had limited access to
novel technologies. The proposed research aims to determine whether Extended
Reality (XR) is an effective technology for engaging under-resourced
municipalities in disaster response planning and governing. By understanding the
distinct needs of small municipalities and exploring the effectiveness and
potential limitations of XR technology, this research aims to develop a pilot XR
toolkit with potential for wider replication. This work has the potential to
make meaningful cross sector contributions to advances in promising applications
of XR, municipal governance, and disaster planning toward reducing disruptions
in governance in future pandemics or other disasters.

While XR technology has been deployed in disaster preparedness and community
planning, it has primarily been used by the federal government and states,
counties, and cities. This work aims to explore the effectiveness of using this
novel technology in small under resourced municipalities, particularly those
with high levels of fragmentation. The proposed research pilot will engage
leaders from 24 under-resourced municipalities in North St. Louis County,
Missouri in the use of novel XR technologies for governing during pandemics or
other disasters. Specifically, this project will introduce the technical
capabilities and immersive virtual experiences of XR as a viable tool to assist
in planning for, facilitating and maintaining government operations during
disasters. Methods will include implementation meetings and concept mapping to
determine municipal priorities to ensure the technology is focused and developed
based on input of communities most impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Stage 1
will bring together government, industry, nonprofit, and academic stakeholders
to identify community assets and vulnerabilities that may affect the acceptance
and adoption of XR technology while jointly co-developing a full proposal for a
Stage 2 research pilot. Stage 2 will jointly explore and test novel uses of XR
technologies for effective governance during pandemics or similar disasters and
identify potential applications of XR with the potential to reduce interruptions
in government activities during times of disruption. This research aims to
define the user requirements toward developing an XR tool kit that will allow
small municipalities to plan for and respond to future disasters or pandemics.
XR will enable municipalities to maintain city assets, plan public works
projects, and maintain and improve public health and safety in real time. This
project is supported by the CIVIC Innovation Challenge program Track B -
Resilience to Natural Disasters: Equipping Communities for Greater Preparedness
and Resilience to Natural Disasters through a collaboration between NSF and the
Department of Homeland Security.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.