* 2043572
* Dissertation Grant: Land-grant scientists and controversial agricultural biotechnologies
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Bruce Lewenstein, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 03/31/2022
* USD 16,400.00

Agricultural scientists face public concerns around genetic engineering, which
range from questions about human and environmental safety to corporatization of
the food supply. These researchers must find ways of navigating such scrutiny
while attempting to make their research meet both scientific and social goals.
This project will examine how academic scientists at land-grant universities,
with their explicitly public focus, adapt their work with controversial
technologies to meet multiple scientific and public needs. A social scientist
will be embedded with the agricultural researchers to help them reflect on their
roles, responsibilities, and the meanings of their work. This will be used to
produce a new model of embedded social science research that encourages
scientists to think critically about the ethical impacts of their work in real-
time. The result will be an enriched understanding of how scientists manage
research programs involving controversial technologies and new methods for
embedding social scientists in natural science groups to enhance benefits for
science and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine interviews
and ethnographic observations to produce a set of in-depth profiles of
agricultural scientists working in genetic engineering at land-grant
universities to capture differing versions of what it means to be a land-grant
scientist working in the context of emergent agricultural biotechnologies. It
situates these analyses within the deeply intertwined histories of the land-
grant university, democratic professionalism, the political economy of
biotechnology, and scientific ideas of control and responsibility. This
theoretical framework challenges the boundaries of traditional studies of
laboratory practices by considering the interactions scientists engage in beyond
their “contained” field trials and walled-off laboratories. This project
contributes to scholarship on emerging technologies and laboratory studies, and
on public engagement and democratic theory. It also creates an embedded model of
social scientists in natural science research that uses ideas from science and
technology studies to open opportunities for engagement with scientists about
the social and ethical dimensions of their research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.