* 2043264
* CAREER: Understanding Grain Boundary Strength via Adaptive Electron Backscatter Diffraction and Multiscale Analysis
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Josh Kacher, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 01/31/2026
* USD 328,121.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;People have been using metals and alloys for
thousands of years and have constantly improved their strength and performance
through developing new ways to make them. This process of improving the metals
has relied largely on guess and check. Although people have become better at
guessing and faster at checking, the foundational knowledge to intelligently
design stronger, safer, more resilient metals is still missing. Part of the
challenge in improving metals and alloys is that their performance is dependent
on the type, density, and distribution of trillions of defects that are not much
bigger than a few atoms. Two important types of these defects are dislocations,
which allow metals to deform, and grain boundaries, which act as barriers to
dislocations as they move through the metal. The character of a grain boundary
influences how easily dislocations can move through the material, and in turn,
affects the strength of the metal. However, a direct link between the character
of a grain boundary and how strong of a barrier it is to dislocation motion has
not been established. By looking at grain boundaries at ultra-small length
scales of one millionth of a meter and smaller, this project will establish that
direct link. To do so, electron microscopes, capable of imaging materials down
to the level of individual atoms, will be used to see how dislocations
accumulate in the material near grain boundaries while the material is being
bent. Artificial intelligence (AI) will be built into the electron microscopes
in order to rapidly and automatically explore tens of thousands of grain
boundaries to obtain a statistical understanding of how grain boundary character
is connected to its strength. This understanding will be instrumental in guiding
the development of new metals and alloys that are stronger, safer, and longer
lasting in application. The broader outreach of this work includes integrating
high school students from underrepresented communities in a summer internship
research program. These interns will work closely with graduate students
supported by the program to investigate the strength of metals and will also
develop lesson plans incorporating virtual reality elements to take back to
their classes in the following school year. The summer internship will also
include visits to the Novelis research center, a global Al company with research
headquarters near Atlanta.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The
central role of grain boundaries has long been recognized in dictating the
mechanical behavior and failure susceptibility of metals and alloys. However,
efforts to understand how variations in grain boundary characteristics affect
material properties have been hampered by an incomplete understanding of what
determines the strength of individual grain boundaries. The purpose of this
project is to determine the characteristics that dictate grain boundary
strength, here defined as the barrier strength that grain boundaries pose to
dislocation propagation. A new adaptive remeshing electron backscatter
diffraction (AR-EBSD)-based approach will be developed, combining in-line
processing and automated adaptive grid remeshing to rapidly sample the tens of
thousands of grain boundaries needed to build a library to which machine
learning approaches can be applied. This approach will be coupled with
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterization and atomistic
simulations to correlate grain boundary strength with dislocation transfer
mechanisms. This coupled approach will facilitate an unprecedented exploration
of grain boundary space in terms of the number of grain boundaries investigated,
allowing rigorous grain boundary strength functions to be established. In
addition, the multiscale electron microscopy techniques developed over the
course of the proposed work will be a widely applicable addition to the
materials characterization toolbox in investigating material deformation under
ambient and extreme conditions. Furthermore, a pipeline for underrepresented
minorities to engage in STEM research will be created by a “visualizing science”
summer internship program for high school students from underrepresented
communities. These interns will work with graduate students supported by this
program to investigate the ductile fracture behavior of metals, learn mechanical
testing and characterization techniques, and visit the Novelis research center,
a global Al company with research headquarters near Atlanta. To enhance the
broader impact of this program, the interns will also develop lesson plans
incorporating virtual reality elements to take back to their high school
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.