* 2043494
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B Community Resilience Catalyst: Co-Designing an Integrated Participatory Mapping System for Enhancing Disaster Resilience through Community Engagement
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2021,09/30/2021
* David Carrasquillo-Medrano, HISPANIC FEDERATION INC
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

In September 2017, Puerto Rico, suffered catastrophic damage as category-5
Hurricanes Irma and Maria made direct landfalls on the island. The effect on
people’s health and safety was devastating and long-lasting. Due to climate
change, places like Puerto Rico are confronting more frequent and destructive
disasters; government agencies and offices at all levels are increasingly
grappling with the limitations of their resources and capacity to meet the needs
of these impacted communities. While individuals and community groups operating
outside of the official disaster management system demonstrate adaptability,
innovation, and responsiveness in contributing resources together with time,
knowledge, and skills, they have been largely undervalued, leading to the
marginalization of local information and knowledge in disaster risk reduction.
The goal of this project is to engage and empower individuals and communities to
become a more integral part of disaster resilience, specifically addressing the
structural and social barriers that will lead to improvement in allocation,
coordination, and delivery of relief services and
supplies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to enhance disaster resilience
and fill information gaps through development of a new participatory, community
mapping platform based on local information and knowledge. It will be developed
in Puerto Rico but can serve as a model for efforts in similar locations
including the Caribbean islands and the Gulf Coast of the US. The approach
brings together citizens, community-based organizations, disaster management and
aid agencies, government entities, the private sector, and research institutions
to co-design and pilot this user-friendly, reliable, and secure technology
platform, supported by collaborative data and governance structures. Integrating
community engagement, partnership building, and technology information systems,
this project will improve disaster resilience by strengthening community social
connectedness, improving local disaster information and knowledge inclusion, and
facilitating collaboration and coordination across stakeholders to achieve
disaster management goals. This project is in response to the Civic Innovation
Challenge program, Track B—Resilience to Natural Disasters—and is a
collaboration between NSF and the Department of Homeland
Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.