* 2043385
* SCC-Civic-PG Track A:Flexible Mobility-as-a-Service to Improve Post-Pandemic Regional Sustainability
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,09/30/2021
* Joseph Ferreira, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 49,994.00

This project's vision is to encourage sustainable mobility habits that can take
advantage of new mobility services. There are enormous debates over whether
emerging mobility services (like ride-hailing and bikesharing) are complementary
or competitive to public transit. This project believes it would be beneficial
to experiment with specific forms of Mobility-as-a-Service (MaaS) in the urban
core of a congested metropolitan area (e.g. Boston), wherein public transit can
focus on high-quality “mass” transit while allowing for emerging mobility
services to complement and feed into public transit. Modern ICTs can provide
travelers with a richer set of mobility alternatives that suit individual
circumstances and affordability. This project envisions a pilot program that
provides low-income workers in targeted communities with mobility service
bundles at subsidized costs. Low-income workers can then increase their use of
active mobility (which has health benefits) and multi-modal shared services to
access more opportunities. The MaaS model also provides tangible benefits for
the COVID recovery plan, wherein buses from low-demand routes can be repurposed
to better match demand on high-volume routes without eliminating options for
car-less individuals on the low-volume routes. This project hopes to learn how
preferences for different non-car services vary by time, circumstance, and
affordability, in order to extend our findings to the design of a long-term MaaS
model that can reverse the trend of rising car ownership in Metro
Boston.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has already analyzed public transit
ridership (from MBTA and Transit app) and commuting flows (from US Census
Bureau) to preliminarily identify communities and bus routes that are most
suitable for the pilot. Low-income commuters along identified bus routes will be
recruited to participate in a stated preference survey, which will used to
identify willingness-to-pay and willingness-to-switch for alternative (non-
private-car) mobility services. Such alternatives include overlapping commuter
rail routes (e.g. Fairmount Line), bikesharing, and mobility-on-demand (EZRide/
private shuttles/ ride-hailing). Based on the survey, this project will design a
randomized controlled trial that provides voucher programs for targeted
individuals. Subsidy levels could even be adjusted periodically based on real-
time peak-hour public transit overcrowding data provided by Transit app. MaaS
vouchers will be distributed among recruits during the pilot phase, and data on
real-time mobility choices will be collected for two months. Finally, this
project will evaluate the effectiveness of providing flexible MaaS at both the
individual level (e.g. sustainable mobility choices and increased accessibility)
and the system level (e.g. lower risk of overcrowding on high-volume bus routes
and lower car use). This project is supported by the CIVIC Innovation Challenge
program Track A. Communities and Mobility: Offering Better Mobility Options to
Solve the Spatial Mismatch Between Housing Affordability and Jobs through a
collaboration between NSF and the Department of Energy Vehicle Transportation
Office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.