* 2043244
* Collaborative Research:  Measuring the Long-Term Effects of California's 2004 Paid Family Leave Statute with U.S. Tax Data
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Martha Bailey, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 117,156.00

Paid family leave has been championed as a policy to reduce labor market
inequality and narrow the gender gap in wage earnings. California was the first
state in the nation to enact a paid family leave statute effective in July 2014,
but data have limited strong conclusions about the policy's impacts. This
research uses novel, large-scale Internal Revenue Services (IRS) tax data to
understand how California's paid leave policy affected parents' careers and
family structure over its first decade in existence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research uses large-scale administrative IRS tax data to quantify the effect of
California's 2004 Paid Family Leave Statute on the short and long-term labor-
market and family outcomes. The sample consists of the universe of tax-filers
allowing the investigators to follow individual mothers and fathers from 2001 to
2015, link to their children's exact date of birth using data from the Social
Security Administration, and examine changes in labor market outcomes in the
short-term (less than 1 year after her first birth), near term (1-5 years after
birth), and long-term (6-10 years after birth). In addition, this research
examines changes around first birth before the policy change took place as an
internal validity check. For both mothers and fathers, the investigators provide
novel evidence of how the 2004 Paid Family Leave Statute has impacted labor-
force attachment, employer transitions, and wage growth. In addition, the
investigators study how the Statute affected family structure, including both
marital stability and childbearing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.