* 2043724
* Acquisition of variation in child language learners
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Kathryn Schuler, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/28/2025
* USD 192,227.00

Children exhibit a remarkable capacity to acquire whatever language (or
languages) they are exposed to without any formal linguistic instruction. When
one thinks of learning a language, one often thinks of learning new vocabulary
words and grammatical rules. However, another important aspect of language
acquisition that is particularly under-studied is how children come to acquire
variation in natural language. Mastering a language to fluency requires learning
more complex and subtle dependencies in the linguistic and social environment.
For example, whether an English speaker produces "went shopping" versus "wen'
shoppin'" may be determined by many factors, some of which are internal to the
utterance (e.g., nearby sounds or the expression's syntactic position in the
larger grammatical context) whereas others are external (e.g., social context
and speaker identity). In the context of language learning, children must learn
and master the use of these variable forms, applying them in the same contexts
and at the same rates as other speakers of their dialect. The proposed research
addresses a paradox in how children acquire such variation. In established
language communities, children acquire such variation--mastering the relevant
articulatory, grammatical and social conditioning factors from a very young age.
On the other hand, children in emerging languages communities will frequently
regularize variable forms, removing variation to create a more regular or
learnable linguistic system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments comprising
this research address why, when confronted with variability in their primary
linguistic data, children sometimes learn variation and its conditioning
factors, and other times regularize it. Using recent findings, this project
examines the hypothesis that particular properties of the language input may
lead children to match variation in one case but regularize in another. In
particular, (1) whether the variation is conditioned on a grammatical or social
context, (2) the fluency of the language model, and (3) whether the input is
provided by a community of speakers. The project employs methods from the
Artificial Language Learning paradigm--an innovative method that enables
researchers to conduct language learning experiments with children in a single
30-minute session. The experiments investigate whether the hypothesized
properties of the input lead children to adjust their learning behavior,
acquiring variation under some circumstances and regularizing variation under
others. The proposed work serve as a foundation upon which further, more nuanced
hypotheses about the acquisition of variation in children can be built, as well
as provide an innovative experimental approach with which researchers can
empirically investigate other important (but still only theoretically explored)
questions in child language acquisition&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.