* 2043575
* Underrepresented Minority Internships for Chemists, Chemical/Environmental/Mechanical Engineers, and Civil Engineers
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Marcus Huggans, The National GEM Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,210,500.00

With support of the Divisions of Chemistry, and Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems, and the Civil, Mechanical, and
Manufacturing Innovation Division, the GEM Consortium aims to improve diversity
in the STEM workforce through a two-pronged approach. First, GEM encourages
selected underrepresented minority (URM) students to pursue graduate degrees in
STEM fields by ensuring that the students receive a living stipend and tuition
while enrolled in a GEM member-university program. Next, GEM provides access to
paid internships for the selected students, providing the students with work
experience and networking opportunities. Ultimately this project works to
illustrate and provide pathways for advanced STEM education and careers for URM
students. Promoting progress in science and building a globally competitive
workforce, a core part of the National Science Foundation's mission, requires
increasing diversity in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides training pathways for both Ph.D. and
Master's level students in the STEM fields of Chemistry, Chemical and
Environmental Engineering, Transport and Fluid Mechanical Engineering, and Civil
and Mechanical Engineering. GEM consortium-selected URM students apply to the
university-member programs, and upon acceptance, GEM provides a stipend towards
living expenses and tuition. The universities cover the remainder of the
tuition, and in the case of Ph.D. level students, a living stipend (through
teaching or research assistantships or other methods) for the duration of the
degree. This encourages member universities to accept URM students, while
assuring students of the economic feasibility of an advanced degree. A total of
52 students will be supported through this effort. These students also
participate in a paid internship that GEM helps to arrange, which enables
students to build a career network and provides them with work experience. These
students and others supported through GEM will be part of a long term evaluation
on the effectiveness of this approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.