* 2043430
* Academic Success of STEM College Students with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and the  Role of Classroom Teaching Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Cynthia Finelli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving STEM teaching
practices for college students with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD). Students with ADHD comprise as many as 10% of U.S. college students.
College students with ADHD earn lower grades and may be less likely to graduate
when compared to their peers without ADHD. However, little is known about how to
increase the academic success of this growing, underserved population. This
project will study the academic success, such as grades and persistence) of STEM
college students with ADHD. Through statistical modeling and student interviews,
the project plans to determine the relationship between student characteristics,
the college classroom experience, and academic outcomes of STEM college students
with ADHD. As a result, the project will describe the influence of the STEM
classroom environment on students with ADHD. This information, in turn, is
expected to provide actionable information for classroom teaching practices that
better support the academic success of this growing, understudied population of
STEM college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to fill a research
gap surrounding college students with ADHD by investigating relationships
between precollege factors, classroom teaching practices, and academic success
of STEM college students with and without ADHD, and by identifying evidence-
based teaching practices that may improve the college experience. The project
includes three universities having different organizational contexts, and it
seeks to address the following four research questions: 1. What precollege
factors are associated with academic success of STEM college students with ADHD
compared to those without ADHD? 2. What teaching practices are associated with
academic success of STEM college students with ADHD compared to those without
ADHD? 3. How do teaching practices mediate the relationship between precollege
factors and academic success of STEM college students with ADHD compared to
those without ADHD? Q4. How does organizational context influence the
relationships between precollege factors, teaching practices, and academic
success of STEM college students with ADHD compared to those without ADHD? Study
1 will address research questions 1 and 2 by applying multinomial logistic
regression models using secondary data from approximately 20,000 first-year STEM
students, including approximately 750 with ADHD. Study 2 will address research
questions 2, 3, and 4 using a student survey (with responses from approximately
2,500 students, including approximately 100 with ADHD) and in-depth interviews
of 30 STEM college students with ADHD. Ultimately, this project should provide
empirical evidence about teaching practices that can improve the college
experience for STEM college students with ADHD. The project will increase
awareness of STEM students with ADHD and strategies to integrate inclusive
teaching practices by disseminating project findings through conference
presentations, journal publications, and professional development workshops.
Expected long-term contributions include improving STEM education, attracting
more students with ADHD to STEM, and increasing the diversity of the future STEM
workforce. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.