* 2043614
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Soil Frontiers: Exploring the Culture and Politics of Soil Microbiology Research
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Anne Rademacher, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 12/31/2021
* USD 15,750.00

This project examines how networks of collaborative research are challenging the
way we study about soils. Contemporary understanding of soil focus on how it is
a one of the most biodiverse and critical ecosystems on the planet. This project
will trace how scientific practices of studying soil microbes are driving
terrestrial cycles of carbon, water, phosphorous, and nitrogen. It will follow
scientists as they investigate soil microbial activity in relation to climate
conditions, plant pathogens, and medicinal resources for humans. The project
will document how novel research techniques are helping scientists design soil
microbial processes to respond to changing climate conditions and soil issues.
The project will provide insight for natural scientists, social scientists, and
policymakers to better understand how specific soil science practices inform
current priorities and challenges of soil health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central focus of this research project is the collaborative networks of soil
scientists and biotech engineers. The project uses ethnographic strategies to
trace the social and technical infrastructure of soil microbiology research
through which scientists assemble their understanding of soils as living
systems. Its analysis draws on qualitative data from interviews with scientists
and participant observation in soil research settings. While human-soil
interactions are often examined in agricultural contexts, this project is among
the first to examine how scientists construct new meanings and materialities of
soils in their research practices. Scientific explorations of soil microbiomes
are contributing to mapping new frontiers of ecological knowledge. This project
will study how political and cultural transformations can support new
possibilities for human adaptation and survival on a rapidly changing
planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.