* 2043302
* CyberCorps Scholarships for Service: Augusta University Developing Immersive Experiences for Novel Cybersecurity Education
* EDU,DGE
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Gagan Agrawal, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 01/31/2026
* USD 1,759,432.00

In today’s increasingly connected world, reactive solutions to cyber threats
have proven insufficient in stemming the tide of exponentially increasing cyber-
attacks on critical infrastructure, industries, schools, homes, and personal
data. This project addresses the need for rigorous academic programs that will
prepare future cybersecurity professionals who can develop systems whose
components incorporate cybersecurity principles from system development through
application. Building on its various local partnerships and emerging research
activity, Augusta University (AU) offers three undergraduate degrees and three
graduate degrees that concentrate heavily on cybersecurity, cyber intelligence,
and other closely related topics. AU has been designated as a National Center
for Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Education by the National Security
Agency and Department of Homeland Security. This proposal positions the Augusta
University Developing Immersive Experiences for Novel Cybersecurity Education
(AUDIENCE) project as a catalyst to promote cybersecurity research and
innovation while preparing future government cybersecurity professionals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AUDIENCE scholarship program will fund a total of 20
students over a five-year period. Students selected for this program will
complete their undergraduate and/or master’s degrees as part of a comprehensive
plan that involves interactions with government and industry partners,
involvement in research, and participation in outreach activities. Options
available to students for undergraduate studies include Bachelor of Science
degrees in Cybersecurity, Cybersecurity Engineering, Cybersecurity Operations,
Computer Science, and Information Technology. Options available at the graduate
level include a Master of Science in Computer Science (with a concentration in
Cybersecurity) or in Information Security Management, and a Master of Arts in
Intelligence and Security Studies. In addition, a cybersecurity learning
community will be established to support AUDIENCE scholars and the rapidly
growing local professional cybersecurity workforce The learning community
provides the opportunity to focus both on cyber intelligence and technical
cybersecurity topics. Broader impact of the project includes dissemination of
the project team’s experiences in cybersecurity education venues and in
promoting a more diverse cybersecurity workforce. AU is uniquely positioned to
increase the participation of underrepresented groups through existing
relationships with Augusta Technical College and Clark Atlanta University and
has a history of success recruiting diverse individuals for other scholarship
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.