* 2043905
* CAREER: Evaluation of machine learning algorithms for understanding and predicting adaptation to multivariate environments with a Model Validation Program (MVP)
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Kathleen Lotterhos, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,291,065.00

Environmental change can be rapid and involve multiple aspects of the
environment changing at the same time, such as warming and increased disease
pressure. Rapid environmental change threatens the productivity of aquaculture
and crops on which humans depend. Predicting organisms' vulnerabilities to rapid
and multifactor environmental change, however, is a major scientific challenge.
A hurdle to addressing this challenge arises from the complex and non-intuitive
ways that organisms adapt, through changes at the level of the DNA sequence, to
many environmental stresses at the same time. Thus, there is a need for new
approaches to understand and predict adaptation in multivariate environments. To
address this need, this project integrates research and education with a Model
Validation Program (MVP). The research is developing and evaluating Machine
Learning Algorithms (MLAs) for understanding and predicting adaptation of
organisms to multivariate environments from their DNA sequences. To evaluate
MLAs, this research combines both data simulation and an empirical test in the
field with the Eastern Oyster, which provide important ecosystem services and
support a multi-million dollar industry. For oysters, this research is studying
how temperature, disease pressure, and salinity interact with evolutionary
history to determine fitness in the field. This research advances efforts toward
addressing the major scientific challenge of predicting adaptation in complex
environments by integrating concepts across the frontiers of marine,
evolutionary, and statistical sciences in a new way. Machine learning and model
validation are not traditionally taught in the marine and environmental
sciences, but are becoming increasingly relevant to these fields. As part of a
broader education program, this research is developing MVP Learning Modules for
high school students and undergraduates, which help students build the
foundational knowledge they need to critically evaluate and apply models.
Modules are being disseminated to hundreds of students in the greater Boston
area and are being made available online for widespread use. The MVP mentoring
program is training graduate students, undergraduates, and high school students
in marine evolutionary ecology, statistical genomics, and machine learning. This
research addresses a pressing societal need to more informatively match
genotypes to environments for restoration, farming, and assisted gene flow
efforts. Results are being disseminated to stakeholders in the oyster
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to evaluate if MLAs,
which can model non-linearities, can be used to understand and predict
adaptation to multivariate environments under a wide range of scenarios. In
Objective 1, the Principal Investigator (PI) is creating simulated datasets with
different aspects of realism, and using them to evaluate and refine the MLAs.
This novel set of simulations is studying genome evolution under high gene flow
in complex, multivariate environments. In Objective 2, the PI is building on
their expertise with the Eastern oyster to evaluate the MLAs in a field setting.
The PI is first developing a comprehensive seascape genomic dataset and using it
to train MLAs to predict an individual's multivariate environment based on a
single nucleotide polymorphism genotype. Then, the PI is testing if the MLA
prediction can predict the fitness of different genotypes from across the
species range when raised in common garden field conditions. In Objective 3, the
PI is integrating research and education by using the data obtained from Objs. 1
and 2 to develop a series of original "MVP Learning Modules" with interactive
web apps for persons at different levels of understanding, using the relatable
example of an oyster restoration project. This research lays the foundation for
future studies by producing datasets that could become classical examples for
developing and benchmarking innovative modeling
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.