* 2043803
* CAREER: A novel Gallium Oxide based transistor for low-waste power conversion applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Elaheh Ahmadi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal Number: 2043803&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Elaheh Ahmadi,
&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: A novel Gallium Oxide based transistor for low-waste
power conversion applications&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;There is an urgent
need for new device technologies to efficiently manage and distribute electrical
power in the 2000V-20000V voltage range. The current technology, however, can no
longer meet the efficiency and reliability requirements for these high-power
electronic applications. The proposed ultra-high voltage switch will enable
efficient high-power switches in the 2000V-20000V voltage range, which is
required in many systems, including distributed grid systems, industrial
automation, electric vehicles, and electrical mass transit including high-speed
trains. The integrated education plan aims to motivate young students,
especially female students and those from the underrepresented groups, to pursue
STEM studies and careers by direct participation in the proposed research
activities. The tutorials prepared for high school students will be made widely
available on PI’s research website and YouTube. The scientific results will be
disseminated in the form of articles in technical journals, conference
presentations, and university seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this program is to demonstrate E-mode β-Ga2O3 fin
field-effect transistors (FinFETs) with breakdown voltages beyond 3kV, specific
on-resistance lower than 1 milli-ohm-cm-square switching efficiency higher than
98% at 15kHz frequency. The scientific goals of this CAREER plan are (i) A
thorough investigation and experimentation into the impact of slanted-sidewall
and N implantation in the inter-fin areas on electric fields to enhance
breakdown voltage. (ii) Fabrication and characterization of FinFETs on both
metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD)-grown and halide vapor phase
epitaxy (HVPE)-grown epi-structure to analyze and compare the impact of growth
technique, and material quality on device performance. This study assists in
selecting the appropriate growth technique for each process module in the
future. (iii) A systematic study of the substrate thickness impact on device
characteristics such as Ron. (iv) Development of β-(Al,Ga)2O3 regrowth on the
fin sidewalls by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (PAMBE) and a complete
investigation of the impact of regrowth conditions on electron mobility in the
channel, interface trap density, and FinFET characteristics. This will be the
first demonstration of sidewall regrowth in this material system. (v)
Development of robust and reliable Hf(Si)O2 dielectrics by PAMBE as well as
investigation and analysis of deposition conditions on dielectric quality
(breakdown, dielectric constant, leakage, etc.). This will be the first
demonstration of in-situ dielectric deposition in this material
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.