* 2043455
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Innovation for Economic Rejuvenation of Louisiana Coastal Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Shirley Laska, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The long-term vision of this project is a sustainable, generative and adaptive
regional economy for coastal Louisiana, a “working coast” that is both
economically and environmentally susceptible to negative impacts from climate
change and human-induced disasters. The focus is to develop economic activity
that will support resiliency in areas experiencing disasters. Communities in
coastal Louisiana have suffered crippling and repeated damage from hurricanes,
coastal sea-level rise, offshore oil spills, and channelization of marshes for
oil and gas exploration, production and distribution, and are increasingly
vulnerable to Atlantic hurricanes with Gulf water warming. Within this complex
context of risks, COVID-19 has also threatened the health of coastal community
residents and forced layoffs of hundreds of coastal and support industry workers
employed by the offshore oil and gas industry. A key element in the transition
to new, greener industries and occupations is building on and adapting existing
skills and infrastructure, and transferring these skills to the next generation.
This project engages twelve diverse communities along the Louisiana coast in a
community-based participatory action research (CBPAR) process to generate and
select ideas for economic activities, products and services that can be produced
by the existing workforce while preserving the environmental integrity of the
coast and its cultures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project advances
fundamental understanding of how to align skills and knowledge development for
personnel trained in the offshore oil and gas exploration/production industry
using a partnered approach to generating and assimilating knowledge from diverse
stakeholders to create sustainable economic choices and a diverse economic
income structure for more resilient livelihoods, community stability and
disaster resiliency. The primary objectives of this planning grant are: (1) to
create two inventories, one of existing skills and interests of coastal
personnel and one of available infrastructure and equipment that may have value
in a green economy; (2) to perform a gap analysis of regional economic
opportunities and green industries and their inland markets; (3) to innovate an
economic rejuvenation plan for Louisiana coastal communities through a
community-based participatory action research (CBPAR) workshop that applies data
collected with the communities; (4) to establish federally-funded work study
partnerships with coastal universities to include in the project the
communities’ college-aged students who will be the future managers and employees
of the economic innovations; and (5) to prepare for Stage 2 launch and
implementation, with the goal of employing coastal residents in the design,
planning and production of beneficial products and
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to Track B - CIVIC
Innovation Challenge - Resilience to Natural Disasters a collaboration with NSF
and the Department of Homeland Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.