* 2043464
* Generating Stable Repetitive Motion of Underactuated Robotic Systems Using Large-Amplitude Short-Duration Control Forces
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Ranjan Mukherjee, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 344,007.00

This project will promote the progress of science and advance the national
prosperity and national defense, by studying generation of stable repetitive
motion for underactuated robotic systems. Underactuated mechanical systems are
those that have fewer control inputs than the number of their degrees-of-
freedom. Underactuation appears naturally in many systems such as missiles,
satellites, underwater vehicles and biped robots. Repetitive motion is very
common in underactuated robotic systems that undergo locomotion, such as
underwater vehicles and biped robots, and maintaining stability is paramount for
safe and reliable operation. The objective of this research is to generate
stable repetitive motion of underactuated robotic systems by incorporating
large-amplitude, short-duration control forces, commonly referred to as
impulsive forces. Although the effect of impulsive forces has been studied in
diverse dynamical systems, the majority of the studies have been limited to
theoretical investigations. This research will have a significant experimental
component and will translate impulsive control of dynamical systems from theory
to practice by addressing the challenges of implementation. In addition to
scientific and technological advances, this project will have broad impact
through integration of research and education, diversity, and outreach. The
project will provide research experience for undergraduate students and
dissertation topics for graduate students and thereby contribute towards the
development of the future generation of engineers and
academics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Repetitive motion is common in underactuated
robotic systems and their ability to reject disturbances depends on the
stability property of the orbit. This research will eliminate the limitations of
current approaches to orbital stabilization of underactuated systems by
including impulsive inputs in the set of admissible controls. For underactuated
systems that are not subjected to impact, current approaches require
controllability of the system to be checked at every point on the orbit and
controller gains to be computed online by solving a periodic Ricatti
differential equation. The approach in this research, which uses both continuous
and impulsive inputs, will result in a linear time-invariant system and reduce
the computational cost and complexity of control design. It will also allow
estimation of the region of attraction around the orbit, which will be used to
determine the optimal location for application of the impulsive inputs. To
consider systems that are subjected to impact, the research will focus on
bipeds, where both continuous and impulsive inputs will be used for gait
stabilization; and the devil-stick, where only impulsive inputs will used. For
bipeds, current approaches use numerical methods to search for stable gaits.
This research will design nominal gaits analytically. It will be possible to
easily check the stability and controllability of a nominal gait and tune
controller parameters to obtain controllable gaits. Impact-free nominal gaits
will ensure that energy loss and hardware wear and tear due to impact will be
minimized. For the devil-stick, purely impulsive control will be designed for a
variety of juggling problems. The analytical and experimental investigations
will lead to new modalities of non-prehensile
manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.