* 2043156
* CAREER: Redefining 'antimicrobial' in the context of microbe-chemical interactions indoors
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2026
* Erica Hartmann, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 03/31/2026
* USD 434,530.00

Microbes are everywhere, including in indoor environments where they come into
contact with humans. We use disinfectants and other antibiotics widely in these
environments to combat disease-causing pathogens, which represent only a tiny
fraction of microbial life. In spite of this diversity, antimicrobial chemicals
are tested on just a handful of standard laboratory organisms. The widespread
use these chemicals can lead to the spread of antibiotic resistance, making
antibiotics ineffective in fighting disease. This has led to antibiotic
resistance being considered one of the biggest global public health challenges.
It is thus critical to understand the impacts of antimicrobial chemicals on
actual indoor microbes. The goal of this CAREER project is to understand how
chemicals and indoor microbes interact. This goal will be accomplished by
looking at where microbe-chemical encounters happen in the and what happens to
the microbes that survive these encounters. The results of this work have the
potential to profoundly change the way we design and maintain indoor
environments. This work is tightly integrated with outreach to engage design
professionals and the public about building materials, chemicals, and indoor
microbes, and more broadly increase scientific literacy on this important global
health issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to use a
multipronged approach to leverage molecular microbiology and analytical
chemistry to arrive at a fundamental understanding of how chemicals and the
indoor microbiome interact. The specific context in which this interaction will
be evaluated is textiles. The overarching hypotheses are that 1) bioavailability
of antimicrobial chemicals changes under environmental conditions and 2)
exposure to antimicrobial chemicals changes bacterial community structure and
function, including enrichment of antibiotic resistance. To observe how
bioavailability of antimicrobials in textiles is impacted by environmental
conditions, antimicrobials such as nanosilver, nanozinc, and quaternary ammonium
compounds will be identified and quantified using high resolution mass
spectrometry under varying conditions. To test if antimicrobials in textiles
alter the microbiome, reduced-complexity communities of undomesticated built
environment bacteria will be exposed to antimicrobial materials. Transcriptomic
indicators and antibiotic resistance phenotypes will be measured. This work is
tightly integrated with an outreach project to engage design professionals and
the public about building materials, chemicals, and the indoor microbiome.
Architects and designers will inform experimental design and dissemination of
findings through interdisciplinary workshops, curriculum development, and
continuing education units for architects. Undergraduate and graduate students
will be trained in science communication. Wikipedia edit-a-thons will be hosted
to improve pages related to indoor environmental quality. Ultimately, this work
will greatly advance our knowledge on how antimicrobial chemicals migrate out of
building materials and shape the viability and antibiotic resistance of indoor
bacterial communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.