* 2043973
* Collaborative Research: Engineering MS2 Capsid Assembly Using Systematic Fitness Landscapes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Danielle Tullman Ercek, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,408.00

Much of the biological world is made up building blocks, known as proteins,
which can assemble into complex structures at scales not visible to the naked
eye. The proposed work explores the self-assembly of a structure made of
proteins called a virus-like particle. Understanding how the building blocks of
viruses come together could be important for developing therapeutics and
vaccines to fight them. The objective of this work is to uncover the rules for
how this virus particle assembles and how it can be modified to improve its
function without disrupting its structure. Outreach efforts will be pursued that
include engagement and training of undergraduate and graduate students, and
engagement with K-12 students and the general public via demonstrations in
schools and at science festivals, discussions at local libraries and museums,
and creation and release of an episode about this work on a top-ranked podcast
series for children ages 6-12.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virus-like particles are an
excellent model system to study protein self-assembly. These closed-shell
protein containers tend to be composed of a single protein and can be expressed
to high titers in bacteria. They also have the useful property of encapsulating
their own genetic information. This proposal takes advantage of this property to
study both the advantageous and deleterious effects of mutations on the self-
assembly properties of virus-like particles using an efficient new directed
evolution technique. Importantly, this technique uses a single step to generate
libraries of the particles in which all sequence positions are systematically
substituted with every natural amino acid. These libraries can then be exposed
to various selection pressures, enabling identification of particles with
desirable physical or biochemical properties via the encapsulated RNA in
survivors of the selection. Using a variety of mutagenesis and functional
selections, this work aims to achieve two specific objectives. First, it will
elucidate the critical requirements for assembly of the virus-like particle
derived from bacteriophage MS2. Second, it will improve the chemical reactivity
and stability of the particle so it can remain intact following modifications
for any desired application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.