* 2043529
* Collaborative Research: The Criminal Deportation Pipeline
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Sarah Tosh, Rutgers University Camden
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 02/28/2023
* USD 112,949.00

The mass deportation of immigrants with criminal records has formed the
cornerstone of increasingly punitive immigration policy in the United States
over the past thirty years. The major categories of crimes for which lawful
permanent residents (green card holders) can be removed are broad and amorphous,
and for undocumented individuals, any conviction can lead to removal. Research
has shown that racial and ethnic disparities profoundly impact the criminal
justice system, adding to the risk of negative outcomes for Black and Latino
immigrants in particular. We advance the concept of the “criminal deportation
pipeline” to describe the intertwining criminal and immigration system processes
that funnel certain immigrants toward removal. The study, drawing on the
disciplines of sociology and criminology, focuses on the factors which shape and
constitute this pipeline. Highlighting racial, ethnic and spatial disparities in
criminal justice and immigration enforcement, as well as local policies and
practices that aid immigrants targeted for expulsion, the study will demonstrate
the pipeline’s functional presence in this iconic city of immigrants as well as
factors that define its impact and character. The results of the research will
contribute to the public debate on immigration policy and human rights reform
while deepening our understanding of the relationship between citizenship, the
law, and policing practices that have so impacted racialized immigrant
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Informed by theories of social exclusion and
criminalization, particularly along the vectors of race, as well as the field of
resistance, the study is oriented by the following research questions: (i) How
do local patterns of non-immigration-related criminal justice enforcement shape
the flow of the criminal deportation pipeline?; (ii) How do protective legal
policies and practices affect the function of the criminal deportation
pipeline?; and (iii) How do immigrants experience and respond to overlapping
processes of criminalization and deportation? We will examine these questions
using a mixed methods research design that combines 120 hours of targeted
observation of deportation proceedings; secondary analysis of official documents
and administrative government datasets; and 120 in-depth interviews with
affected immigrants, legal practitioners, and community-based advocates.
Research will expand upon preliminary spatial analysis of high deportation areas
in order to: (i) better understand how spatial, racial, and ethnic patterns in
policing shape processes of criminal deportation; (ii) assess the function and
impacts of protective legal policies, and (iii) identify the experiences of
immigrants facing deportation with criminal records, as well as the impacts of
overlapping criminal and immigration. The new knowledge produced will allow
further development of theory around processes of social control, state
practices and human agency with regard to the collective and individual
immigrant experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.