* 2043748
* Improving Science Content Knowledge of Undergraduate Elementary Education Majors through Phenomenon-based Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ron Gray, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 296,001.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing and testing the
effectiveness of phenomenon-based science content courses for prospective
undergraduate elementary teachers. As part of this Level I - Engaged Student
Learning project, two phenomenon-based science courses, specifically focused on
the science content areas, life and earth/space and physical science and
engineering, that prospective elementary teachers need to understand to teach
science in their future classrooms, will be developed using the Ambitious
Science Teaching framework. This framework centers around an evidence-based
pedagogy that is currently used in K-12 settings. This project intends to test
the effectiveness of the developed courses in terms of improving prospective
elementary teachers’ science content knowledge. Additionally, it will determine
the applicability of the Ambitious Science Teaching framework to the
undergraduate context especially in science courses for undergraduate students
who are not STEM majors and for elementary education majors in particular.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many elementary education majors graduate from their
teacher preparation programs with incomplete science content knowledge and
limited experience learning science in ways that model the types of pedagogical
approaches shown to be effective for elementary students. This project intends
to contribute to the STEM education field’s understanding of how prospective
elementary teachers develop deep science content knowledge. This work aims to
extend research that has examined the relationship between science content
courses for prospective elementary teachers and their confidence, attitudes, and
self-efficacy beliefs. This project embraces the critical need for elementary
teachers to not only develop useful understandings of science content, but to
also to utilize effective science teaching instructional approaches. This
project will extend a model of science instruction, Ambitious Science Teaching,
shown to be effective in K-12 settings into undergraduate science teacher
preparation. Project goals are to: 1) Develop two phenomenon-based science
courses (one focused on Life and Earth/Space Science and the second focused on
Physical Sciences and Engineering) targeting undergraduate elementary education
majors; 2) Examine the impact of the phenomenon-based science courses on
prospective elementary teachers’ science content knowledge; and 3) Determine the
applicability of the Ambitious Science Teaching instructional model to the
undergraduate context. Using a mixed methods with a quasi-experimental approach,
the research team will investigate the impact of the courses on prospective
elementary teachers’ science content knowledge and how the Ambitious Science
Teaching framework supports prospective elementary teachers in developing
understandings of science content. As a community, elementary science teacher
educators recognize the enduring challenge of science content knowledge
preparedness for their teacher candidates. This project has the potential to
significantly impact science instruction for undergraduate elementary education
majors and thus their future elementary school students. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship (Noyce) Program is
providing co-funding for this IUSE: EHR project to support the project's
preservice teacher preparation goals, which are well-aligned with Noyce Program
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.