* 2043066
* Collaborative Research: Volatile sources, eruption triggers, and magma ascent rates for mafic alkaline magmas at Nyiragongo and Nyamulagira volcanoes, DR Congo, East African Rift
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Paul Wallace, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2024
* USD 227,229.00

Nyiragongo and Nyamulagira, in the East African Rift, are two of the most active
volcanoes in the world, and they pose major hazards to large populations living
nearby. Many volcanoes that pose great risks to large populations are well
studied and highly monitored with scientific instruments, but there is still a
fundamental lack of understanding of many basic aspects of the Nyiragongo and
Nyamulagira systems. This investigation will improve our understanding of these
systems by focusing on (1) how magma forms beneath the two volcanoes, (2) how
deeply and for how long magma is stored beneath the volcanoes before eruption,
(3) what triggers eruptions to occur on the flanks of the volcanoes, in and near
populated areas, and (4) how fast magma moves towards the surface during an
eruption and how much warning time people would have in advance of an eruption.
In addition to these aspects focused on hazards, this project will investigate
the source of the carbon that is released as carbon dioxide by these volcanoes.
Large amounts of carbon are likely stored in solid minerals inside the Earth
beneath thick, old continental crust like that in East Africa, and when the
crust gets pulled apart by rifting as in the East African Rift, the carbon
contributes to magma formation. Nyiragongo is one of the largest emitters of
carbon dioxide gas of any volcano worldwide, and better understanding the
connection between carbon in minerals and magma formation beneath this volcano
will help us better understand the Earth’s deep carbon cycle. Much of the
research for this project will be conducted by graduate students at the
University of Oregon and University of Wyoming as part of their scientific
training. Collaboration with scientists at the Goma Volcano Observatory in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will include periodic videoconferences to share
research results important for volcanic hazards monitoring. Public engagement
will include a National Geographic Explorer’s Blog and several short articles
for a general audience on volcanic hazards at Nyiragongo and Nyamulagira and
release of carbon dioxide from volcanoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In detail, the
primary goals of this project are (1) to understand the time-integrated effects
of lithospheric metasomatism on magma generation beneath Nyiragongo and
Nyamulagira, and (2) to use the results as the starting point for a source-to-
surface investigation of the plumbing systems, magma storage timescales,
eruption triggering processes, and magma ascent rates for these volcanoes.
Although these volcanoes are only 15 km apart, their eruption behavior and the
types of lava they emit are profoundly different, with Nyiragongo erupting some
of the most unusual lava types found anywhere on Earth. To understand the roles
of lithospheric mantle and metasomatic veins as magma sources, we will use
existing major and trace element and isotopic data together with new data on
volatile contents of olivine-hosted melt inclusions to establish parental melt
compositions and source lithologies. Our data and modeling approach will also
provide important constraints on parental magma CO2 and S concentrations and
magma fluxes for each volcano. Our proposed work will use existing tephra and
lava samples and will focus on the many parasitic cones and tuff rings on the
flanks of Nyiragongo and Nyamulagira, as these erupt more primitive compositions
than the volcanoes’ central vents. For investigating the plumbing systems, we
will use (1) melt inclusion volatile data to determine crystallization depths,
(2) U-series mineral isochrons to determine crystal and magma residence times,
(3) mineral zoning and diffusion chronometry to identify recharge and mixing
processes that may trigger eruptions and yield precursory seismic signals, and
(4) diffusive loss of H from melt inclusions to infer magma ascent rates during
eruption, which likely influence explosivity. Our overarching goal is to produce
geologically well-grounded, state-of-the-art geochemical and petrological data
that improves our understanding of these volcanic systems and thereby improves
hazard assessment models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.