* 2043192
* Influences of State Policies and Racialized Parental Incarceration on Youth Justice System Contact and Conflict, Emotional Estrangement and Intergenerational Life Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2025
* John Hagan, American Bar Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 02/28/2025
* USD 318,536.00

From about 1970 to 2010, police profiling and mass incarceration increased at
historically unprecedented rates in America. Since 2010, there have been
variable reductions, especially among African-American parents and youth who
have been disproportionately imprisoned for minor drug offenses punished as
serious crimes. The economist Glen Loury has observed that ‘blackness’ had led
to “misattributions detrimental to blacks,” while the sociologists Becky Pettit
and Bruce Western has shown that this has made the abnormality of going to
prison disproportionately “normal” for many African-American parents and their
children. The present study focuses on the results of disparities in parental
incarceration on children. The focus is on children from ages of about 15 to 35,
using data from five waves of the National Longitudinal of Study Adolescent and
Adult Health [Add Heath]. The analysis concentrates on (a) how state variation
in parental incarceration and resulting family trajectories affects their
children, (b) the unfolding life experiences of child transitions from youth to
adulthood, and (c) the later life course educational and occupational
consequences of differences in these parental and youth experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Add Health data set offers unique possibilities for
assessing unfolding life events of parents and children who have experienced
variation in profiling and punishment across American states during the recent
era of mass incarceration. This study will analyze this mass incarceration era
sample of youth from adolescence into adulthood. Understanding variable
consequences of state level policies requires analysis of these states alongside
data also collected on the affected individuals, and the Add Health data allow
both. In the past, Add Health has worked with this research team to add new
measures of youth and adult crime and the return of parents, as well as their
adolescent and young adult children, from prison. The current research will
extend this work and uniquely develop new measures with Add Health of the
policing and punishment of traffic violations. Traffic violations are uniquely
important, for example, when they are disputed as resulting from “driving while
Black.” Analysis of these measures will be of special importance because they
can be embedded within the larger multiple wave and national framework of Add
Health. The measurement and analysis will further examine how the variable
accumulation across states and the sampled individuals of fines and court costs
may have damaging consequences for life outcomes that last into and through
middle adulthood. The above additions to the national Add Health data set will
be made publicly available for other researchers to analyze as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.