* 2043150
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Watershed Dynamics in Snow-Dominated Mountainous Karst Watersheds Using Hybrid Physically Based and Deep Learning Models
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* James McNamara, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 02/29/2024
* USD 110,797.00

Karst aquifers form in regions underlain by highly soluble rock formations, such
as limestone, and serve as the primary drinking water source for about a quarter
of the worldâ€™s population. These aquifers are characterized by complex
groundwater recharge, storage, and flow patterns in sinkholes, pores, fractures,
and conduits. In many mountainous areas of the western U.S. and worldwide that
host karst aquifers, most of the annual precipitation falls in the winter as
snow. In these snow-dominated karst watersheds, snowmelt recharges aquifers that
sustain streamflow in summer when precipitation is scarce and water demand is
high. These watersheds are sensitive to year-to-year variations and long-term
trends in precipitation and temperature. This creates challenges for sustainable
water resource management particularly when a quantitative understanding of
mountainous karst watershed response to climate variability is lacking. Such
knowledge gaps exist due to complex recharge and discharge processes that occur
because of topographical and geological heterogeneities inherent in these
watersheds. This project will overcome these limitations and provide a sound
scientific basis for improved water resources management. Funding will support
both graduate and undergraduate research at multiple universities. Through
outreach and educational activities, the project will also engage local
stakeholders, the general public, and K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of the proposed research is to understand and predict
hydrologic responses of snow-dominated mountainous karst aquifers. The three-
year project will integrate a spatially distributed, physically based snowmelt
model with a data-driven, deep learning model that represents the highly complex
karst aquifer system. Field observational and geochemical data sets (including
streamflow, and ions and isotopes in stream and spring water) will be collected
at various spatial and time scales to identify recharge and discharge
characteristics, while also testing the predictive capability and physical
representativeness of the deep learning model. Specifically, the project will
(1) quantify the spatiotemporal groundwater discharge and streamflow response to
snowmelt/rainfall events with varying intensity and duration, (2) determine how
interannual climate variability and watershed physical properties influence
hydrologic behavior, and (3) test the combined physically based and data-driven
modeling approach in different locations and climate conditions. The outcomes
will lead to improved understanding of how snow-dominated mountainous karst
watersheds respond to climate variability and provide insight into the
robustness of the modeling approach for forecasting or transferability to other
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.