* 2043072
* Collaborative Research: Aggression as Biological Adaptation: Investigating Development in Stressful Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Tuppett Yates, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 456,510.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aggression has significant
negative impacts on individuals and societies. Aggressive behaviors are
influenced by poverty and stress. In the current study, the researchers seek to
understand how youth aggression might be biologically advantageous in the
context of both acute and chronic stress exposure. The investigators also
consider potential gender differences in the biological benefits of aggression,
as well as potential influences of this buffering effect on later risky
behaviors. Understanding the functions of aggression, and its potential benefits
for youth growing up in the context of adversity is critical to inform the
development and implementation of effective, innovative
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent evolutionary models of development
argue that problematic behaviors, including aggression, are not necessarily
“deficits,” but rather reflect adaptive responses to stressful, unstable or
disadvantageous environments. However, despite evidence from animal models
showing that aggression can reduce physiological stress, no research with humans
has systematically evaluated aggression as a potential protective buffer against
the effects of stress exposure on biological regulation. In this project, the
researchers critically evaluate hypotheses with two rigorous and complementary
study designs that build on an ongoing, NSF-funded longitudinal study of 250
sociodemographically diverse adolescents whose risk exposure, aggression, and
biological functioning have been well characterized since early childhood (ages
4-14). Study 1 uses a longitudinal design to test relations between childhood
risk exposure (ages 0-8) and a multisystem indicator of biological dysregulation
at age 17 as buffered by aggression across early adolescence (ages 10-14). Study
2 uses a laboratory experiment to expose youth to stress, manipulate
opportunities to aggress following the stressor, and test the effects of
aggression on stress physiology. Together, these studies have the potential to
dramatically revise extant models of aggression with significant implications
for improving the effectiveness of contemporary interventions, which do not
currently consider the positive biological function of aggression, particularly
for high-risk youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.