* 2043334
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Social Influence in Eyewitness Identification Procedures: Do Blind Administrator Behaviors Magnify the Effects of Suspect Bias?
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Margaret Bull Kovera, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 199,619.00

DNA exonerations of innocent individuals have consistently implicated eyewitness
misidentification as a leading cause of wrongful conviction. A key factor
producing these eyewitness misidentifications is social influence, or the
process by which interactions with a police investigator affect eyewitnesses’
identification decisions. In an attempt to reduce social influences in
eyewitness identification, researchers have recommended the implementation of
double-blind lineup procedures in which the lineup administrator does not know
which lineup member is under suspicion. However, even double-blind lineup
administrators sometimes engage in behaviors that could influence eyewitness
decision-making. This project will test whether double-blind lineups are
sufficient to prevent social influence from increasing mistaken eyewitness
identifications. The findings could support the development of more effective
policy reforms by demonstrating a need to move toward fully computerized
administration of eyewitness identification procedures, a practice that has yet
to be adopted by law enforcement agencies in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of a series of experiments
that will examine social-influence processes in double-blind lineups. First,
these experiments will identify social-influence behaviors emitted by double-
blind administrators and assess their effects on eyewitness decision-making.
Second, the experiments will test whether administrator influence in double-
blind lineups can increase the risk of eyewitness misidentification of innocent
suspects by exacerbating the effects of lineup factors that bias witnesses
towards identifying the suspect (e.g., unfair lineups, repeated exposure to the
suspect). Third, the experiments will examine how social-influence effects carry
over across multiple identification procedures and assess whether some
eyewitnesses are more vulnerable to social influence effects than others.
Fourth, the experiments will test competing psychological theories regarding
whether social influence has stronger effects on identifications of guilty or
innocent suspects. Finally, the experiments will asses the effects of
administrator influence on the diagnostic value of eyewitness confidence, which
is relied upon by fact-finders (e.g., judges and jurors) to assess the
reliability of eyewitness identification evidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.