* 2043102
* Investigating the Differential Impacts of Collaborative Learning Environments on At-Risk Students in General Chemistry Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Lisa Shah, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 04/30/2025
* USD 290,801.00

Failure rates for students from historically-excluded demographic groups are
disproportionately high in large-enrollment undergraduate science courses.
Across scientific disciplines, there is strong consensus about the potential for
collaborative activities to minimize outcome differences. However, we do not
fully understand the specific features of these environments that do so or how
they do so. This project seeks to serve the national interest by investigating
aspects of college general chemistry instruction that may contribute to
inequalities in student outcomes. The project team will identify features of
collaborative learning environments that uniquely impact the success of students
most at risk of failure in a large-enrollment general chemistry course. Findings
from this work will inform the development and dissemination of equity-oriented
curricular resources for undergraduate science education.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The design of collaborative learning environments is aligned with
tenets of Sociocultural Theory. Students make sense of chemical ideas when
solving problems and explaining their thinking to their peers. However, the
collaborative learning environments in which these sensemaking events occur are
typically designed for the majority population of successful students and
improvements in course outcomes for students most at risk of failure are largely
coincidental. As a result, it is not clear what, how, or why specific features
of these educational settings may combat inequities in student outcomes. This
project will investigate aspects of collaborative learning environments in
first-semester general chemistry at Stony Brook University that contribute to
documented inequities in student success rates. To accomplish this goal, the
project team will record students working collaboratively on general chemistry
classroom activities. The recordings will then be analyzed to determine the
impacts of activity design and instructor facilitation approaches on student
discourse for two samples of general chemistry students. The two samples will be
drawn from the majority population of students and a population of students
predicted to have higher rates of failure based on incoming mathematics
proficiency. These data will be supplemented with learner interviews to capture
studentsâ€™ voices and perspectives in the analytical process. The success of the
project will be evaluated through cycles of questioning and review by an
external advisory board. Findings from this work will inform the development and
dissemination of equity-oriented curricular resources, including instructional
activities and facilitation guides for undergraduate instructors and teaching
assistants. The NSF IUSE: EHR program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.