* 2043667
* Cognitive Self-regulation and Metacognition in Comparative and Developmental Perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* John David Smith, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2025
* USD 692,684.00

When people monitor their own thoughts, memories, and how well they are
learning, they are engaging in metacognition. It is considered a hallmark
feature of the human mind, but metacognition is also susceptible to error. Adult
humans and children often mistakenly assume they have learned material better
than they really have, or they mistakenly trust that they can remember something
that they will likely forget. Metacognition emerges fairly slowly in human
development and is not fully evident until the age of six years (or even older).
Young students who are learning new facts and skills and those in the workforce
who are training in new techniques need to be able to engage in metacognitive
control and monitoring. Decision makers in business and politics must know how
to deal with “known unknowns” by recognizing potential errors in their thinking
and adjusting behavior to reduce uncertainty. Understanding how younger and
older children engage in metacognition similarly or differently can provide
insights into normal developmental paths for this important skill. It is also
deeply debated as to whether species other than humans can think about their own
thinking. If they can do this, it would inform issues of animal welfare, ethics,
and a reconsideration of whether metacognition critically relies on language or
other uniquely human cognitive capacities. Understanding whether non-verbal
species can perform metacognitive tasks will provide insights into the essential
or perhaps non-essential role of language, culture, and formal education in
metacognitive abilities. These efforts can inform new approaches to improve
study habits in students and improve self-guided routines for those learning
skills such as visual classification (for example, “is that a tumor in this
x-ray, or not, or is it too hard to tell and I need to look for other
information?”). These studies will also refine animal models of metacognition,
introduce new tests of metacognitive control in children, and illustrate the
strengths or weaknesses of metacognition in children and monkeys. The data will
inform efforts to train metacognitive strategies in groups that show an
impairment in this ability such as those struggling to learn new information
because they cannot gauge their own uncertainty (e.g., students) and those who
feel overconfident in situations where they truly do not know enough to stop
studying or learning (e.g., trainees in new
professions).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project presents computer tasks to
preschool and early elementary school children, human adults, capuchin monkeys,
and rhesus monkeys. Individuals perform primary goals such as remembering
information or judging picture sizes or colors while also considering how well
they are doing at those tasks. Some tasks assess how these groups use internal
feelings such as fluency (for example, how easily a memory comes to mind) to
monitor their cognition. Some tasks assess whether individuals can anticipate
future memory problems and commit themselves to re-study material when they are
at risk of forgetting. Other tasks assess whether individuals can use strategies
to make difficult-to-remember information easier to remember or to selectively
eliminate hard-to-remember material from a test so that they can perform better
overall. These techniques are designed to track two important aspects of
metacognition. One is the ability to monitor cognition for potential moments of
uncertainty and difficulty. For example, this happens when someone knows they
cannot answer a question because the right answer is not retrievable in memory,
or they simply do not know the answer. An equally important but less well
understood aspect involves the control strategies that are engaged when one must
overcome uncertainty or difficulty. These include strategies to seek more
information before choosing or deciding, to study material longer to learn it
better, or even to recruit help from others when unsure. Ultimately, monitoring
and control of cognition are essential to a well-educated and well-trained
population. As part of this project to assess monitoring and control of
cognition, the investigators will be training and mentoring a new generation of
scientists to engage in research with children and nonhuman animals, and the
results of this project will be shared with the public through traditional and
social media outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.