* 2043875
* Collaborative Research: Student engagement with online formative assessments:  Identifying access and barriers to resource use at two-year and four-year institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Sarah Spier, Southeast Community College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 07/31/2024
* USD 49,198.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving student engagement
in undergraduate biology courses at two-year and four-year institutions.
Specifically, the research team will explore how students interact with online
assignments and what factors influence that interaction. Formative assessments
give students the opportunity to test and revise their understanding of course
content before their learning is measured to determine their course grade.
However, instructors often expect students to complete formative assessments
outside of class, typically via online platforms. The expectation of this
additional work creates challenges for some students. For example, students may
have limited access to technology or have external responsibilities that affect
the time they can spend on these assignments. Such challenges and their unequal
distribution have been spotlighted because of the rapid and sustained increase
in higher education’s dependence on remote or online learning in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic. It is likely that these challenges affect how students
approach learning and the resources they choose. However, few studies have been
done to explore student approaches to completing online assignments. This
project aims to help fill this gap, and thus provide tools to improve students’
instructional strategies and enhance their learning in online environments. This
project intends to benefit society by providing insights into how student
backgrounds and circumstances affect their learning behaviors in online courses
and how these behaviors affect course outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on
prior research, this project will adopt a multi-methods approach to investigate
and improve undergraduate student engagement with online formative assessments
completed outside of class time. The project team will pioneer a novel two-stage
protocol involving video recordings of biology students completing authentic
online course assignments and then conduct follow-up interviews to clarify their
learning approaches, discuss why they used certain resources (e.g., classmates;
textbooks; websites), and identify potential barriers to resource access (e.g.,
internet availability; social connectedness). Drawing from these interviews, the
project team will create closed-ended surveys for students to report their
learning approaches and resource use and indicate external factors that might
affect their ability to complete online assignments. Administering these
instruments broadly will allow exploration of quantitative connections between
personal demographics, access/barriers, formative assessments utilization
behaviors, and learning outcomes. With particular attention to the potential
barriers faced by underserved groups, the project team will facilitate a working
group of biology faculty that will develop and implement strategies to guide
students about how to overcome challenges and interact productively with online
assignments. The newly developed survey instruments will be used to monitor the
impact that this guidance has on student outcomes. By disseminating findings
through reports to educational communities, this project will help replace
anecdotal intuitions with evidence-based accounts of student experiences in
completing online assignments. Investigating asynchronous assignment completion
represents a critical research direction given the longstanding desire among
institutions to develop flexible course formats that work with busy student
schedules. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This Level 1
project is aligned with the Engaged Student Learning track, which the supports
the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.