* 2043427
* A Multi-User Database of Freedom of Information Act Litigation in Federal District Courts
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Gbemende Johnson, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 10/31/2022
* USD 242,810.00

The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) enables the release of government records
to individuals and organizations, while allowing government agencies to refuse
release of documents based on delineated exemptions. When a requester and agency
cannot resolve a FOIA dispute through internal administrative processes, FOIA
cases can be appealed to the federal courts for adjudication of the agency’s
decision not to release requested records. This project will compile a database
of FOIA requests that are litigated in Federal District Courts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will analyze FOIA litigation dynamics and
outcomes through the creation of a database of FOIA exemption decisions in U.S.
District Courts from 2001 through 2016. This project theoretically and
empirically situates federal courts at the juncture of government dominion over
information and the public’s access to information by providing analysis of
judicial monitoring of agency decision making. The result will be a publicly
available database that compiles District Court decisions on FOIA litigation,
allowing for research of FOIA cases and outcomes that will be of import to the
general public, scholars, and practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.