* 2043324
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): An Enhanced and Integrated Scholar Experience in Cybersecurity
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Ambareen Siraj, Tennessee Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,985,631.00

The renewal of the Tennessee Tech University (TNTech) project will allow this
CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to continue supporting
National Defense through the production of well-trained cybersecurity
professionals. The program supports the success of the SFS scholars by combining
integrated experiences in education, research and outreach and leveraging
existing resources and university-wide collaboration among faculty and
administration. The TNTech CyberCorps® program supports both undergraduate and
graduate students with a focus on improving the diversity of the cybersecurity
workforce through increasing the representation of women and underrepresented
minorities. In addition, the program is the first in the state of Tennessee with
the opportunity to serve the economically distressed Appalachian region. With
the rapid growth of Tech’s computer science and cybersecurity program, the
renewal allows TNTech to continue to produce highly trained cybersecurity
professionals who contribute to the nation’s cyberspace security. It also allows
new innovations in the SFS program and enables the Cybersecurity Education
Research and Outreach Center at TNTech to continue deepening its local,
regional, and national impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the
TNTech SFS program include continuing to expand higher education choices in
cybersecurity for local and regional students through federal scholarship
opportunities. The project will also enhance SFS scholars’ knowledge, skills,
research aptitude, and service-learning motivation through a program that values
fair participation in education, research and outreach. The program will
continue supporting the pipeline of SFS scholars to federal agencies in
Tennessee (and the region) while aiming to increase women and underrepresented
minority students’ participation. Program performance will continue to be
assessed in this new project period. The project continues to refine strategies
and techniques that can potentially be effective in addressing SFS program
management challenges including scholar on-boarding and providing wide-ranging
experiences and flexible paths for scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which
funds proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity
and aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior
cybersecurity workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are
required to work in cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal
Government organization for the same duration as their scholarship
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.