* 2043422
* PFI-TT: Synthesis of low-cost and environmentally sustainable organic phosphors for light emitting diode lighting fixtures
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Christine Luscombe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 03/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to eliminate dependence on rare-earth
(REEs) in phosphors used in light emitting diode (LED) lighting applications
while continuing to improve lighting quality and efficiency. Rare earth elements
are essential for inorganic phosphors used in commercial LED products. Even
though the REEs are currently available; They are geographically unevenly
distributed, so their availability is susceptible to various factors, such as
social and political constraints, environmental regulations and economics, and
thus, a high degree of uncertainty exists in their future availability. As a
result, inorganic phosphors present an inherent risk to the long-term commercial
viability and utility of LED lighting. Moreover, there exists an opportunity to
improve the efficiency and light quality performance of existing inorganic
phosphors. Improvements could result in reduced electricity consumption, which
could lead to significant reductions in greenhouse gas emissions considering the
wide application of LEDs. In addition to direct impacts on visual performance,
light quality affects human mood and behavior. Improved light quality may lead
to elevated mental states, sharpened alertness, and boosted productivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project develops an eco-friendly method to
synthesize organic phosphors using an abundant natural product in place of rare
earth elements, at a commercially competitive cost. The final product, a
phosphor-imbed sheet, can be integrated into lighting products as the outer
cover and achieve enhanced efficiency and color quality compared to rare earth
element-derived inorganic phosphors. The team is the first to report the
syntheses of highly fluorescent organic phosphors from theobromine, a molecule
derived from cacao beans, through direct arylation. Using an abundant, non-toxic
natural product and advanced green chemistry allows the research group to
produce the desired organic phosphors at both reduced cost and environmental
impacts. Moreover, introducing theobromine to organic phosphors enhances their
ambient stability, which is essential for LEDs given their long lifetime. The
synthetic and molecular design challenges the common conception that organic
phosphors are expensive and unstable. Dr. Luscombe and her students recently
developed theobromine-derived phosphors offering efficiency and light quality
performance that exceeds most commercial products. Their next steps will focus
on further enhancing the stability of the theobromine-derived phosphors through
molecular optimization and encapsulation designs, aiming to narrow or eliminate
the gap between lab research and a commercial product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.