* 2043064
* Collaborative Research: Roles of rupture complexity, geological structure, stress interaction on earthquake sequences
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Xiaowei Chen, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2023
* USD 399,438.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earthquakes remain one of the most
significant natural hazards facing society. With the increase of human-induced
seismicity, regions that previously had lower seismic risk (e.g., central United
States) are now facing earthquake-related hazards. The dramatic increase in the
seismicity rate during the past decade in central US, and the improved
instrumentation here and in California provide a rich dataset of well-recorded
small-to-moderate sized earthquakes in two very different geologic settings; one
dominated by tectonic motion on the great San Andreas fault, and the other where
human activities induced earthquakes on less continuous, smaller, faults. This
provides the opportunity to learn more about the controlling factors and
consequences of earthquakes in both settings. By studying and comparing the
earthquakes and their interactions in two very differently deforming regions
(Northern California and Oklahoma), this project will advance our understanding
of the fundamental processes of earthquake physics, their dependence on tectonic
setting, and help reduce earthquake related hazards. An improvement in
understanding of the relationship between earthquake rupture processes and
hazard parameters (seismicity and ground motion) could help to reduce seismic
hazard posed to local communities and important infrastructure. This analysis
will also combine earthquake and industry 3D seismic data, which will help to
develop guidelines to identify potentially hazardous critically stressed faults
in Oklahoma. The project includes mentoring and collaboration on a range of
levels, contributing to the education of two graduate students (at OU) and
support for an early-career PI (at OU). The derived state-of-the-art database of
earthquake catalog, cluster characteristics and source parameters will provide
fundamental input for many studies, and will be of broad interest to earthquake
hazard community, and understanding of earthquake physics. The methods and
workflow will feed into activities for classes in earthquake and exploration
seismology, and structural geology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complexity of
earthquakes is a significant factor governing earthquake source dynamics and the
consequent ground motions, and it is related to complexity in the fault
structures on which the earthquakes occur. This project will use both high-
quality earthquake seismograms and industrial 3D seismic data, and develop
improved techniques to quantify complexity and enhance our understanding of the
fundamental earthquake source process on a variety of temporal and spatial
scales. The researchers focus on the inherent earthquake source variability, its
relationship with geologic structure, and its influence on earthquake sequence
evolution and ground motion patterns. They perform a combined spectral and time
domain analysis of earthquake sources and geological fault structure in two
distinct tectonic settings: northern California which is dominated by the San
Andreas plate-boundary fault, and Oklahoma where human activities are inducing
earthquakes in a low-strain rate region. Spectral complexity and source-time-
function complexity will be quantified, and automatic classification methods
will be developed to identify complex earthquakes. Collocated high-resolution
industrial 3D seismic data and seismicity enables us to better understand
characteristics of seismogenic faults in the basement in detail. The synthesis
and integration of multiple datasets will help to understand the interlink
between geologic structure and earthquake rupture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.