* 2043325
* Understanding and Controlling Hydrodynamic Cavitation to Improve Manufacturing Processes Involving High Velocity Fluid Flow
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Gracious Ngaile, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/29/2024
* USD 354,899.00

This grant supports research that contributes new knowledge in the manufacturing
field, promoting both progress of science and engineering and advancing national
prosperity. Hydrodynamic cavitation is the formation, growth, and burst of gas
bubbles in a rapidly flowing fluid. The resulting implosion of gas bubbles
releases concentrated energy as pressure waves or high-speed micro jets. The
impact of this project is on multiple fronts; the potential to reduce total
energy spent in manufacturing processes, increase in the quality of the produced
parts and fabrication of part features that are difficult to achieve with
conventional manufacturing processes. The knowledge gained from this project
could also be used to enhance the efficiency of existing cavitation-based
systems in other areas beyond manufacturing such as cleaning devices, water
purification, and homogenization of industrial and food products. The
experimental and analytical work emanating from this project provides excellent
educational opportunities to graduates and undergraduate students participating
in the research. Particular emphasis is placed on engaging women and minority
students in this project. The project also supports several classroom teaching
initiatives within the manufacturing curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to advance the fundamental understanding of mechanisms for
producing hydrodynamic cavitation from a high velocity fluid stream in a
manufacturing process so that the pressure waves and micro-jets produced by this
cavitation could be utilized to enhance the process. A combination of
experimentation and analytical and numerical modeling is used to study different
mechanisms for producing and controlling hydrodynamic cavitation. The study
includes (1) characterization of hydrodynamic cavitation intensity via novel
flow-induced vibration at various resonance frequencies, (2) characterization of
vortex flows that can generate continuous and fully cavitating fluid streams
thus increasing the yield on the energy to be harvested, and (3) development of
mechanisms for creating self-resonating flows via superposition of pressure
waves aimed at enhancing bubble collapse frequency. The analytical modeling
provides an estimate of pressure induced during bubble collapse, whereas
numerical modeling provides field variables depicting distribution behavior of
cavitation in the fluid domain. To quantify the cavitation power density
obtained from the above mechanisms, residual stresses and microhardness
distributions measured from samples are mapped with field variables from
numerical and analytical models. This project is aimed at creating a knowledge
base to facilitate utilization of the cavitation energy to enhance manufacturing
processes that involve high velocity fluid flow such as water jet cutting, water
jet peening for surface treatment, nano-lubricant formulation, and
polishing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.