* 2043042
* Collaborative Research: Development of a Better Understanding of Ambient RM Chemistry, Reactions Forming, and Methods for Measurement
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Mae Gustin, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/29/2024
* USD 925,541.00

This project focuses on the development of improved methods for measuring
reactive mercury in the atmosphere. Controlled laboratory experiments will be
conducted to test and develop new and better materials for detecting oxidized
mercury. The project includes measurements of reactive mercury in the ambient
atmosphere at a diverse group of sites with different atmospheric chemistry.
Improving the ability to quantify the concentrations and chemistry of reactive
mercury compounds is critical to developing strategies for mitigating their
damaging impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort has three main objectives.
These are to: (1) Develop a better understanding of the chemical reactions
responsible for forming and transforming reactive mercury (RM) through
laboratory experiments and field campaigns; (2) Test and develop new and better
materials for oxidized mercury (Hg) detection, including the identification of
desorbable, long-term collection, and short-term collection surfaces for better
resolved measurements; and (3) Develop and test a method to estimate RM
concentrations measured over the past 20 years using archived data. The work is
critical for understanding the Hg biogeochemical cycle and modeling atmospheric
Hg processes and deposition, the two priority focus areas recently identified by
the NADPâ€™s Mercury in the Environment and Links to Deposition Science (MELD)
Committee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.