* 2043877
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Building PreK-12 School Resilience in the Face of COVID-19
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Changbum Ahn, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

PreK-12 schools reopen for in-person instruction with a set of mitigation
strategies that limits transmission of the virus, including cohorting with the
same small group of students, spacing between seats, staggered scheduling,
creating one way routes in hallways, and closure of communal use shared spaces.
However, each district and school, which has unique qualities and varying public
health conditions in communities, is left on its own regarding how to implement
recommended measures considering its classroom/campus settings, student
population, and public health conditions in communities. The vision of this
project is thus to build PreK-12 schools’ resilience in the face of Covid-19, by
empowering school districts to predict, monitor, and evaluate the effectiveness
of their mitigation strategies to limit transmission. In particular, this
project focuses on physical distancing within the educational environment (e.g.,
school buildings, transportation buses) as a key strategy for limiting
transmission, and its long term goal is to create and validate technological and
social tools that help districts and schools to predict, monitor, and enhance
physical distancing behaviors of students within the education environment, in
collaboration with College Station Independent School District (CSISD) in Texas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve its long term goal, this planning
grant will develop the necessary research personnel, research infrastructure,
and foundational work, by (1) creating a pilot agent-based simulation model to
predict students’ physical distancing behaviors; (2) conducting a survey to
examine factors influencing students’ preventive behaviors; and (3) coordinating
community meetings and focus interviews to build an understanding of
communities’ needs in designing enabling technologies/tools. Ultimately, the
successful completion of this project will immediately benefit educational
administrators and facility managers in designing optimal operation measures
considering their educational facilities and student populations. In addition,
the project outcomes will provide guidance in designing and implementing
behavioral interventions to enhance students’ awareness and compliance to
physical distancing practices. This will be critical in reducing the risk of
COVID-19 transmission and ensuring continuous and safe school
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.