* 2043012
* OPUS: Linking species traits, community change and environmental change across scales to forecast how animal declines impact ecosystem function
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Caryn Vaughn, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2024
* USD 187,687.00

Human alteration of the environment has led to rapid declines in animal
populations, particularly in freshwater habitats. When animals are lost, the
important roles they play in ecosystems are also lost. Understanding the
consequences of these biodiversity declines for the natural services they
provide requires long-term data. Freshwater mussels are a good example. Few
people know that they were once abundant and are now rare. They feed by
filtering algae and other material from the water. This “biofiltration” helps
with nutrient cycling and provides ecosystem services such as improved water
quality for humans. This project will synthesize 30 years of data on mussel
distribution, abundance, and community composition across rivers in the Ouachita
Highlands of Oklahoma and Arkansas. Information on species biological traits,
such as temperature tolerance, body size, and filtration rates, will be used to
estimate how mussels help the environment and benefit humans. This will be
combined with climate change projections to predict how these functions may
change in the future. Products from this project will include journal articles,
a book on mussel ecology, and an educational web site and poster on the mussels
of Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-term data are needed to understand how
Anthropocene declines in animal biodiversity and abundance affects the ecosystem
functions they perform, which are a product of interactions among species’
functional traits, the environment, and community composition. This project will
synthesize 30 years of data on mussel traits (thermal tolerance, adult body
size, life history strategy), mussel community structure (species richness,
abundance, and biomass from 8 rivers in one biogeographic region, the Ouachita
Highlands), mussel community change, environmental gradients (temperature and
flow), and ecosystem function (biofiltration and nutrient cycling and storage)
to: (1) Estimate mussel contributions to ecosystem function across spatial
scales (mussel bed, river, biogeographic region); (2) Determine how mussel
losses and environmental change have altered these contributions, and how this
is related to species functional traits; and (3) Use species traits and
projections for future stream flows and temperatures derived from downscaled
climate models to forecast how these contributions will change in the future.
All data will be made publicly available in a web-based, permanent
archive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.