* 2043016
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Time-Telling, the Exact Sciences, and Empire in Early Modern India
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Massimo Mazzotti, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 15,750.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement grant supports a history of
science project that examines relationships between science and empire in India
during the early modern period (from sixteen to eighteen hundred); specifically,
it will analyze the social practice of time-telling in Mughal India by focusing
on activities, objects, institutions, and communities of practice that drew on
the exact sciences of astronomy and mathematics. The project will explore how
time-telling imparted cultural authority and material utility to the sciences
and how they in turn were marshalled in support of the empire. The requested
funds will be used to engage in archival research; they will be used to obtain
access to specific sources that are held in Britain, India, and Pakistan. The
project will make a central intervention in postcolonial Science and Technology
Studies, history of global science, and Islamic science.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The study uses time-telling as a portal into the socio-cultural world
of Mughal scientific practices through original archival research configured
around three sets of questions. The first concern the role of astronomical
observations in political decision-making at an everyday level as well as
empire-building on a broader level. Who are the principal actors and what
contestations and collaborations occurred between them? Why did Mughal
observatory-building ambitions not succeed until the end of the early modern
period? In lieu of observatories, what sites and approaches were used for
original astronomical observations? The next set focus specifically on the
economy of this large Mughal empire. What transformations in agriculture and
trade resulted from the instatement of new calendars and daily schedules? Were
peasant logics reflected in this new temporal scheme? How did peasants’ lives
change in one of the world’s most flourishing agricultural economies as a result
of Mughal temporal systems? The last set consider the deeper values and cultural
entanglements in Mughal time-telling practices in the most religiously diverse
empire in the early modern world. philosophical discourses on and historical
constructions of time shaped the values of Mughal and regional courts in India?
How did scholars from different traditions—Muslim, Buddhist, Jain, Hindu,
Zoroastrian, Jesuit—contribute to shifting sensibilities of eschatological and
historical time during the early modern period?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.