* 2043850
* Professional Development for Part-time College Faculty to Enhance Student Success in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Thomas Sawyer, Elmhurst University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,964.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high quality undergraduate
STEM education by developing and evaluating comprehensive professional
development for part-time STEM faculty. At many institutions, part-time faculty
teach introductory STEM courses. As a result, these faculty have an essential
role in creating equitable opportunities for student success in STEM. However,
institutional reliance on part-time faculty has been associated with lower
first-year persistence and lower graduation rates. Few research studies have
examined what part-time faculty do in the classroom and how their actions relate
to student learning. STEM education reform efforts often do not include part-
time faculty, even though studies document the desire of part-time faculty to be
included in institutional efforts, their interest in collaboration, and their
need for greater awareness of campus resources and policies. This Level 1
Engaged Student Learning project intends to enhance the effectiveness of part-
time faculty, leading to increased student success and persistence of students
in first-year STEM courses taught by the participating faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a comprehensive faculty
development program for part-time STEM faculty at Elmhurst University. Over the
three-year duration of the project, 45 part-time STEM faculty members will
participate in intensive faculty development. The development programming will
combine training in teaching methods with training about campus resources,
including institutional support mechanisms as well as retention and inclusion
initiatives. This comprehensive approach may serve as a model for other small,
liberal arts institutions, that increasingly rely on part-time faculty. Through
this sustained multi-year professional development effort, it is expected that
part-time faculty will develop more student-centered conceptions of teaching,
increase their use of evidence-based and inclusive teaching practices, and
exhibit an increased sense of belonging with the institution. The project will
expand institutional support for part-time STEM faculty by establishing a STEM
department chair workshop focused on integrating part-time faculty into
departmental conversations around teaching and learning, as well as supporting
sustained professional development through participation in an online course in
effective teaching. The improvements in instruction, combined with a greater
ability to connect students with campus resources, are expected to enhance
student success in first-year STEM courses. The proposed research study
associated with the project will investigate specific changes in the part-time
faculty members’ attitudes and behaviors related to their conceptions of
teaching, use of evidence-based practices, and sense of belonging to the
institution. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.