* 2043388
* PFI-RP: Commercializing a novel mobile platform technology to both prevent and respond to high school violence
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Sharyn Potter, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 04/30/2024
* USD 564,908.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project addresses a significant societal and
public health problem: school violence. Annually, there are over 4.3 million
school violence offenses resulting in $400 million in direct costs and $94
million in health care costs from student injuries. When unaddressed, school
violence, including bullying, hazing, sexual harassment, and dating violence,
impacts victims’ health and safety. The societal value of our proposed
innovation is a comprehensive and easy-to-adopt system that reduces present and
future risk to students, reassures parents that schools are working to protect
students, and reduces schools’ risk and liability. The innovative system will be
a licensable. dynamic, real-time, interactive, customizable tool deployed via
mobile app technology. It will provide new, evidence-based and age-specific
educational content and prevention strategies for high school students,
delivered in a format that facilitates end-user adoption and engagement. The
target market segment for the proposed innovation is the 35,000 US public and
private high schools. The initial customers are school administrators, followed
by community organizations and parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project addresses the need for an integrated, comprehensive system to reduce
school violence and teach high school students to respond safely to the spectrum
of school violence including bullying, harassment and assault. The mobile app
and accompanying administrator dashboard represent the novel union of
technology, prevention science, and adolescent development science. This project
will evaluate the impact of the student safety app on school violence incidents,
student knowledge of school violence and prevention, student reports of
violence, and access to support resources. Additionally, app implementation
strategies will be researched and evaluated to optimize student usage. The team
will conduct a four-state, 20-school pilot study that includes qualitative focus
group data collection with students and school administrators and quantitative
survey administration before, during, and following the implementation of the
student safety app. The anticipated output is a mobile app-deployed school
safety system that integrates comprehensive education, prevention,
communication, and response tools. The team's effort represents an innovative
combination of gamified research-informed social-emotional educational content,
a confidential reporting tool, interactive tools to aid students in risky
situations, push notifications to student phones, and streamlined access to
school and community resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.