* 2043106
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Cybersecurity Scholar Incubator
* EDU,DGE
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Hazem Said, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 01/31/2026
* USD 2,590,409.00

The Cybersecurity Scholar Incubator project at the University of Cincinnati
(CSI:UC) addresses the severe shortage of cybersecurity workforce at US
government agencies through a multidisciplinary approach to prepare highly
skilled cybersecurity scholars for government jobs. The CSI:UC project leverages
resources and experiences gained from various cybersecurity education and
research projects. These include an innovative early college program that
engages and admits underrepresented high school students to study Information
Technology (IT) and cybersecurity, a successful collaboration with community
colleges, three National Security Agency (NSA) funded veterans and government
transitioning workers training programs, and National Science Foundation (NSF)
funded cybersecurity research projects. Scholars admitted to the SFS program
will be supported by faculty with diverse expertise ranging from cybersecurity
policies and laws to strong hands-on IT skills, and to fundamental and
theoretical research. In addition, UC is home to two centers designated by the
Department of Homeland Security and the NSA as Centers for Academic Excellence
in Cyber Defense Education and Cyber Operations. In addition, UC is home to the
Ohio Cyber Range Institute that advances cybersecurity education as well as
workforce, and economic development across the State of Ohio.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSI:UC five-year project will recruit and award
scholarships to 24 scholars who are pursuing undergraduate, master’s or doctoral
degree programs. Three unique cybersecurity programs hosted by the School of
Information Technology, the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, and the Department of Political Science provide students with various
options in choosing a study plan in Bachelor of Arts, Bachelor of Science,
Master of Science, and doctoral degrees. The project plans to broaden
participation in cybersecurity by recruiting fifty percent of its scholars from
underrepresented groups. In addition to completing their degree programs, the
scholars will participate in extracurricular and experience-based learning
activities to build strong hands-on competence and practice inter-personal
communication and leadership skills. Student success teams and co-op advisors
will monitor the scholars’ degree progress, support their co-op and internship
opportunities, and prepare them for job interviews. Furthermore, the scholars
will participate in summer workshops to practice cybersecurity skills, survey
cybersecurity technologies and research papers, improve resumes, prepare for
interviewing for government jobs, and understand SFS program expectations.
Through the project, the scholars will have multiple opportunities to attend
onsite or virtual SFS job fairs. The CSI:UC project is a critical step toward
preparing a qualified cyber workforce for government jobs and advancing
cybersecurity education and research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds
proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and
aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity
workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.