* 2043301
* Scholars Award: Following the Residues of the Lead Industry
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Abby Kinchy, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 06/30/2023
* USD 94,361.00

Lead - a toxic heavy metal - is dispersed across yards, playgrounds, parks, and
empty lots in cities around the world, the result of decades of leaded
automobile emissions and centuries of mining and industrial pollution. Because
lead does not break down over time, remediation of urban soils to some
previously pure or safe baseline condition may be impossible. Given this
challenge, how do scientists, decision-makers, and affected communities attempt
to reduce the harms caused by soil lead? This project answers these questions by
tracing soil lead residues in four regions with distinctive roles in the lead
industry. The main goal is to understand how people in each area create
knowledge about soil lead, develop and promote methods to reduce exposures, and
change the social and economic circumstances in which lead exposures occur. By
"following the chemical" across four areas, from lead mines to the soils of
urban neighborhoods, this project has potential to affect environmental politics
and policy, offering new ways to conceptualize the global problem of lead
residues, while illuminating possible solutions that are emerging in particular
locales. Other broader impacts include communicating with urban gardeners about
the hazards associated with lead exposure, developing ties among academic and
community-based soil researchers and advocates, and demonstrating how soil
science and social science can mutually support and inform each
other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the first sustained analysis of soil lead as
a ubiquitous residue that continues to accrete around the globe. This project
contributes to research conversations in science and technology studies about
life in polluted environments, where toxic contamination and its consequences
often evade scientific apprehension. Furthermore, it expands the work of
historians and social scientists whose research on lead poisoning and the long
struggle to regulate the lead industry has generally focused on single
locations. In addition to multiple field sites, multiple methods are used in
this study: 1) ethnographic fieldwork in historical and present-day lead mining
and processing communities; 2) interviews of scientists and activists who
conduct community-based soil testing research; 3) analysis of documents about
lead mining, the lead-acid battery industry, and other historical and
contemporary sources of lead residues in soils across the planet; and, 4)
examination of the scientific literature and risk modeling about soil lead
exposures. This study also deploys a novel research method called ethnographic
soil testing. By interviewing urban gardeners while collaboratively testing
their soil for traces of lead, insights are produced regarding how people think
about their own exposures to lead, their relationships to the environmental
histories of their communities, and living safely in contaminated
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Science
and Technology Studies program in SBE and Environmental Engineering Program in
ENG.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.