* 2043522
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Assessing the Feasibility of Systematizing Human-AI Teaming to Improve Community Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Keri Stephens, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 12/31/2022
* USD 49,855.00

Emergency managers need access to the right data to effectively and efficiently
plan for and respond to disasters. Social media offers a data source that is
increasingly relevant for disaster management, but emergency response
organizations typically lack capacity to monitor and mine social media data at
scale. One remedy is to pair human volunteers, who label relevant information,
with computers to train and update artificial intelligence (AI) systems for
scalable monitoring. Including local volunteers in the process is important
because they are uniquely capable of identifying locally-relevant images, text,
and conversations that reflect their communities. Yet, we currently have no
mechanism to systematically pair these human volunteer/AI-systems with emergency
management organizations. Therefore, the fundamental issue this project
investigates is the feasibility of leveraging the strengths of local members of
a Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) with AI—called human-AI teaming—to
bridge this gap. The unique CIVIC aspect of this project is to leverage existing
collaborations with a CERT organization to assess the feasibility. The long-term
vision is to develop a sustainable, replicable, and empirically informed
framework for integrating CERT volunteers into the automated processing of
social media data using an AI-based system. The project supports education and
diversity by providing research experiences to diverse students, as well as
training CERT volunteers in social media and human-AI teaming. Findings can help
emergency managers better train their volunteers who comb through social media
using understandings of the built environment to help machines see new patterns
in data. Hence, this project supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science and advance the nation's health, prosperity, and welfare by
demonstrating the value of leveraging local CERT volunteers, in partnership with
emergency managers, to generate disaster situation awareness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this planning grant is to analyze existing
human-AI teaming disaster data and involve civic partners in focus groups to
better understand the attitudes and beliefs of CERT volunteers, emergency
managers, key governmental organizations, and non-governmental organizations.
This project will develop deep knowledge of digital volunteer teams, how they
work, how to motivate them, and how to have them support the objectives of
emergency managers. Thus, we advance theory around volunteer teaming in the
technology space and human-in-the-loop protocols. This project provides
meaningful ways for more citizens to participate in disaster planning and
response, and develops a training curriculum for CERT volunteers who work with
social media data in an effort to build sustainable volunteer
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to Track B - CIVIC
Innovation Challenge - Resilience to Natural Disasters a collaboration with NSF
and the Department of Homeland Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.