* 2043870
* OPUS: Synthesizing concepts about succession, disturbances, and indicators based on long-term research at Mount St. Helens
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Virginia Dale, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 05/31/2024
* USD 319,600.00

Succession is the process of change of species in an ecological community over
time. Understanding succession is essential to understanding how disturbances
affect ecological systems. Disturbances are not viewed by ecologists as
catastrophic agents of destruction but rather as normal, sometimes even
integral, parts of long-term system dynamics. While disturbances can
significantly impact ecosystem processes, they are seldom included in ecological
studies. Yet disturbances are occurring with greater frequency and intensity
than in the past. For this project, data from 40 years of monitoring permanent
plots established after the catastrophic eruption of Mount St. Helens in 1980
provides an unprecedented opportunity to examine ecological resilience after
extreme disturbance as well as secondary disturbances that have occurred since
1980. The study will build on the researcher’s documentation that resource
managers and other stakeholders must have knowledge about succession, effects of
disturbances, and indicators of change to plan for disturbances and thus provide
long-term protection of ecological systems. The project will produce not only a
scientific paper, presentations, and data sets but also a book and serious game
that will provide a means for the public to learn about the forces that affect
ecological changes during succession and ongoing
disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While succession is one of the basic concepts
of ecology, theories of succession have not yet fully integrated the role of
disturbances in affecting successional process nor evaluated how indicators of
change can be used to improve understanding the dynamics of succession. By
synthesizing information from permanent plots monitored since the 1980 eruption
of Mount St. Helens, this project will test and update a conceptual model of
succession that includes effects of ongoing disturbances, the role of survivors,
creation of new habitats over time, random events, and ecological filters
(conditions that screen out some propagules, species, or interaction and
therefore limit ecological opportunities). Topics addressed by the proposed
project include how ecological conditions change over time following
disturbance, what alterations in key indicators suggest for ecological recovery,
and how human activities and natural disturbances influence ecological
succession. The data on vegetation reestablishment, seed dispersal, and changes
in soils and other environmental conditions that were collected over the 40
years since the eruption of Mount St. Helens as well as the indicators and other
information resulting from this synthesis will be placed in the permanent
archive at Mount St. Helens National Volcanic
Monument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.