* 2043453
* Collaborative Research: Developing a Diverse, Future-oriented Workforce for Renewable Energy Industries
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* John Solomon, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2024
* USD 160,438.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by studying ways to prepare a
new generation of engineers to join the growing renewable energy workforce. A
shift to increased reliance on renewable energy will require a skilled
engineering workforce that can develop and promote energy sustainability
practices. To help prepare this needed workforce, the project aims to develop
engineering students’ environmental awareness across multiple levels, from
knowledge acquisition to career decisions. Typically, a change in students’
environmental awareness alone does not translate into workforce development for
renewable energy industries. This exploratory research intends to address this
gap by offering interventions that target environmental awareness across a
diverse group of undergraduate engineering students at Tuskegee University and
Auburn University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to advance
understanding of the gap between environmental awareness and behavior, as well
as determine the necessary technical competencies and soft skills that
sustainable energy industries demand from new engineers. To do so, this project
will: (1) examine the link between engineering students’ environmental awareness
and their willingness and preparedness to pursue careers in renewable energy
fields; (2) offer mechanistic educational design to maximize sustainability
competencies and behaviors; and (3) create a paradigm for building a pipeline
between academic institutions and renewable energy and related industries. This
project from two institutions in Alabama features strong associations with
relevant industries in the Southeast. Activities intended to support development
of a diverse renewable energy engineering workforce include a renewable
makerspace, horizontal integration of sustainability concepts in multiple
courses, and enhanced university-industry engagement, such as student field
trips to industrial sites and feedback from industry representatives regarding
workforce needs. A mixed-methods research study will provide insight on the
skills and competency levels associated with participation in each intervention.
Four components of environmental awareness (knowledge, attitude, willingness,
and perceived preparedness) will serve as indicators. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.