* 2043526
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Digital Backpack: Enabling Offline Web-based Content Access to Promote Student Academic Resiliency in Acute and Chronic Disaster Situations
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,08/31/2021
* Morgan Vigil-Hayes, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 49,436.00

The lack of home Internet availability is extremely problematic when schools
shift to remote learning as part of community disaster response plans. Some of
the most severe “homework gaps” are experienced by students living in tribal
communities, where households often lack reliable broadband connectivity and
students experience the highest dropout rates in the nation. It is in this
context that this project proposes Digital Backpack (DigiPack), an opportunistic
content delivery network and mobile app that proactively uploads, downloads, and
stores digital learning material to devices whenever they obtain an Internet
connection. DigiPack will enable students’ mobile devices to automatically fetch
and store digital education content that they can work on offline at home.
Content generated and tagged for upload while working offline at home is
automatically transferred when Internet connectivity is encountered. This allows
students to make the most of trips to hotspots and allows for more casual
interaction with online learning; rather than having to remember a list of all
the content that needs to be downloaded, uploaded, and interacted with whenever
they are at a hot spot, students can focus on engaging in interactive learning
activities (e.g., video calls with a teacher) when connectivity is available and
DigiPack automatically handles content that can be engaged with asynchronously.
We will partner with STAR School, a public preK-8 charter school located in the
southwestern corner of Navajo Nation in Leupp, AZ, to plan and pilot the
DigiPack system in Navajo Nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's vision
for research and civic engagement activities focuses on understanding the
specific educational content needs of Navajo students and educators in Leupp,
AZ. This research will (i) identify the specific educational information needs
that DigiPack must support in the Leupp community; (ii) discern where DigiPack
CDN nodes and access points should be placed in Leupp for optimal benefit to
students and their families; and (iii) co-design the DigiPack mobile app user
interface and back end service support to ensure that a deployment is effective
and usable. To this end, the project team will work with a community advisory
board (CAB) comprised of Leupp families, educators and ISP operators to guide
the design choices for DigiPack interfaces and services such that they best
serve the learning needs of the community. This project's approach will
integrate best practices from participatory action research, including asset-
based community development and Lean UX design to work with community members as
co-researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.