* 2043697
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B Convergence, Inventory, Matching, and Assignment (CIMA) to Optimize Post-event Housing Repair for Displaced Vulnerable Populations
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2021,07/31/2021
* Juita-Elena Yusuf, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

Many communities across the United States have struggled to adapt to the
increasing frequency and severity of weather events. Hurricanes and other
weather events, have the potential to inflict wide-spread structural damage to
homes, resulting in the displacement of populations. Households displaced due to
storm-induced damage suffer enormously. The length of time between initial
displacement from the home and returning, once again, to stable, functional
housing varies greatly across populations with low-to-modest income households
and medically fragile households tending to have lengthy displacements relative
to non-vulnerable households. Following an event, volunteer labor and donated
materials from many sources flow into the impacted region. However, the matching
of supply (donated materials and volunteer labor) with the need for repair,
particularly among vulnerable households, is less than optimal. This project
aims to more-optimally match supply with need—through development of
“Convergence, Inventory, Matching, and Assignment” platform called CIMA—so that
lengthy displacement times common among low-to-modest income households will be
meaningfully reduced, thus addressing fundamental inequities in recovery and
wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CIMA will fill a known gap in the ability of
nonprofit recovery organizations to manage arriving materials and labor,
identify households likely to suffer the greatest displacement times, and
optimize the scheduling of repairs for these households that are most
vulnerable. This Planning Grant supports capacity-building objectives through
structured community engagement activities focused on the assessment of the CIMA
management platform concept. Specific activity include: 1) assessing, though
community engagement, the potential utility of the CIMA platform, 2) eliciting
insights from stakeholders and evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the CIMA
concept, and 3) refining, with stakeholder recommendations, the specification
requirements for CIMA. These objectives will be achieved through Visioning
Events, each targeting a different stakeholder constituency: 1)
Community/Nonprofit Stakeholders, 2) Government Stakeholders, and 3) Foundation
Stakeholders. Each event consists of four collaborative interactions: 1)
discussion of modeled storm-induced flooding with estimates for damage &amp;
displaced populations, 2) participants visioning the housing recuperation
dynamics for Standardized Displaced Households under current conditions, 3)
discussion of CIMA concept and functions, utility and applicability, and 4)
participants visioning the housing recuperation dynamics under the intervention
of nonprofit regional recovery organizations deploying the CIMA platform. This
project is in response to the Civic Innovation Challenge program, Track
B—Resilience to Natural Disasters—and is a collaboration between NSF and the
Department of Homeland Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.