* 2043900
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: A Visualization Tool and Assessment Framework for Civic Technology Use in the DMV Area: The Case of 311 Systems During the COVID-19 Outbreak
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2021
* Susan Winter, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 49,846.00

The 311 systems that city officials currently deploy can efficiently help
agencies detect non-emergency civic issues such as potholes and trash on the
streets. Although the 311 system was designed for non-emergency calls, residents
can re-appropriate the technology for capacities not initially intended. For
example, when Hurricane Irma hit Miami in 2017, residents used 311 systems to
report disaster-related problems, leading city officials to adapt the system and
create a new category for calls. The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted all aspects
of civic infrastructures that range from reduced public transportation systems
and public libraries' closure. If managed well, local governments and publics
can co-produce effective civic technology that addresses pandemic-related issues
and promotes quality services. Because it is still unclear how local governments
balance between managerial efficiency and citizen empowerment through 311
systems, the project team aims to understand how people use the system, how
local governments support people's different uses of the system, and how the
different performance metrics of local governments for 311 systems function at
the metropolitan area level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In the planning phase
supported by this award, the project team is establishing connections with local
governments in the Washington D.C. metropolitan area (a.k.a., DMV area) through
roundtables organized by a community partner, Connected DMV, and is
consolidating currently-inconsistent 311 datasets as a viable unified database.
If Stage 1 is successful, the project team will integrate local governments'
performance metrics by analyzing their 311 datasets and survey city officials.
Based on the survey, the team will build a web-based visualization tool that
shows metropolitan-level system performance during the pandemic. These tools and
metrics will directly impact governments' service quality, system design
adjustment processes, and citizens' awareness of communication processes. This
research will also educate undergraduate and graduate students about data
science and its social implications, particularly regarding marginalized
communities less represented in the 311 systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.