* 2043330
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Undesigning the redline and reimagining mobility investments to equitably link jobs, affordable housing, and services
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Austin Troy, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,889.00

Many urban neighborhoods that have experienced decades of disinvestment and
displacement lack dense, frequent, and reliable transportation options, despite
the growth in light rail construction, shared ride services, micro-modes of
transportation, and technologies that support demand responsive transit. Yet,
significant mobility improvements could save residents time and money and
improve access to employment, education, food, health care, and other necessary
destinations. At the same time, transportation improvements could lead to
redevelopment that causes displacement. To advance inclusive and opportunity-
rich urban regeneration without displacement, this project envisions a multi-
sector and intersectional process to design, test, and institutionalize an
innovative community engagement method in a formerly Redlined neighborhood in
Denver, Colorado, Valverde, that results in strong community adoption of a
technology-supported, community-designed neighborhood mobility system that
connects multiple local and regional transportation modes, including traditional
transit (bus and rail), micro-transit (e.g. demand responsive shuttles), and
micro-modes (e.g. bikes, e-scooters, etc.). This project's approach furthers the
development of smart city technologies to promote resident health, prosperity,
and welfare through the design and implementation of an equitable and adaptive
community-oriented mobility management platform and supportive backend systems
that incorporate policies for equity, community ownership, ongoing feedback,
rapid system changes, low-barrier participation for micro mobility
entrepreneurs, and affordable user subscriptions. While there are many competing
transit and mobility apps, none to the project team's knowledge, accommodate all
potential modes, local providers, and the ability for ongoing feedback that
informs rapid system responses. This approach will also test processes for
public institutions and nonprofits to co-construct community engagement
processes with residents that are focused on contextually appropriate mobility
solutions without triggering displacement.

The proposed system would upgrade and expand the Regional Transit District’s
(RTD) existing front-end (e.g., Mobility as a System (MaaS) platform) and back-
end technologies to provide affordable subscriptions for mobility packages,
community management and ownership opportunities for demand responsive micro-
mobilities, and user feedback loops that inform rapid adjustments to bus and
shuttle routes and schedules. This project will also create a pilot neighborhood
mobility hub to enhance visibility, access, and connectivity among modes; foster
community dialog; provide mobility information; and support related
entrepreneurial activities, e.g., community bike shops. The engagement plan
builds on the Denver Undesign the Redline exhibit, which combined artifacts,
storytelling, photos, and interactive activities; and the City’s use of
photovoice methods for mobility planning. These exhibits help public officials
and planners to understand community issues through the eyes of residents, which
allows for more collaborative action.

This project is in response to Track A – CIVIC Innovation Challenge -
Communities and Mobility a collaboration with NSF and the Department of Energy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.