* 2043075
* I-Corps: Biodegradable plastics that incorporate plastic degrading enzymes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Ting Xu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to make
environmentally friendly plastics. Compostable plastics, one of the fastest
growing innovations in the space, promises to enable a circular materials
economy. Unfortunately, there is currently poor access to industrial compost
nationally, and building infrastructure is costly. Our technology streamlines
this degradation process, requiring only water and heat, to produce small
molecules than can be readily composted, or turned back into high quality
plastics. The global plastic market is $234 B, and successful commercialization
could positively impact environmental sustainability while meeting the needs of
industry to maintain modern quality of life. The technology can potentially be
used for solutions across a breadth of applications, ranging from industrial
chemistry to energy generation to biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project supports efforts toward translation of a class of materials
called random heteropolymers (RHPs). RHPs effectively stabilize enzymes in
foreign environments, such as organic solvents or within plastics. Enzymes are
natureâ€™s chemists, performing chemical transformations with unparalleled
efficiency and specificity within cells. However, enzymes are typically fragile
and perform poorly, if at all, once removed from the cell. The proposed RHP
technology enables enzymes to be covered in a nano-scale shell that shields them
from the environment without harming their function. RHPs can be used to embed
the enzymes that degrade plastic materials inside of the plastics. Upon
triggering, the plastics biodegrade rapidly and completely, leaving behind no
microplastics. The monomers can be recaptured and reused to make new plastics or
disposed of as compost. The materials can also be processed using current
manufacturing techniques. Altogether, this provides an opportunity to produce
materials that meet the needs of industry while providing a better end of life
with minimal investment in infrastructure. More broadly, RHPs offer the
functionality of natural or engineered enzymes with the utility of plastics as a
novel approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.