* 2043089
* Quantum Epistemology Beyond Quantum Measurement
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Samuel Fletcher, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,950.00

It is well known that quantum mechanics does not, in general, predict any one
outcome of a given experiment with certainty, but instead predicts a
distribution of probability values for possible outcomes. One enduring question
in the interpretation of quantum mechanics is: just what do these probabilities
signify? Many believe quantum probabilities represent something objective, such
as frequencies of measurement outcomes in repeated trials. Others suggest a
perhaps more radical view that quantum probabilities only represent a person’s
subjective personal beliefs. On this subjective view, different people making
predictions with quantum mechanics might even reasonably disagree about the
probabilities of experimental outcomes. These objective and subjective
interpretations of quantum probability present starkly different philosophical
viewpoints. And understanding quantum probabilities is not only important for
making sense of the theory itself; it also has implications for the fields of
quantum information and quantum computing, which aim to use quantum theory to
develop new technologies. The goal of this project is to investigate the status
of quantum probability by developing a view that does not require quantum
probabilities to be only objective or only subjective, but instead allows for
both possibilities. The project will analyze the relationships among objective
and subjective probabilities in quantum mechanics to yield important insights
about how they both figure into the nature of physical
probability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project approaches the
interpretation of quantum probability in a novel way by separating questions
about probability from other controversial topics in the interpretation of
quantum mechanics. The question of whether probabilities are objective
frequencies or subjective beliefs has been addressed in existing work by tying
an answer to more contentious views about the status of measurements in quantum
theory. For example, some investigators reach an understanding of probability
based on a view of quantum measurement that implies the existence of a
"multiverse" of many worlds. This project will develop methods for analyzing the
relationship between objective and subjective probabilities, methods which do
not depend on such highly debated issues. As such, the project aims to make a
lasting impact by establishing tools for understanding quantum probability that
will apply, regardless of the ultimate interpretation of quantum mechanics. The
project will thus lay the foundation for further research and understanding,
which will be aided by disseminating the developed methods in a workshop to
train early career interdisciplinary researchers, as well as public lectures to
engage the broader community in these deep questions about fundamental physics
and the nature of probability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.