* 2043544
* Mechanism of UVB-induced DNA methylation suppression and inheritance in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Xuehua Zhong, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 06/30/2022
* USD 855,000.00

It is urgent to develop crops that survive and maintain high yields under
dynamic climate conditions. The goal of this project is to understand how plants
sense the ever-changing environment and reprogram their chromatin landscapes to
achieve adaptability and robustness, with a specific focus on exposure to high
levels of ultraviolet radiation. The focus is on epigenetic modifications, the
chemical information layered onto the genome that switches genes ‘on’ or ‘off’
and which has emerging roles in plant responses to diverse environmental
stresses. This study could ultimately enable the development of innovative
chromatin-based technology for biomass production and agricultural improvement.
In addition, this project will have a broad educational impact by providing
multi-disciplinary research training opportunities for students and scientists
from diverse backgrounds including those from underrepresented groups such as
women and minorities. Another impact will be the development of learning modules
to disseminate epigenetic research to the public, including tabletop science
stations for K-12 students and a summer science-camp for rural Wisconsin high
school students and science teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cytosine DNA
methylation is emerging as a molecular interpreter in sensing and translating
extracellular signals to guide diverse cellular and physiological functions.
Despite the numerous studies describing altered DNA methylomes in response to
environmental stress, little is known about how distinct DNA methylation
patterns are generated, maintained, and removed over time during stress. This
project will enhance understanding of how plants respond to ultraviolet B (UVB)
radiation by reprogramming the DNA methylation landscape, using Arabidopsis
thaliana as a powerful model. Specifically, this project will investigate how
UVB and its photoreceptor interact to alter locus- and tissue-specific DNA
methylation and also UVB-induced stress priming and epigenetic memory. Findings
from this project will provide mechanistic insights into how signaling cascades
intertwine with chromatin dynamics to guide cellular and organismal functions.
Given the importance of DNA methylation and signaling cascades in diverse
biological processes, understanding how chromatin senses and transduces
environmental stimuli is a fundamental question relevant to both plants and
animals. This award was co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Plant Genome Research
Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.