* 2043588
* Collaborative Research: Interactions between Arctic cyclones, atmospheric rivers, and sea ice in a warming climate
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Christine Shields, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 01/31/2024
* USD 396,216.00

The Arctic is undergoing a dramatic transformation due to global climate change,
including major reductions in the areal coverage and thickness of Arctic sea
ice. Past research suggests that Arctic sea ice loss will likely lead to
stronger winds near the surface, accompanied by more frequent and/or intense
storms. This project is testing the hypothesis that such interactions represent
an important but unrecognized feedback: reduced sea ice coverage leading to
stronger surface winds and storms, greater surface evaporation, and stronger and
more frequent "atmospheric rivers" flowing into the Arctic, leading in turn to
accelerated sea ice loss. Discoveries from the study will help decision makers
address numerous environmental challenges in the Arctic that affect the region's
people, ecosystems, economy, and security. For example, stronger storms and
reduced sea ice coverage likely will lead to stronger wind-driven waves and
greater coastal erosion affecting Arctic communities. In addition, stronger
waves and storms may hinder plans for expanded Arctic marine navigation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes an original perspective by
investigating as a system the interactive roles of sea ice, moisture, and
atmospheric/oceanic dynamics in the Arctic's ongoing climate transformation.
Past studies have investigated coupled responses between certain components, but
this research will advance knowledge by broadening the analysis to encompass a
semi-enclosed and partially reinforcing system of physical processes involving
sea ice, cyclones, wind, and moisture/precipitation (including atmospheric
rivers). To achieve these objectives, the researchers are studying archived
global climate model simulations from the Community Earth System Model (CESM)
Large Ensembles, Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (versions 5 and 6), and
Polar Amplification Model Intercomparison Project (PAMIP) in combination with
two sets of innovative modeling experiments using the latest CESM2 version. They
are using these results to assess the interactive physical mechanisms comprising
the proposed feedback system loop and address three overarching research
questions: (1) how extratropical cyclones, associated atmospheric rivers, and
Arctic winds affect sea ice through heat, moisture, and momentum fluxes; (2) how
sea ice in turn affects cyclones, atmospheric rivers, and Arctic winds; and (3)
how a changing climate will affect these feedback processes and their relative
importance over different spatial and temporal scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.