* 2043431
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Piloting On-Demand Multimodal Transit in Atlanta
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2021,09/30/2021
* Pascal Van Hentenryck, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 09/30/2021
* USD 47,793.00

In the United States, car ownership remains the best predictor of upwards social
mobility. Those without a car are grievously disadvantaged in accessing jobs,
health care, and decent groceries. Moreover, housing patterns further limit
social mobility, as low-income populations often reside far away from job
opportunities and have few efficient public transit options. Ride-hailing
services have sometimes helped in providing additional mobility options. But, in
general, they have widened inequalities in accessibility, servicing the needs of
an affluent population, reducing the revenues of transit authorities, and
increasing congestion and emissions. The importance of transit has also being
highlighted during the pandemic. This award envisions a future for public
transit that meets these mobility challenges for all population segments through
the concept of On-Demand Multimodal Transit Systems (ODMTS). ODMTS combine on-
demand services to serve low-density regions with high-occupancy vehicles (buses
and/or trains) to travel along high-density corridors. The resulting door-to-
door services have been shown to improve convenience, reduce costs, and provide
a unique opportunity to expand services and job accessibility in neighborhoods
where traditional transit systems have been too costly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
validate the concept of ODMTS at scale, this civic engagement project explores
pilots in Atlanta, the city of Smyrna in Cobb county, and Gwinnett county. By
studying complementary high-impact pilot settings, i.e., transit deserts, cities
with no transit systems, counties in need of better connections to a large city,
and support for low-income population, the project hopes to create a blueprint
for the deployment of a new generation of transit systems across the country. To
support these pilots, this award researches the scientific and technological
advances to translate the concept of ODMTS into successful pilots. In
particular, it explores four research threads to overcome knowledge gaps: (1)
the modeling of mobility patterns and their relationship to the built
environment, capturing future housing and retail profiles; (2) the joint
optimization of mode adoption and network design; (3) the joint optimization of
on-demand and recurrent requests; and (4) the modeling of the transit regulatory
environment ((ADA, EEO, Title VI). This award adopts a community-driven
participatory design, sustained by advanced simulations, visualizations, and
metrics to highlight the potential impact of ODMTS on mobility needs and
budgets. The blueprint for deploying ODMTS in cities around the country consists
of a software pipeline that covers the data analytics, predictive models,
optimization technology, mobile applications, and high-performance computing
architecture that plan and operate the transit
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to Track A – CIVIC
Innovation Challenge - Communities and Mobility a collaboration with NSF and the
Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.