* 2043512
* OPUS: CRS, Soil Biogeochemical Responses to Interacting Global Change Drivers and Feedbacks to the Climate System
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Serita Frey, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 243,760.00

Synthesis of long-term ecological datasets is important for providing new
scientific insights and advances. The aim of this project is to conduct a
research synthesis of data collected over nearly two decades from several long-
term global change experiments. The overarching goal is to understand the soil
responses to three global changes of significance for ecosystems in the
northeastern United States (climate warming, atmospheric nitrogen deposition,
and invasion by non-native plants). Soils are the largest repository of carbon
(as organic matter) in the terrestrial biosphere, and the degree to which these
global changes will accelerate or suppress soil organic matter decay will
influence carbon and nutrient cycling processes and feedbacks to the climate
system. The results and products of this research will provide a synthetic
understanding of how soil warming, soil nitrogen enrichment, and plant invasion
interact to influence biological and chemical processes in forest
soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this OPUS project is to conduct a core
research synthesis of data collected over 18 years from four long-term global
change experiments at the Harvard Forest Long-term Ecological Research site with
the goal to understand how multiple global change drivers act individually and
in combination to influence soil microbial and biogeochemical parameters, with
an emphasis on fungal community and soil organic matter dynamics. The ongoing
experiments span 14-32 years in duration and represent some of the longest
running experimental manipulations of their type globally. These sites have the
same climate and similar soils, vegetation, and land-use histories and use
identical soil warming and nitrogen fertilization techniques. A coordinated set
of biogeochemical and microbial measurements have been made. This data synthesis
approach offers a unique opportunity to understand how increasing soil
temperatures, soil nitrogen enrichment, and biotic invasion individually or in
combination affect soil biogeochemistry, plant-soil interactions, and microbial
community dynamics over time. While several syntheses have been done for
individual experiments, there has been no coordinated effort to integrate and
synthesize data across experiments. The synthesis plan has two key components:
(1) testing a mechanism for the soil carbon response to simultaneous warming and
nitrogen enrichment, and (2) a cross-study synthesis of fungal community
responses to global change and linkages to soil carbon storage. Data sets to be
used in this synthesis include long-term records of 1) soil abiotic parameters
(temperature, moisture, pH, bulk density, texture); 2) biogeochemical
measurements (soil respiration, inorganic N, N mineralization, total soil C and
N, root biomass, mycorrhizal colonization); and 3) microbial biomass, activity,
diversity, community composition, and functional capacity. The project will
provide training for postdoctoral researchers and study results will be
incorporated into classes taught at the University of New
Hampshire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.