* 2043506
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant. Fluid Strategies: Water Management in Cape Colony and Natal Port Cities
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Graham Mooney, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 15,522.00

In 2018 and 2019, Cape Town underwent historic water shortages resulting from
decreased rainfall and a ballooning population. Three other major coastal
cities—Port Elizabeth, East London, and Durban—have also felt increased stress
on their water supply and sanitation infrastructure, a growing issue thanks to
climate change and underfunded infrastructural maintenance. This project
responds to this crisis by exploring the history of water management and its
relationship to public health in these four major port cities of British-
occupied Cape Colony and Natal between 1850 and 1910. While scholars in public
health and sociology have examined how municipal administrators and urban
residents manage cities’ clean and wastewater, few have considered them
together. This research establishes how both residents and governments construct
ideas about how to control urban sanitation and water supply. Water is a
valuable resource to understand municipal public health priorities because of
its widespread necessity and increasing scarcity. This project examines the
relationship between municipal authorities and urban residents to illuminate the
colonial legacies of water management and infrastructure in these cities. It
aims to help those municipalities, among others, better understand the different
perspectives and voices involved in clean and wastewater
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of this project are to reveal
how municipal and resident actions come into conflict or cooperate with one
another; explore how colonial municipalities and their residents use definitions
of sanitary water in daily public health prevention; and demonstrate how and why
the non-human environment complicates and influences sanitary engineering and
infrastructure. The project addresses these goals by using historical methods to
analyze documents from the Western Cape Archives and the UK National Archives,
including correspondence, resident petitions, public health and nuisance
inspector reports, municipal statutes, newspaper articles, and municipal
committee reports. These sources uncover administrative and resident
perspectives across the four cities that depict the day-to-day realities of
water supply and management. In doing so, this project exposes the racial,
class, and gendered interests and values driving water use and management. It
deepens our understanding of public health by addressing how disease outbreaks
and water shortages create the need for more efficient and better-maintained
drainage and water delivery infrastructure. This is a pressing issue in
postcolonial cities, where municipalities often continue to use infrastructure
built under colonial governments and thus reckon with its legacies. The project
expands on environmental studies by showing how the natural world—plants,
animals, and other non-human phenomena—is constantly present in the decisions
people make, particularly when it threatens elements like water that are
necessary to a city’s existence. Ultimately, this research demonstrates that it
takes cooperation and understanding between administrators and residents to
recognize and redress disproportionate access and delivery of utilities to
municipal inhabitants, particularly the most vulnerable members of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.