* 2043209
* Insuring Slavery: Actuarial Science and the Underwriting of the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade in the Eighteenth Century
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Michael Ralph, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 03/31/2024
* USD 533,292.00

This project provides the first systematic analysis of the application of
probabilistic mathematics to the trade in enslaved Africans. It offers
foundational research for an exploration of the relationship between the marine
insurance industry and the trans-Atlantic trade in human beings across more than
one hundred years. Through this work, the project traces a complete circuit of
value across the trans-Atlantic slave tradeâ€”from the price for which enslaved
persons were sold on the coast of Africa, to the price for which they were
insured as cargo, to the price for which they were auctioned, to the price for
which they were later insured or rented out as a workers. This research
contributes significantly to the resurgent interest in making sense of the role
enslavement played in shaping techniques of accounting, risk management, and
actuarial science. Data will be used to expand the Treasury of Weary Souls, a
public database of policies that insured enslaved persons as
property.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is comprised of three activities
that produce two outcomes. First, it conducts a systematic scoping review and
qualitative coding of the remaining records of known individual underwriters in
London during the eighteenth century. Second, it conducts a systematic scoping
review and qualitative coding of insurance-focused archival collections for
records pertaining to the trade of enslaved Africans as well as a reevaluation
of slavery-focused archival collections for records pertaining to insurance.
Third, it conducts preliminary archival research on the relationship between the
slave trade and insurance in western Europe as well as the insurance of slave-
produced goods returning to Europe. This research produces traditional scholarly
output including articles and a book. Through our methodological innovations,
our publications, and our database, we will generate foundational material for
scholars and the public to better understand the role of still-in-use risk-
assessment techniques and financial instruments that have their roots in the
trans-Atlantic slave trade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.