* 2043026
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Co-Designing Protocols for Data Creation, Analysis, and Use among Local Care Networks in Seattle and Boston to Enhance Disaster Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Emma Spiro, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,997.00

Crises catalyze existing and latent groups of people to engage in collective
action - asking individuals to pool their undivided attention, unique skills,
and valuable informational resources together in order to respond effectively to
a range of events, including global health pandemics, wildfires, earthquakes,
etc. Once convened, an open question within crisis informatics is how to best
organize and coordinate latent groups for effective response, especially those
representing traditionally underrepresented populations? This question becomes
all the more salient when there are information asymmetries (advantages and
disadvantages) between groups that prohibit effective cooperation. In the
context of Covid-19 it's critical that information asymmetries are overcome to
effectively share and pool informational resources. In particular, there is a
need to better align the strategic outreach and formal information dissemination
activities of municipal governments with citizen-led cooperative groups focused
on distribution of local resources. This project considers the latter to be
“networks of care” - individuals coalescing around particular situated
vulnerabilities that are revealed or exacerbated by the ongoing global health
pandemic. Networks of care, by definition, operate independent from formal
government agencies, sometimes because the public sector has failed to care for
historically underserved communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study the
potential integration of information from networks of care with top-down,
centralized, governmental COVID-19 responses, the proposed research-centered
pilot project seeks to prototype modular protocols for data creation, analysis,
and use - co-designed with care networks, public libraries, and municipal
government in Seattle and Boston. These protocols will be flexible to a variety
of disasters and crises, and usable in less extreme contexts to build resilience
to future pandemics or other crisis events. These protocols will also
specifically address privacy protections and data formats, as well as data
literacy, collection, storage, cleaning, analysis, visualization, use, and
deletion that are necessary for meaningful data
exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the four month planning grant the PI team
will be assembled and the research team will collect and assess the relevance of
municipal 311, Twitter, and other open data about COVID-19 in Seattle and
Boston. Major top-down and bottom-up sources of information about the pandemic
will be catalogued, and care networks beyond those named in this planning grant
will be prioritized for potential engagement during a full award. Participating
care networks will be engaged so as to gather information about the types of
data they are collecting, whether they share any of that data and with whom, and
their preferences for privacy protections in exchanging information with local
governments. Engagement activities under this planning grant will include remote
video-conferencing meetings among the community and city partners, as well as
the PI team, senior personnel academic collaborators and consultants.
Facilitation will elicit further community-based participants or relevant
stakeholders and provide the basis for a future pilot
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.