* 2043286
* GOALI: Modeling, Evaluation, and Control of Tire Blowout for Automated and Partially Automated Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Xinyu Du, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 12/31/2023
* USD 310,000.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project
advances a research foundation for effective systems to model, predict, and
mitigate the effects of tire blowout on automobile dynamics. The goal of this
project is to substantially improve road safety, especially as driver-assist
systems or full autonomy become more widespread in personal vehicles. Three
specific research thrusts are addressed. The first research thrust is an in-
depth model of the blowout event itself -- essentially a "super slow-motion"
look at the changes that occur as the tire rapidly loses its integrity. This
model is embedded in a vehicle simulation software, to predict the dynamic
response of various vehicles, under different ambient conditions. Because this
high-fidelity modeling approach splits the brief duration of the blowout into
many tiny time intervals, the resulting computer software is too slow to be used
during an actual event. Therefore, the second research thrust is to create a
model of tire blowout that can be run by an on-board computer to help keep the
car under control. An "impulsive" control model condenses the blowout event into
a single jump change in the vehicle status. An on-board computer uses the
impulsive model to interpret sensor readings, determine the type of blowout that
has occurred, and predict the subsequent motion of the car. Finally, the on-
board computer uses the model to keep the car under control until it can be
brought to a safe stop. This controller is appropriate for self-driving
vehicles, however the near future is more likely to see deployment of partial
autonomy, in which a driver-assist feature shares some degree of control with a
human operator. For partially autonomous situations the on-board controller must
be able to predict and accommodate operator inputs. Therefore, the third
research thrust of the project is the creation of a human-behavior model to be
integrated with the vehicle control system, that will enable effective shared
control and ensure safe operation over a wide range of driver skills and
emotional states. Each year tens of thousands of accidents and hundreds of
deaths could be prevented by a successful outcome to this project. The
transition of the results to commercial practice will be facilitated by a
research partnership with General Motors, who will provide subject-matter
expertise, and validate scale-model laboratory experiments with full-scale
testing at GM facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first of three tasks will
advance the research team's preliminary efforts towards an experimentally
validated, high-fidelity model of tire blowout. The model features a two-phase
analysis of forces during blowout, with the first phase accounting for the
initial collapse of the tire, and the second phase accounting for the wheel
behavior after the rim contacts the ground. This high-fidelity model will be
parametrized by quantities such as tire pressure, tire size, cornering
stiffness, and vehicle geometry, and will include an analysis of the sensitivity
of vehicle behavior to those parameters. The large time-scale separation between
the dynamics of the tire blowout and the preceding and subsequent vehicle
dynamics makes this model too unwieldy for real-time use. Therefore, the second
task is to derive and validate an impulsive model of the vehicle dynamics before
and after tire blowout. That is, the dynamics of the blowout event itself are
ignored, and its effects are gathered into an instantaneous impulsive force
applied at the stricken tire, plus an associated step change in the vehicle
parameters. Versions of the model will be obtained for two types of estimators
-- the case where the identity of the blown-out tire is known, and the case for
which it must be inferred. It is of interest to consider both fully autonomous
and partially autonomous vehicles. For the latter, a human driver shares control
with an automatic controller. Under shared control, the automatic controller
should be able to interpret and predict the human driver input, in order to
provide an appropriate stabilizing response. Thus the third research task is to
create a model of human behavior, implementable by the vehicle controller. The
envisioned model represents the dynamics of human response to lane departure
error using a third-order transfer function with time delay. Subsequently, the
project will derive controllers to ensure safe lane maintenance after tire
blowout for both automated and partially automated vehicles. Innovations in this
task include the derivation of dynamic models combining impulsive and continuous
controls and disturbances. The project will also develop tools of impulsive
observability to describe conditions under which the blowout characteristics may
be inferred from sensor measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.