* 2043238
* Quorum Sensing Control of Bacterial Biofilm Formation and Dispersal
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Bonnie Bassler, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 06/30/2024
* USD 934,613.00

Biofilms, bacterial communities formed on solid surfaces, are a predominant form
of bacterial life on Earth. Biofilms are crucial for the environment, industry,
and medicine. Biofilms can be beneficial, for example in the microbiome and in
bioremediation, but biofilms can also be harmful, for example during infection
and because biofilms foul many types of surfaces. Biofilm dispersal is crucial
for bacterial spread and for disease transmission, but very little is known
about this important process. One aim of this project is to determine the
mechanisms that coordinate biofilm dispersal. Another aim of this project is to
determine how communication between bacterial cells helps maintain biofilms. An
exploration of the role of phages in driving biofilm formation and dispersal
will also be a focus of this work This work will advance the progress of science
by revealing the mechanisms that provide bacterial biofilms their resilience and
they will reveal biofilm vulnerabilities. Highly talented students will be
trained by working on this project. Efforts to increase diversity among those
who participate in science research and efforts to expand public access/public
understanding of science are central to the project and will be accomplished
through a variety of nation-wide science outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of this research are
to explore the mechanics, spatial and temporal cell-cell communication
processes, and signal transduction networks that enable bacteria to build and
subsequently disassemble multicellular biofilm communities. An exploration of
the role of phages in driving biofilm formation and dispersal will be a focus.
The studies will span biological scales - from the molecule, to the protein, to
the network, to the cell, to the community. At a basic science level, the work
will define the mechanisms bacteria use to uniquely detect and respond to kin
and non-kin in communities, how genes and mechanics interact to drive community
morphology, and how inter-domain interactions influence multicellular community
dynamics. At a practical level, these investigations could lead to synthetic
strategies to manipulate biofilm formation and dispersal, quorum-sensing-
mediated communication, and phage infection of bacteria. Consequently, the
results should reveal the principles underpinning the evolution and maintenance
of traits that are not essential under laboratory conditions but are crucial and
precisely regulated in nature. With this knowledge in hand, the field should be
able to rapidly move forward to develop synthetic strategies to prevent or
promote quorum sensing, to prevent or promote single-species and mixed-species
biofilm formation, and to prevent or promote biofilm dispersal, as required.
Such applications will have industrial, agricultural, and medical relevance. The
PI is highly involved in service as Chair of Department, as a teacher, as an
editor, broadly in national educational and outreach initiatives, and through
her service to not-for-profit foundations and government funding
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.