* 2043104
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): Secure Computing Initiative
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Ali Mili, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,641,004.00

This New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) project will continue and expand
the Secure Computing Initiative (SCI) as part of the CyberCorps®: Scholarship
for Service (SFS) program. SCI is designed to prepare the next generation of
cybersecurity professionals to fulfill the national need for cybersecurity
experts, while promoting diversity, learning, and discovery. SCI has been
successful in recruiting, training, and placing highly qualified cybersecurity
experts in government positions since 2016. The SCI project recruits students in
their junior or senior undergraduate year and supports them through the
completion of one of two cybersecurity master’s degrees offered at NJIT: MS in
Cyber Security and Privacy or MS in Information Technology Administration and
Security. The project also includes several activities to recruit a diverse
student body, such as working with the NJIT’s Murray Center for Women in
Technology to enhance gender diversity, collaborating with the NJIT chapters of
Hispanic and African American professional societies to enhance racial/ethnic
diversity, and cooperating with the NJIT’s Educational Opportunity Program
office to recruit students from disadvantaged socio-economic
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SCI cybersecurity education model is
characterized by seven features: flexible cybersecurity curricula, experiential
learning, research-supported education, nurturing students’ creativity, a
cybersecurity technology watch activity, fostering students’ abilities to work
under stress, and multi-tier mentoring. NJIT has a strong commitment to
cybersecurity education, demonstrated by more than 40 courses that focus on this
area. As a result, NJIT’s undergraduate and graduate programs allow the SCI
students flexibility in choosing their area of cybersecurity specialization. In
addition, SCI incorporates experiential learning projects that map to the
National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) Cybersecurity Workforce
framework. SCI scholars are required to participate in a research project with a
mentor drawn from a pool of research-active faculty who teach and conduct
research in cybersecurity. Creativity is stimulated through training in design-
thinking approaches for research projects and working in interdisciplinary
teams. To keep the students abreast of evolving cybersecurity threats, SCI
organizes a cybersecurity technology watch, which consists of investigating
recent cybersecurity breaches, analyzing them, and drawing lessons from them. To
develop appropriate skills for work under stress, the SCI students participate
in cybersecurity competitions, in which they typically have to solve practical
problems in a limited amount of time. Finally, SCI is structured for a multi-
tier mentoring approach that includes guidance/feedback both from the PIs and
peers serving as mentors. In addition to training the next generation
cybersecurity workforce, SCI also produces scientific results and publicly
available software that helps advance the discipline of cybersecurity. Many of
the SCI activities involve contact with the general public and are likely to
sensitize society at large to the importance of cybersecurity. The outreach
activities also include enrichment programs that focus on cybersecurity
education for high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds
proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and
aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity
workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.