* 2043611
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Leveraging AI-assist Microtransit to Ameliorate Spatiotemporal Mismatch between Housing and Employment
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2021
* Daniel Grosu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 12/31/2021
* USD 49,898.00

COVID-19 disproportionately affects the low-wage workers whose spatiotemporal
mobility pattens, e.g., between housing and job, have dramatically changed.
Microtransit service has been recently launched in Detroit to complement the
existing public transit options. Despite the initial success, a salient issue is
how to effectively and efficiently utilize microtransit resources to ameliorate
spatiotemporal mismatch between employment and housing for low-wage workers.
With the rise of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and increasingly available smart
mobility data, the vision of this research project is to create a dynamic
routing prediction system based on learning the hourly mobility patterns between
jobs and housing. It is designed for the stakeholders (i.e., community advocates
and public transport authority) to visualize and forecast the mismatch between
employment and housing, which is translated into a dynamic trip demand that can
be used to design adaptive routing algorithms to optimize the allocation of
microtransit resources and to enhance micromobility via minimizing the rider’s
first/last mile. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently public transportation with
fixed routes and schedules are periodically tweaked and/or augmented to
ameliorate the ever-changing spatial mismatch. Despite its long-term
effectiveness, it is not sufficiently flexible to adapt to the hourly
spatiotemporal variation of jobs-housing mobility patterns primarily from the
hourly paid workers. The long-term goal of this project is to work with civic
partners in the city of Detroit to (1) design, implement and deploy an AI-assist
microtransit system to ameliorate the spatiotemporal mismatch between housing
and employment, particularly for the low-wage workers residing in the under
resourced neighborhoods; and (2) use geocoded socioeconomic data to identify the
community with disparities in mobility and deploy smart mobility technology to
reduce the disparities and foster thriving communities. The project’s near-term
objective is to leverage and power the existing microtransit service with
cutting-edge technology and select a few spatiotemporally mismatched regions in
Detroit as the testbed for our smart mobility strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research innovation is expected to provide immediate, low-cost yet effective
public transit solutions that are expected to bring an immediate benefit to the
vulnerable communities in Detroit by significantly reducing transit risk,
commute time/distance and trip cost. It can be replicated to other US cities to
ameliorate the spatiotemporal mismatch between housing and employment. In
addition, it can provide insight for designing long-term intervention strategies
to eliminate the mismatch and reduce the mobility disparities, for example,
government to launch new transportation options and create jobs; and builders to
develop housing in the mismatched regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
in response to Track A – CIVIC Innovation Challenge - Communities and Mobility a
collaboration with NSF and the Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.