* 2043613
* PFI-TT: Using Big Data Analytics to Empower K-12 Teachers for Instructional Improvement
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,10/31/2023
* Min Sun, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 10/31/2023
* USD 301,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop an online platform for
collaborative learning and analytics for global education. The proposed
technology uses the latest developments in educational big data and machine
learning techniques to empower K-12 teachers for instructional improvement. K-12
school systems have become the latest frontier in big data, as the COVID-19
pandemic has accelerated the digital transformation of teacher and student
learning with artificial intelligence playing a key role. Despite a great
societal need, K-12 systems remain one of the areas least transformed by
technology. Teachers currently lack the kind of technological tools that can
efficiently support their lesson plan, reflection, and learning. The proposed
technology aims to address these needs and may have potential to generate
economic value, as education technology places a critical role in advancing the
human capital needed to drive economic growth. This team, led by women and
people of color, will broaden participation by piloting the initial prototype in
schools that serve large proportions of students of color from low-income
families.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project uses a participatory
design-based implementation approach to co-design with and for teachers. The
proposed technology will include libraries of high-quality instructional
materials that teachers can adapt and incorporate into their own lesson plans.
The platform leverages machine learning analytics to allow teachers to
efficiently conduct self-learning and be mentored and coached by other teachers.
Moreover, the development of this technology will incorporate a rigorous, quasi-
experimental approach that combines both quantitative and qualitative evidence
to examine its effectiveness on improving teaching and student outcomes, as well
as factors that moderate its usefulness in schools. The proposed technology will
be supported by a team that represents the ecosystems necessary for its ongoing
success, including expertise in education and data science research, product
development and technology transfer, and marketing and business
strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.