* 2043717
* Audiomotor Speech Rhythms and Their Perceptual Consequences
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* David Poeppel, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 02/29/2024
* USD 495,472.00

A long-standing puzzle in psychology and the brain sciences is how the systems
that underpin perception and cognition (e.g., vision, hearing, intention) are
coordinated with those that generate action (e.g., reaching, speaking, walking).
Although a great deal has been learned about how these individual systems work,
how these critical functions interact remains poorly understood. This
interaction is especially important in speech communication, which is of
remarkable significance in humans. In order to use speech successfully, both to
communicate with others and to monitor oneself speaking, the auditory speech
perception circuit and the motor speech production system must precisely align
in time. This temporal coordination is important for planning to speak,
monitoring one’s errors, learning language sounds, and learning new words from a
conversation. In this research program, the investigators study this alignment
through auditory-motor synchronization. They use behavioral, neuroscience, and
computational approaches to characterize auditory-motor synchronization and test
the consequences of this synchronization for real-life behaviors such as word
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important feature of recent work that
motivates this research is the discovery of a simple behavioral paradigm, the
“spontaneous speech synchronization test” (SSS test). The test measures how
precisely listeners synchronize their own spoken output to speech that they
hear. The procedure is remarkably sensitive to individual differences, revealing
that not all listeners synchronize equally well. Notably, the synchronization
scores from the SSS test not only correlate highly with brain anatomy and
physiology but are also predictive of listeners’ performance in important real-
life challenges, such as word-learning. The new research builds on the novelty,
sensitivity, and broad utility of the SSS test. The research plan is organized
into four aims. First, the investigators will optimize the test for broad use by
other scientists. Second, they will perform new experiments that test how
auditory-motor synchronization, i.e., the rhythmic alignment between speech
perception and speech production systems, guides speech perception. Third, they
will develop a computational model constructed to provide a mechanistic
description as well as to generate further testable predictions of auditory-
motor synchronization. Fourth, the team will explore the consequences of
synchronization for the essential capacity of word learning. An overarching
practical, final goal is to release the SSS test in an open access format.
Because the test outcome correlates with word learning, specific patterns of
neural connectivity, and other cognitive features, it can be a useful, quick,
easy-to-implement assay for researchers, educators, and
clinicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.