* 2043599
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Gender and Race in the History of Folk Medicine
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Lisette Varon-Carvajal, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 15,750.00

During the last few decades, many parts of the world have witnessed the
resurgence of midwifery and other traditional healing practices. Even in cities,
sites where biomedicine has allegedly taken hold, there is a growing interest in
medical alternatives. This contemporary phenomenon challenges the teleological
framework of traditional histories of medicine that have long been interested in
explaining the emergence of biomedicine, the professionalization of medicine,
and relatedly, the medicalization of society, and calls for a longer examination
of the history of folk medicine. Following a long tradition of scholarship that
questions unilinear narratives of scientific or medical modernity, this project
argues that folk healers were, and remain to be, essential medical providers.
Progress narratives that have presented them as superseded or ousted by the
professional doctor are always created retrospectively by historians and fall
into the trap of teleology. This project establishes a conversation between past
and present to investigate how present-day concerns shape the knowledge that is
produced about the history of folk medicine, and conversely, how the past
resonates in the lives of its current practitioners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
longitudinal study reconstructs the lives of unlicensed midwives, healers, and
surgeons, people who provided the bulk of medical care before the rise of
biomedicine in towns and villages where there were few or no doctors. Three main
questions drive this research: First, who provided the lion's share of medical
care regionally before the rise of biomedicine, and what were the key medical
practices involved that have so far eluded historical analysis? Second, how did
race and gender shape the medical interventions of folk healers? And third, how
do contemporary narratives of scientific modernity inform the ways of
understanding the history of folk medicine? This project focuses on the role of
midwives, healers and surgeons as medical experts in criminal trials, civil
trials, and their participation in municipal councils, all instances in which
they provided medical certifications to townspeople. Drawing on qualitative data
gathered in multiple archives, this project analyzes how diverse actors
(patients, judges, lawyers, and witnesses) upheld ideas of proper/improper
behavior according to gender and race ideologies, and how medical practitioners
challenged or reproduced such imaginaries in their medical practice. This
project supplements archival research with interviews involving current folk
healers, in order to reflect on: 1) how they conceive of the body, disease, and
healing today; 2) how they understand their own past and history. In doing so,
this study aims to articulate the role of gender and race in the construction of
medical expertise, and to elucidate how present-day concerns shape the knowledge
that is produced about the past, and how the past resonates in the
present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.