* 2043555
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Roger Bacon's Pharmacology and the Prolongation of Life
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Meagan Allen, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 19,464.00

The history of medicine in the Middle Ages is often characterized as unusual,
and considered far removed from modern medicine. But this ignores two important
areas deserving further study: the medieval roots of many twenty-first century
medical practices, and continuing concerns about the safety and efficacy of
drugs. The fears of alternative medicine groups promoting homeopathy, essential
oils, and “all-natural” remedies can be found as far back as the Middle Ages.
The goal of this project is to study the practice of pharmacology in the Middle
Ages in relation to the Franciscan Roger Bacon’s (d.1292) practice of medical
alchemy, through which he attempted to produce medicines that would prolong
human life. Bacon’s medical alchemy exemplifies thirteenth century attitudes
towards medical practice, which simultaneously deferred to classical authorities
and advocated for experiment and the creation of new knowledge. By examining
extant manuscripts written by Bacon in light of contemporary 13th century
medical authorities, this project examines the ways in which Bacon believes the
theories of alchemy - which teaches how both organic and inorganic substances
are generated - provides the means to create more effective pharmaceuticals.
This history of pharmacology is important both for historians of medicine and
current medical practice: it clarifies understanding of the early use of
inorganic materials and their manipulation in medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
examining Bacon’s alchemical and medical theories in light of thirteenth century
medical education and practice, this project answers three central questions:
(1) What types of medicines does Bacon think are useful in restoring health? (2)
What physiological effects do these medicines have on the body, and why are they
effective against disease when other medicines fail? And (3) How can we
characterize the relationship between Bacon’s medical theories and those taught
in universities? In situating Bacon within the 13th century medical traditions
that focused on creating panaceas such as theriac, this research shows that
Bacon, while certainly unique in many of his ideas, is still a part of the
thirteenth century intellectual culture and that his ideas are molded by
advances in medicine and contemporary theological discourses. It is imperative
that the originality of Bacon’s ideas be established, as previous scholars have
suggested that for the first 150 or so years after its introduction to the west
in 1144, alchemy was focused more on the transmutation of metals than the making
medicines. Thus Bacon is generally considered the first western author to unite
alchemy and medicine. If it could be shown that Bacon’s alchemical ideas were
influenced by others, then the early history of western alchemy, especially its
ties with medical practice, would need to be re-
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.