* 2043736
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B:  UNUM: Unification for Underground resilience Measures
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Debra Laefer, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,997.00

Natural disasters are predicted to pose increasing threats to urban populations.
Given community reliance on utility services and the interconnected and
interoperable nature of utility services, infrastructure issues in one
neighborhood may have direct and/or cascading effects in others (e.g. a
transformer overload in one area may cripple services in distant neighborhoods).
Improving natural hazard resilience requires full knowledge of subsurface usage
and community interests in them to identify threats and vulnerabilities as well
to design effective mitigation strategies. To directly address this challenge
the Unification for Underground Resilience Measures (UNUM) project proposes
examining subsurface data development, integration and interoperability options
in ways envisioned after the 9/11 New York City (NYC) World Trade Center attack.
Three-dimensional (3D) integration, viewing, and querying of subsurface data can
enable improved risk identification, the implementation of cost-effective
mitigation and redundancy measures, and enhanced communications with communities
which currently have little access to infrastructure information. Such
infrastructure information is typically held in proprietary systems, stored in
separate silos, and likely to be in incompatible formats. Overcoming current
data integration barriers requires the design of seamless, interoperable, 3D
data storage and visualization systems and a willingness to share data with
appropriate security measures in place. UNUM will assemble all relevant
stakeholders for the necessary data sharing agreements, security arrangements,
and stakeholder concerns to enable a Stage 2 implementation for 2 NYC
neighborhoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UNUM embraces the Model for Underground Data
Definition and Interchange (MUDDI) [an Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) led data
modeling effort for standardizing underground utility information]. In Stage 1,
individual and group meetings and information gathering will take place with 31
unique stakeholders including government agencies, local utility companies,
community groups, and political leaders. UNUM focuses on two NYC neighborhoods:
Sunset Park, Brooklyn and the Grand Central Business Improvement District,
Manhattan and is expected to generate data gathering, sharing, and application
recommendations applicable across NYC and beyond. Stage 2 will implement Stage 1
recommendations through the MUDDI data model for the two neighborhoods. These
community test beds will be used to refine an infrastructure data integration
strategy that can be applied across multiple jurisdictions across the U.S. to
help assess threats and vulnerabilities of vital infrastructure systems and to
identify single points of failure and triggers to cascading effects. The project
will provide effective models for multi-stakeholder engagement and a detailed
roadmap for the implementation of a subsurface data
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.