* 2043918
* Identifying &amp; Implementing Evidence-Based Online Tutoring Practices: Online Practices for Tutoring In Mathematics Using Meaningful Interactions
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Deborah Moore-Russo, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 12/31/2021
* USD 307,040.00

This project addresses the national need to provide support systems that enhance
undergraduate STEM learning. It will do so by investigating best practices for
online tutoring in college mathematics. Face-to-face tutoring in mathematics is
known to correlate with positive learning outcomes including higher course
grades, greater persistence, and improved retention. Providing quality online
tutoring experiences also benefits for tutors by helping them learn valuable
skills such as organization, time management, teamwork, problem-solving,
leadership, and technical communication. The COVID-19 pandemic forced many
university-based tutoring services to either stop offering help to students or
move online. Many chose to move online. However, the effective implementation of
online mathematics tutoring is not yet well understood. Such understanding is
important because online mathematics tutoring could benefit students long after
the current pandemic has dissipated. Preliminary observations have shown that
online mathematics tutoring sessions typically serve as a homework service:
tutors solve problems brought to them by students and the students watch and
copy down the solutions rather than actively participating. This study aims to
make the online tutoring experience more like the in-person experience by
discovering ways to ensure students are active participants in tutoring
sessions. Through continued observation of online tutor-student interactions,
the project will identify tutor behaviors that encourage greater student
participation in online tutoring sessions. The project will then design training
materials to promote the most effective behaviors in tutors. These training
materials will be freely distributed to the mathematics education community
through workshops, conference presentations, and online resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project’s online tutoring model will be tested and
refined at West Virginia University and the University of Oklahoma, two large
universities that server large populations of students. The project will
identify tutor practices that promote student-centered online tutoring
interactions and generate training materials to optimize the frequency of such
interactions in online tutoring sessions. Recorded online tutoring sessions will
be analyzed using inductive and deductive thematic analysis to identify tutor
behaviors that promote student-centered tutoring interactions. Pen and tablet
technologies will be utilized and compared to online sessions without such tools
to study specific impacts on tutor practices and student engagement. Through
multiple cycles of observation and implementation, a set of empirically tested
training materials will be developed, including a Tutoring Manual for tutors and
a Training Guide for tutoring center leaders/faculty. The Training Manual for
tutors will contain resources such as technology suggestions (e.g., best
collaborative whiteboard app; how to use your phone as a document camera; apps
to scan written work to pdf), articles to read, and how to be an effective
virtual coach. The Training Guide for faculty will provide resources such as how
to host a one-day training before the semester starts, how to support tutors
during the semester, and how to evaluate online tutoring offerings. This project
is funded through the NSF IUSE:EHR program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). The IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.