* 2043339
* CAREER: Remote Control of Humanoid Robot Locomotion using Human Whole-body Movement and Mutual Adaptation
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Elizabeth Hsiao-Wecksler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 03/31/2026
* USD 736,877.00

Agile teleoperation of legged robots through unstructured environments could
enhance the capabilities of emergency responders such as firefighters. Consider
the demanding physical task of manipulating an active hose while walking over
uneven terrain. Delegating the task to a robot could be performed via direct
teleoperation if the operator were to directly control the robot's entire body
while experiencing the machineâ€™s sense of balance and the interaction forces
with the hose. Due to lags in perception-action coupling, the task can only be
performed reliably if the robot can predict and adapt to human motion intent.
Teleoperation of coordinated locomotion and manipulation therefore requires
bilateral motor and mind synergy between human and robot. The goal of this
Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project is to advance a
fundamental understanding of teleoperated locomotion of a humanoid robot
firefighter using whole-body force feedback and eye gaze intent detection. The
project will advance the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and to
advance national health, prosperity, and welfare by advancing a fundamental
understanding of the complex dynamics that arise through the bidirectional
physical interaction between human and robot agents during teleoperated
locomotion. Activities planned to enhance the broader impacts of this research
include efforts to enhance engineering education via active-learning activities,
establish interactions with the general public, students, and professionals
through outreach activities; and train the next generation of scientist leaders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project advances a fundamental understanding
of the novel dynamics that arise during bilateral whole-body teleoperation of
the locomotion of a humanoid robot traversing unstructured environments. Direct
human-in-the-loop control of locomotion via teleoperation is one way to endow
robotic assistants with human-level motor skills for physical interaction. In
this project, the human teleoperator uses their body to directly command the
robot's locomotor while receiving force feedback through a novel torso-mounted
interface. In contrast to conventional haptic interfaces that directly render to
the operator the forces applied to the robot, the project's first research aim
is to create a general mapping that renders also kinematic effect of
perturbations. The second aim is to understand human motor adaptation to robot
locomotion dynamics. The third aim is to achieve navigation on uneven terrain
via a shared-autonomy framework in which the robot adapts to human locomotion
intent by modifying its foot placement on the fly. The efficacy of the approach
is evaluated through human subjects experiment. This work makes fundamental
contributions to human whole-body haptics, biomechanics of locomotion, and
control of legged robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.