* 2043044
* I-Corps: Processing of high-performance optical isolator materials using magneto-optical garnets on Si wafers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Bethanie Stadler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of materials to improve communications. Current designs of certain
components are limited to discrete bulk components that a have large footprint,
need expensive raw materials and require a labor-intensive assembly processes.
The proposed technology will greatly simplify optical isolator manufacturing and
performance. Applications for this technology include 5G wireless networks, data
centers, and Internet of Things, and potentially photonic integrated circuits
(PICs), which offer significant power, space and cost savings along with
increased functionality for future communications systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
garnet-on-silicon optical isolator. Optical fiber technology has revolutionized
communications, but expense and assembly difficulties have prevented step-
function improvements. A hidden component in this expense is the optical
isolator that sits in front of each laser to block reflections that otherwise
interfere with the laser’s performance and lifetime. Composed of a thick iron
garnet film, grown on a single-crystal garnet substrate, the isolator is also
the likely roadblock in the expansion of fiber success. The proposed technology
enables the processing of high-performance magneto-optical garnets on Si wafers
with oxide multilayers for optical resonance that enables isolation with 1000x
thinner garnet films. In addition, revolutionary garnet compositions and designs
may provide magnet-free isolators. Together, these features may reduce cost and
ease device assembly. The use of Si as a substrate also enables integrated
device manufacturing, rather than “pick and place” assembly methods of
commercial products today. With low-magnetization garnet compositions that
maintain high Faraday rotations, this technology will have negligible dipole
fields, and devices already have been designed that do not require external
magnetic bias. These large-scale, inexpensive, magnet-free garnets open many
applications in communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.