* 2043612
* CAREER:  Virtual Reality Simulations of Moral Decision Making for Autonomous Vehicles
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Veljko Dubljevic, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2026
* USD 340,217.00

Accidents with Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) attest to the need to consider the
ethical issues inherent in AVs use, and the ethical goal functions they will be
programmed to follow. Work with AVs has been dominated by utilitarian models
both in algorithms and framing public surveys regarding AVs. However, due to
methodological issues and a pronounced resistance of the general public towards
utilitarian thinking, there is a need to offer alternative approaches that
adequately capture the flexibility of human moral judgment and decision making.
This project utilizes the Agent-Deed-Consequence (ADC) model and research on
human moral decision making to revolutionize the development of ethical
artificial intelligence (AI) technologies with the use of virtual reality (VR)
and simulations. The project aims to improve high-school and college education,
interdisciplinary scientific research, and transportation engineering by
partnering with the NC State University Libraries’ Virtual Reality Lab, NC
State’s Institute for Transportation Research and Education (ITRE), Professional
Engineers of North Carolina (PENC), and the North Carolina School of Science and
Mathematics (NCSSM). It contributes to (i) increased public scientific literacy
and public engagement with science and technology; (ii) increased participation
of women, persons with disabilities, and underrepresented minorities in
research; (iii) improved Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
education and educator development; and (iv) improved well-being of individuals
in society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ADC model draws on insights from ethics,
experimental philosophy, social psychology and decision neuroscience to explain
moral judgments and decisions by breaking them down into positive or negative
intuitive evaluations concerning the Agent, the Deed, and the Consequence, and
designating them as ‘high-’ or ‘low-stakes’ in any given situation. These
intuitive evaluations combine to produce a positive or negative judgment of
moral acceptability. For example, the overall moral judgment in a situation in
which someone committed a deed that is judged as negative (e.g., changing lanes
on a full line) would be mitigated if the agent had good intentions (e.g.,
circumventing a hazard) and the consequences were good (e.g., an accident was
avoided). The ADC model provides formulas for representing such situations
(e.g., [A+], [D-] &amp; [C+] = [MJ+] or positive moral judgment). This project
develops new moral situations about potentially harmful decisions involving
traffic, including vehicles and pedestrians, and tests moral judgment on samples
of high-school students, professional moral philosophers, and lay people with no
formal training in ethics. The moral situations are programmed and recorded as
animations in an immersive VR setting, and tested in populations of high school
and college students as well as ethicists. The project culminates with a
prototype ethical algorithm based on the ADC model which interacts with human
decision makers in a simulated visual environment in the high-fidelity traffic
simulator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.