* 2043205
* CAREER: Guiding automated synthesis of hybrid perovskites towards stability via knowledge of nanoscale ionic mechanisms
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Mahshid Ahmadi, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2026
* USD 327,511.00

Metal halide perovskites are a new class of hybrid materials with inorganic and
organic components with the potential to revolutionize optoelectronic
technologies. They have shown particular promise for the next generation of
inexpensive, efficient solar cells. The primary limiting factor to widespread
use of perovskites is that they are not stable in devices. This project will
develop an understanding of the fundamental and specific properties of
perovskites with an overarching goal of improved stability. This project will
elucidate and describe the electrochemistry of these materials to inform
development of new processes for manufacture of stable perovskites. This work is
made possible by an innovative automated synthesis approach that allows for
experimentation on a diverse range of novel compositions that would be difficult
to identify and study otherwise. The PI will strive to increase interest and
participation of women in materials science and engineering research careers
through an active, project-based outreach program. This program will include
individualized career awareness mentoring for high school students and
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organicâ€“inorganic halide perovskites (OIHP)
have many qualities that are ideal for optoelectronic applications and are used
to improve function and reduce cost of solar cells, photodetectors, and light-
emitting diodes. The substantive hurdles to widespread, commercial use of OIHPs
are their instability and low long-term performance. Precise control of ionic
chemistry and understanding of how interfacial and surface chemistry affects
function are essential to overcome these limitations. This project will measure
and describe the underlying mechanisms that affect OIHP intrinsic stability to
create predictive models that will inform design of durable materials. The three
challenges related to the stability of OIHPs examined in this project are: 1)
establish rapid guided automated combinatorial synthesis workflow for material
discovery and optimization, 2) determine the role of ion chemistry via
electrochemical gating experiments, and 3) describe the kinetics and
thermodynamics of the interfacial electrochemical processes on the three-phase
junctions. The project will employ microscopy techniques and imaging of in-
operando devices to build a comprehensive understanding of the internal
electrochemical functionality of OIHP systems, which would enable a path toward
predictive modelling and optimization of processing. The proposed automated
synthesis approach using rapid characterization and slow device testing will
allow for navigation of the compositional and processing space of these
materials. The project-based outreach program will integrate the physics of
electronic and ionic charge transports with machine learning concepts for new
research experiences for undergraduate and graduate students. Grade-level
appropriate versions of these activities will be offered to interested female
high school students to increase interest in and improve preparation for
materials science careers for women and other groups underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.