* 2043207
* Improving Undergraduate Computing Education through Virtual Peer Instruction in Interactive Ebooks
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Barbara Ericson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 04/30/2024
* USD 339,459.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating the use of
Peer Instruction in a virtual learning environment. Decades of research have
provided evidence that Peer Instruction improves student learning and
engagement. However, thus far all research on Peer Instruction has been done in
a face-to-face lecture setting. Many computing instructors are adopting
interactive ebooks, which have the benefit of containing executable code and
practice problems with immediate feedback. This project will leverage such
interactive ebooks to increase the adoption of Peer Instruction by designing,
building, and testing a system that will serve Peer Instruction questions in
interactive ebooks. Research on this implementation of Peer Instruction has the
potential to improve the number and diversity of students who succeed in STEM
undergraduate courses, a goal that aligns with NSF's efforts to enhance and
improve STEM education in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new Peer
Instruction application, called Peer+, will leverage free ebooks for pre-lecture
reading and reading assessment. The system will mine existing ebooks and public
question banks to identify Peer Instruction questions. The Peer+ system will be
used to investigate: 1) the effect of synchronous and asynchronous online peer
discussion on learning and student satisfaction; 2) the effect of Peer
Instruction on retention of knowledge up to a month later; 3) the effect of
Peer+ on student retention, especially for underrepresented students; and 4) how
instructor attitudes and knowledge change due to a workshop and use of Peer+. A
design-based research approach will be used, based on social constructivism and
expectancy-value theory. The research is designed to both contribute to theory
and also test the system in real educational settings. Both qualitative and
quantitative research measures will be used to evaluate the impact of Peer+ use.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.