* 2043648
* CAREER: Engineering polymers cohesive energy density and free volume for highly selective organic separations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Michele Galizia, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2026
* USD 459,938.00

About 10% of global energy consumption (7.5 GJ per person every year) is devoted
to chemical separations. Enhancing the energy efficiency of industrial
separations is crucial to decrease costs and control environmental pollution.
Solutes are typically separated from the organic solvents in which they were
synthesized using energy intensive separations such as distillation and
absorption. Polymer membranes can be used in substitution of or in conjunction
with traditional technologies to separate species based on their permeability
through the membrane material. However, new methods for controlling the
selectivity and lifetime of polymer membranes are urgently needed to make
membrane-based separations economically competitive. This project will develop a
new approach to engineer selectivity by acting on the membrane material
properties (cohesive energy density) and morphology (free volume architecture).
Designing materials that exhibit high cohesive energy density is expected to
enhance the capability of a membrane to separate molecules based on their
different solubilities, and incorporating functional groups that provide a more
uniform and permanent free volume is expected to enhance the ability to separate
molecules based on their size. The combination of high cohesive energy density
and proper free volume architecture will yield polymer membranes exhibiting
previously unattainable selectivity for organic separations. This CAREER project
will combine experimental and computational approaches to discover a new class
of materials prepared by blending commercial and novel polymers. These blended
polymers will be judiciously selected to exhibit high cohesive energy density
and have porous networks exhibiting non-collapsible free volume architecture.
The structure of these materials will be systematically tuned to maximize the
selectivity for target species while guaranteeing superior long-term stability.
Equally important, this CAREER project will promote discovery-based learning for
high school, undergraduate, graduate students, their families, and the general
public. Results from this project will be disseminated directly in the
classroom, through workshops and high-school educational modules to enhance
public science and engineering literacy, and via influential conference talks
and publications in scientific journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional
approaches to tailor selectivity in polymer membranes are often ineffective. The
scientific goal of this CAREER project is to discover, synthesize, and
understand next-generation polymer membranes for organic solvent reverse osmosis
and nanofiltration. The leit motif of cohesive energy density and
configurational free volume will be leveraged in the design of these high
selectivity membranes with enhanced long-term stability. The fundamental
hypothesis is that a polymer membrane's solubility-selectivity concomitantly
increases with increasing cohesive energy density, and that diffusivity-
selectivity systematically increases via the incorporation of iptycene moieties
that confer non-collapsible configurational free volume. Using a combined
experimental and theoretical approach to test these hypotheses, this project
will lead to highly selective and stable polymer membranes for organic
separations and will enrich the fundamental understanding of structure-property
correlations for membrane-based organic separations. This interdisciplinary
research program will exploit materials discovery, synthesis, characterization,
and modeling as a vehicle to educate diverse student populations at various
levels and enhance science and engineering literacy among the general public.
Research and education will be integrated via i) an educational module for
middle and high school students in the Norman, OK area, ii) an Advanced Polymers
Workshop in the Southwest region of the US, iii) a new course offering for
chemical engineering students at the University of Oklahoma, and iv)
interdisciplinary training opportunities for a population of diverse graduate,
undergraduate and middle/high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.