* 2043992
* Improving Undergraduate Success through Effective Critical Thinking
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Joseph Biernacki, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 02/29/2024
* USD 298,284.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing engineering
students with important training in critical thinking. Such training is expected
to enhance their problem-solving skills, academic performance, and retention.
Information that students previously had to memorize is now just a mouse click
away. However, this availability makes it much more important that students
learn how to think critically about that information. Critical thinking includes
thinking objectively, seeking unbiased data, and considering a broad range of
perspectives. This project aims to systematically study how critical thinking
affects both short- and long-term student success over the four years of
undergraduate Chemical and Electrical Engineering education. The study will
include first year students whose progress will be monitored through graduation.
The research team also plans to investigate gendered effects of critical
thinking since women are greatly underrepresented in STEM fields. Finally, the
team will work with middle and high school teachers to explore ways to integrate
critical thinking activities at the secondary-school level, helping to better
prepare students for college. The project's findings have the potential to help
educators to design more effective critical thinking programs, including efforts
that focus on the success of women in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
goal is to explore whether deliberate training in critical thinking in early
years of the engineering curriculum improves students’ learning. To this end,
the multidisciplinary project team of engineers, psychologists, and education
researchers will use the NSF-funded Critical Thinking Assessment Test (CAT),
which was designed by a member of the investigative team in 2004. The CAT
instrument is one of the few critical thinking assessment tools that uses short
answer essay responses to assess critical thinking. The research will use a two-
level, two-factor, factorial design using direct statistical analysis, with the
CAT exam administered as pre- and post-intervention treatments. In this design
some students will be provided with interventions meant to improve critical
thinking and some students will have multiple interventions. The performance of
these students will be compared to that of control students who did not receive
the intervention(s). The nation’s socioeconomic success will be strengthened by
individuals who look objectively at information before acting and who make
informed decisions rather than relying on instinct and preconceptions. Thus,
critical thinking, together with effective problem solving and the ability to
draw connections between seemingly unrelated pieces of information, are of
tremendous societal benefit. This project is funded through the NSF IUSE:EHR
program, which supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.