* 2043832
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Starting-up with the State: Computing, Entrepreneurship, and Governance
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2021,10/31/2021
* Sandeep Mertia, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 10/31/2021
* USD 15,750.00

________________________________________________________________________________
__________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Abstract - Sandeep
Mertia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an ethnographic study of cultures of
computing in start-up incubators, focusing on digital infrastructure,
entrepreneurial practices, and state policies. The goal of this project is to
critically examine the historical, socio-technical, infrastructural,
governmental, and aspirational dimensions computing in start-up incubators, to
advance comparative social scientific understandings of the global assemblages
of technology start-ups and the promissory futures of digital innovation. In
carrying out this research in the context of the on-going COVID-19 pandemic,
this project also opens a new vantage point for looking at disruptive socio-
technical changes, particularly in postcolonial contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project ethnographically addresses three research
questions. 1) How do digital infrastructures such as government application
programming interfaces (APIs), platforms, and mobile apps shape—and how are they
shaped by—the dual pursuit of governance and entrepreneurial value? 2) How do
techno-entrepreneurs from different social backgrounds navigate the everyday
practices of start-up incubation? How are they reimagining their agential
capacities for innovation and social mobility amidst the on-going structural
shifts due to the COVID-19 pandemic? 3) How do computing in start-up incubators
program seek to tether the recent global history of digital innovation and
disruption to national futures? Based on multi-sited fieldwork, this project
comparatively follows start-up incubators in a metropolitan and a tier-two city
to spatialize the growing interface between the state and start-ups. The
researcher deploys historical, virtual, and in-person ethnographic methods,
including participant observation, semi-structured interviews, digital archival
and software studies approaches, to track the former futures and the everyday
imaginaries and practices of state-sponsored start-up incubation. This project
combines interdisciplinary scholarship in STS, media studies, anthropology and
related fields, to think through the three-way relations between the
postcolonial state and technological nationalism, digital innovation and
capitalism, and aspirational futures and social mobility. By focusing on the
emergent relations between digital infrastructure and innovation in a computing
start-up incubators ecosystem, this project contributes to global STS research
on cultures of computing. By comparatively studying the techno-entrepreneurial
journeys of aspirational youth in two cities, this project seeks to illuminate
the hopes and discontents associated with an ever-accelerating digital
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.