* 2043745
* Understanding Law and Legality in Media
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Douglas Rice, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 399,987.00

When individuals think about legal concepts like marrying, calling the police,
or filing a lawsuit, they frequently consider their community’s values in
formulating their understandings and judgments. One way that individuals get a
sense of their community’s values is through specialized media. This is
especially so among members of marginalized groups, who are often excluded from
or sidelined in mainstream conversations. This study examines the long-term
changes in the coverage and discussion of law and legal ideas in media serving
the LGBTQ+ community over nearly five decades. This provides the opportunity to
understand which legal issues are most salient to the LGBTQ+ community, and to
appreciate that community’s attitudes towards legal actions and actors. It does
this by examining how broader events, such as legislation, judicial rulings, and
social movement activism influence changes in the coverage of particular issues
and their discussion as matters of law in LGBTQ+ magazines. In doing so, the
project contributes insights into how legal issues rise and fall on the agenda
of marginalized groups, how the legal consciousness of marginalized communities
develops over time, and how legal decisions influence public awareness and
attitudes toward law and legal actors. Further, by employing a diverse team of
undergraduate and graduate research assistants, this project will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in the research process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project represents the first-of-its-kind, large-scale
examination of the portrayal of law and legality in LGBTQ+ media over an
extended period of time. Theoretically, the researchers root their approach in
the well-developed literatures on legal consciousness, issue salience, critical
junctures, and judicial impact, while developing new expectations for how and
when law and legality matter among affected communities. Methodologically, the
researchers will combine computational text analysis with rigorous human coding
to investigate depictions of rights claiming and court decisions in LGBTQ+ media
in the United States from 1969-2015. The analysis of the data will, first,
identify and examine how the salience of legal issues in the LGBTQ+ community
changes over time, and evaluate what influences those changes. Second, the
researchers will examine temporal shifts in the legal consciousness of the
LGBTQ+ community, and identify the causes of those shifts. These analyses will
shed new light on the ways in which cultural, social, political, and legal
factors affect both the prominence of legal concepts in a marginalized community
and the character of the legal consciousness of that community, including
attitudes toward legal and political actors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.