* 2043955
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Building Neighborhood Density, Mobility, and Affordability Through Regulatory Reform: An Action Plan for Newark, NJ
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Shlomo Angel, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,997.00

This project will study the population density in Newark, NJ, with a specific
focus on the relationship between regulations and zoning, and the amount of
housing in neighborhoods that are well-served by transit. Newark, NJ is a
medium-sized city located in the New York metropolitan area, only 25 minutes
from the center of Manhattan. It is a low-income city with many residents who
struggle to access transportation, jobs, and affordable housing. As housing in
the New York area has become increasingly scarce, residents in Newark are
increasingly concerned that this new development will lead to their
displacement. The city is now engaged in a highly consultative revision of its
10-year master-plan, which offers an opportunity to address issues, including
regulatory and zoning limitations that prevent densification and make new
housing unaffordable. This project aims to support that process by empowering
residents and policymakers with data and a new decision-making tool that will
help identify participatory and effective approaches to increase the supply of
housing and improve housing affordability through the master plan revision
process.

A newly developed methodology for the measurement of ‘factors’ of population
density will be used to create a decision-making tool and generate associated
data; these factors include building height, plot coverage, the share of land in
residential use, the occupancy rate, living area density, and floor-plan
efficiency. The key advantage of measuring these factors from a policy
perspective is that zoning and building regulations determine the maximum values
for many of them. Earlier work approached density as a horizontal measure, a
strategy which furnished useful information but was disconnected from policy.
The factoring approach has clear policy implications for increasing the supply
of housing. The quantification of these factors uses satellite imagery to
measure residential buildings, field information to measure the occupancy rate,
and a regulatory audit to associate each of the factors with actual policies,
enabling a truly detailed set of policy recommendations to emerge. The goal of
this research is to model the factors of density and their relationship to
regulations, providing data on the ways in which different regulatory changes
might impact the supply of residential floor-space. This project is in response
to the Civic Innovation Challenge program, Track A— Communities and Mobility:
Offering Better Mobility Options to Solve the Spatial Mismatch Between Housing
Affordability and Jobs—and is a collaboration between NSF and the Department of
Energy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.