* 2043740
* Predicting attention fluctuations and their consequences for memory from functional brain connectivity
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Monica Rosenberg, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 04/30/2024
* USD 499,999.00

Sustained attention is critical for safely and successfully completing everyday
tasks, like driving a car or listening to a presentation. Our ability to
maintain focus, however, fluctuates over time when we experience mind wandering,
distraction, boredom, or depletion (i.e., feeling like we’re “out of gas” when
we try to sustain attention). Resulting attention failures can have deleterious
consequences for ongoing behavior, such as a lapse in attention causing us to
miss our exit on the highway. Such failures may also impact later memory, for
example, leading to poor performance on tests of material we encountered while
being inattentive. Although fluctuations in attention are pervasive, researchers
lack a way to track changes in attention over time, predict attention lapses,
and characterize the consequences of attention fluctuations for subsequent
memory in a variety of situations, such as watching a lecture or performing an
attention task (e.g., a task that requires a person to monitor a stream of
images and detect a rare target picture). This project will use functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data to predict attention fluctuations during
psychological and “naturalistic” tasks—like watching movies and listening to
stories—and ask whether fMRI activity signatures of attentional states impact
what people go on to remember at a later time. This work may help us better
track attention changes and predict attention failures in lab-based and real-
world contexts and will lead to a better understanding of the manner in which
how we attend affects what we remember.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work
suggests that patterns of functional brain connectivity predict a person’s
overall ability to sustain attention. Functional connectivity is measured with
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and reflects statistical dependence
between the fMRI signal time-courses in two different brain regions. When
regions are said to be strongly functionally connected, activity in those
regions tends to increase and decrease in sync, whereas activity in regions that
are weakly functionally connected varies out of sync. The proposed project asks
whether changes in functional connectivity from one moment to the next—that is,
functional connectivity dynamics—reflect changes in the degree to which a person
is attending to the task at hand. The project will also characterize how these
fluctuating attentional states affect ongoing behavior and later memory.
Specifically, the investigators will collect fMRI data during three different
types of scans. During each scan, volunteers will be asked to either perform
attention tasks in which they press a button in response to certain pictures
that appear in a stream of images on a screen, rest quietly, or watch movies or
listen to stories—the latter of which more closely mirror real-world situations
in which we commonly experience attention fluctuations. The researchers will ask
three primary questions. First, how do functional connectivity dynamics
(measured by calculating functional connectivity strength in short time windows
during fMRI scans) relate to attention dynamics during the tasks, rest period,
and narratives? Second, how overlapping or distinct are brain networks in which
the strength of activity predicts overall sustained attention and attention
fluctuations in different contexts (i.e., task performance, rest, and visual and
auditory narrative perception)? Finally, how are brain signatures of attentional
states during encoding of information related to later memory performance,
including recognition of the images encountered during the attention tasks and
verbal recall of the movie and story narratives? This work may improve our
ability to track changes in focus over time and predict attention failures in
experimental and naturalistic contexts. It will provide insights into the
functional architecture of sustained attention itself and inform us about the
relationships between sustained attention and memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.