* 2043839
* Linguistics: Reconstructing the Discipline through Universals Research
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Judith Kaplan, Philadelphia Area Center for History of Science
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 91,674.00

This project is a historical investigation of modern linguistics, embracing
anthropological and cognitive traditions in the discipline. Linguistics is
strikingly heterogeneous, consisting of sub-fields that touch on almost every
aspect of human life—from the study of human genealogy to the development of
twentieth-century computer science. Accordingly, there are few comprehensive
accounts of the discipline, a gap that this project will help to fill. As
contemporary society is grappling with questions about who should have the
authority to research and manage human diversity, there is an urgent need to
understand the tension between particular and general approaches at the heart of
linguistics, rather than focusing exclusively on one or the other. Funding will
support archival visits, conference participation, and translation services, and
it will lead to the production of a book, scholarly papers, teaching materials,
and community development initiatives that will shed light on the stakes and
scope of linguistics as a discipline. Correspondingly, the project will give
practicing linguists historical insights that may inform policies around the
preservation of linguistic diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two prominent, yet
mutually isolated, research programs dedicated to language universals emerged
during the 1960s. One was empirical, and associated with Joseph Greenberg; the
other was logical, with Noam Chomsky at the fore. Drawing on archival materials
at Stanford University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, this
project will characterize these two programs in full. It will use them to
reconstruct a maximally inclusive history of modern linguistics via patterns of
citation, collaboration, and subsequent engagement. Through the prism of
language universals, it will survey major schools and developments in the
history of modern linguistics including structuralism, machine translation,
typology, and Transformational-Generative Grammar. Informed by recent work in
science and technology studies concerned with the nature and historicity of
data, research praxis, scientific communication, and the organization of
knowledge, the project will promote understanding of the processes by which
modern disciplines have taken shape and defended their societal relevance over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.