* 2043202
* CAREER: Modeling Movement and Behavior Responses to Environmental Disruptions
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Somayeh Dodge, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 05/31/2026
* USD 383,667.00

This project is about analyzing the effects of significant environmental
disruptions on peoples’ behavior across different geographic and temporal
scales. Using movement as a positional marker, this project will provide data-
driven results about the consequences of environmental change caused by
disruptive events such as wildfire outbreaks, pandemics, and human-wildlife
conflict situations. Intentional movement is an important trait shared among
humans and animals and is a fundamental actor in the dynamics of geographical
environments. This research will enable scientists to model behavioral
adaptation caused by disruptive events. The transdisciplinary methods developed
in this study are generalizable to understanding adaptation in both social and
ecological systems, contributing new knowledge about spatial behavior of humans
and keystone species. The project's educational initiatives will raise geography
awareness and advance spatiotemporal thinking and will broaden participation of
college students and educators in STEM education and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the advances in tracking technologies,
there still exists limited in our understanding of the mechanisms governing
movement patterns. This interdisciplinary project will transform research and
education in geographic information science by integrating information on both
spatial and temporal change using computational movement analytics. This study
will investigate three core research questions: 1) Are individuals’ movement and
behavior driven by their environment, and how do these relationships vary across
spatial scales? 2) How can data science better capture movement patterns that
reflect change in behavior? 3) How can movement be used as a proxy to understand
and predict the behavioral adaptation of individuals caused by disruptive
events? This project will create potentially transformative computational
approaches for machine learning, modeling, and simulation of spatial behavior in
environmental disruptions that includes wildfire, COVID-19 pandemic, and human
interaction with endangered species. The first two studies focus on human
movement responses and adaptation to short- and long- term environmental
changes, while the latter evaluates resilience in an environment experiencing
gradual land-use change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.