* 2043710
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Community-Centric Pre-Disaster Mitigation with Unmanned Aerial and Marine Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Jason Moats, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,998.00

This project will establish a community-centric emergency management consortium
to pilot a program intended to increase community resilience to chronic major
disasters: flooding, wildfires, hurricanes, tornadoes, and tropical storms. One
key to improving resilience is to document and understand the current conditions
through comprehensive environmental assessments and continuous surveillance
prior to a disaster. While small unmanned aerial and marine robots combined with
advances in artificial intelligence (AI) and geo-spatial information systems
(GIS) offer great promise for these assessments, agencies do not have sufficient
personnel to cover vulnerable areas. Texas A&amp;M will lead the pilot program
where the Texas Department of Emergency Management and Texas Forestry Service
will determine the pre-disaster mitigation needs for three communities with
different vulnerabilities, demographics, and land use: Bastrop, Houston,
Galveston. At-risk high school students in these communities will be trained to
use unmanned systems with AI and GIS tools to collect and process the data, then
integrate the results back into the emergency management framework. Thus the
resilience of the communities will be improved while filling the STEM pipeline,
increasing economic competitiveness, and creating career paths for a skilled
emergency response workforce that is savvy with innovative and emerging
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use open source datasets to
further improve and automate pre-disaster mitigation assessments. The labeled
longitudinal aerial and underwater datasets will enable fundamental research and
new advances in CV/ML as well as disaster science. The project will establish
the trustworthiness of CV/ML develop new algorithms for recognition of
vulnerabilities during different seasons and weather conditions, and further
fundamental understanding of transfer learning from one disaster to another. The
data on the frequency of surveying with aerial and marine assets will lead to an
informatics-based model of sampling that captures the tradeoffs between
accuracy, resolution, and frequency on identifying objects and scene
understanding. This project is in response to the Civic Innovation Challenge
program, Track B—Resilience to Natural Disasters—and is a collaboration between
NSF and the Department of Homeland Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.