* 2043499
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Risky Homes, Domestic Accidents, and Safety Work
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Graham Mooney, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 12,591.00

Accidents account for 26 million nonfatal injuries each year and rank third
among causes of death within the United States. Domestic accidents make up over
half of these totals. Despite the centrality of physical hazards to domestic
life, historians have generally left the subject of home accidents to
researchers from sociology and public health. Using the term “safety work” as
shorthand, this project reveals how experts and laypeople tried to control
mishaps and their consequences over time. It charts the history of domestic
accidents and safety work from 1900 to 1980, analyzing how and why public health
education, voluntary product standards, and markets for insurance and consumer
appliances came to delineate American risk management. This research describes
how corporations and nonprofits established influential models for accident
prevention research and policy and presents new insights into the changing
realities and cultural meanings of risk and responsibility. Even as Americans
have become more conscious of household risks, the burden of injury prevention
continues to fall heavily on citizen-consumers. Ordinary men and women shop for
“safe” products; install and repair equipment; review the latest safety advice;
and perform many other tasks to keep their homes running smoothly. This project
considers the historical limitations of this individualized approach to accident
management and illustrates the benefits of state-centered alternatives like
strict presale product regulation and subsidies for childcare and home nursing.
Discussing this history with policymakers and public health practitioners has
the potential to bolster existing consumer protection laws and to expand
government aid programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on trade catalogues,
advertisements, insurance policies, magazines, case histories, product safety
tests, warning labels, and other sources, this research interprets domestic
accidents as part of a longer sequence of events from risk prevention to long-
term recovery or disability. This project analyzes shocks, burns, falls, and
choking to make four related interventions. First, its stress on safety work
recenters the study of accidents on the home and the lives and labor of ordinary
Americans. It represents mishaps less as results of fate or individual
carelessness than as predictable byproducts of overwork and the complexity of
domestic space. Second, this project clarifies how safety concerns became
embedded within markets for insurance and consumer products, which left
households to buy physical and mental security from for-profit corporations.
Third, work itself is redefined to include learning about common hazards and
shopping for “safe” appliances, factoring self-education and consumption into
the labor of risk management. Finally, it shows how experts papered over
differences between communities with distinct racial, economic, and geographical
profiles to make middle-class white suburbia the “one-size-fits-all” model
solution for home accident prevention. Overall, this project analyzes how
Americans kept up with new safety practices and technologies and why they did or
did not follow available social prescriptions for safe living. Accidents
manifested not only as causes but also as effects of housework and compelled
stakeholders to reconcile the ideal of the home-as-sanctuary with its risky and
toilsome reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.