* 2043708
* RCN: Expanding the History of Science, Technology, Environment, and Medicine: The United States and its Regional Neighbors
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Karin Rosemblatt, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2026
* USD 419,209.00

Science has often been understood as a universal language, involving
conversations across all parts of the planet. However, as recent controversies
regarding vaccination and climate change remind us, not everyone understands
science in the same way. Recent research on science, technology, environment,
and medicine is addressing this issue by looking at how diverse publics engage
with and apply science. They are also analyzing how these disparate publics
influence scientific innovation. Still, most of this research focuses on the
United States and Europe. This project provides a more comprehensive view of how
science works by examining scientific innovation and application in Latin
America and the Caribbean and the relation of science in the region to other
sites. By sponsoring a website, workshops, and publications, the project will
produce new resources for teachers and researchers, providing access to cutting
edge studies of science in Latin America and the Caribbean. It will also train a
new generation of graduate students in the history of science to conduct
research on Latin America and the Caribbean and to incorporate the region into
their courses. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Research Coordination Network project
brings together senior and established researchers and graduate students to take
stock of the vibrant and burgeoning fields of science, technology, environment,
and medicine in Latin America and the Caribbean. Our network will secure ties
among researchers in North and South America and unify discussions taking place
with a variety of academic societies and organizations. It will produce
publications that make this research available to those who are not specialists
in the region. The ethnic and racial diversity of Latin America and the
existence of creolized Indigenous and Afro-descendant knowledge practices make
it an excellent place for advancing knowledge of worldviews that challenge or
coexist with scientific rationalities. Project participants will include
graduate students in the history of science and provide them with in-depth
training and mentoring on Latin America and the Caribbean--training that is not
readily available in the majority of history of science graduate programs. K-16
teachers will gain access to bibliographies, lesson plans, essays, and
collections of syllabi that allow them to cover a broader range of scientific
endeavors and of a more diverse community of scientists. Their students will in
turn incorporate and reproduce more complete and complex representations of how
science functions globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.