* 2043610
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Not-So-Inexhaustible Sea: Fisheries Science and Management 1863-present
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Naomi Oreskes, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 20,204.00

Fish provide the primary source of protein for a billion people, but that
crucial food supply is threatened by overfishing. Despite a vast scientific and
policy literature arguing that sustainable fisheries are achievable through
scientific models and management frameworks, the health of global fisheries
continues to decline. This suggests that there may be something fundamentally
wrong with the way we have tried to analyze, understand, and manage fishing.
This project examines an overlooked but critical factor in the overfishing
crisis: the false belief that fisheries are inexhaustible, meaning they can be
harvested at contemporary rates indefinitely, year after year, without risk of
collapse. The resulting dissertation will: 1) document the history of
inexhaustibility and show how resistance to the idea of dwindling fish stocks
has taken different forms over the centuries; 2) examine what propels belief in
inexhaustible seas; and 3) suggest how its influence might be mitigated to allow
for the development of more effective and resilient fisheries management
strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project finds surprising continuities
over a hundred and fifty years of history. Preliminary results from archival
research methods show that inexhaustibility appears in diverse forms over time
but for similar reasons, including 1) overconfidence in quantitative science and
free markets to simplify and solve complex environmental and social problems; 2)
failure to account for observed fluctuations in fish populations that may make
predictable and sustainable annual catches very difficult in the long term; and
3) an inertia generated by existing models, areas of focus, and management
strategies that precludes new ways of thinking. Drawing on historian Thomas
Hughes’ notion of technological momentum, this project suggests that the idea of
inexhaustibility has had sufficient intellectual momentum that it has proved
nearly impossible to dislodge, even in the face of volumes of refuting empirical
evidence. Through publications, op-eds, forums, round-table discussions, and
oral histories deposited in the NOAA Voices archive, this project will engage
scientists, policy-makers, environmentalists, and workers in the fishing
industry in rethinking fisheries science to adapt to the reality of an
exhaustible—and increasingly exhausted—sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.