* 2043210
* CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (Renewal): Carolina Cyber Defender Scholarship Program
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Bei-Tseng Chu, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,291,344.00

This project is building on an existing effort at the awardee institution which
has successfully recruited, educated, and placed diverse undergraduate and
graduate students into cybersecurity positions in government agencies. This
renewal project will recruit and educate an additional 22 undergraduate and
graduate students in government agencies, committing to place over 80% of its
graduates in federal executive agencies. The renewal will continue an
established collaboration with Forsyth Technical Community College, enabling
three new cohorts of community college students to complete their undergraduate
degrees at UNC Charlotte. Project activities will improve curricula and
organizational programming and benefit a large number of cybersecurity and
computing students at the two institutions. All graduates from these degree
programs will, in turn, provide critical cybersecurity skills to the
organizations that employ them, both within the government and the private
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students in this project will undertake a breadth
of experiences, including an innovative cybersecurity curricula, hands-on
training opportunities through courses and cybersecurity competitions, research
opportunities with faculty in various cybersecurity problem areas, and student
leadership and community service through multiple cybersecurity-focused student
clubs at UNC Charlotte and Forsyth Technical Community College. The project team
will focus on expanding education and research in cyber defense training, usable
security and privacy, and cyber analytics. The project team will also expand
activities in the Internet of Things (IoT) and Cyberphysical systems and expand
its evaluation capability. Course materials and exercises from the three focus
areas will be shared broadly. The shared materials will expand faculty capacity
at SFS-supported projects and cybersecurity programs at other institutions, to
train students in cyber defense, usable security, and cyber analytics. Project
evaluation materials will also provide other SFS sites with enhanced ability to
improve their programmatic efforts, benefitting students at institutions around
the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity that aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.