* 2043833
* Disability Expertise and Design Justice for Post-COVID Equity
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Rayna Rapp, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 03/31/2024
* USD 618,490.00

This project will analyze the lives of disabled and chronically ill people
during the COVID-19 pandemic to understand their experiences and capture the
strategies that they have developed for surviving under new, difficult
conditions. Disabled people, especially people of color and those living in
nursing homes, have been at greatest risk of infection and death from COVID-19.
Documenting and interpreting disability expertise and the methods by which by
which marginalized groups respond to the pandemic will provide crucial
information for helping to address the inequities for people with disabilities
as they manage health risk post-COVID and in relation to future pandemics and
social crises. Researchers will collaborate with community members to collect
memories, stories, artwork, and other materials to build a publicly accessible
archive know as the “Disability COVID Chronicles.” Conversations on social
media, records of digital public meetings, and photographs of street art and
actions that are otherwise ephemeral will also be collected, interpreted, and
preserved. This archive will be of value for scholars and for those working to
achieve better conditions for disabled citizens in the future. Project findings
will be widely disseminated in public and academic publications and through
social media, events, and city partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will collect and analyze data about COVID-19 design related issues (e.g.,
congregate living, telework, tele-therapy) and compare and analyze cases from a
“design justice” perspective, focusing on innovative uses of remote technology
and infrastructure. It focuses on four social groups that experts and the
disabled anticipate will experience prolonged impacts from COVID-19. These
groups include: (1) People with chronic fatigue syndrome who can serve as models
of post-viral syndromes and survivorship with longstanding expertise in remote
work and tele-intimacy; (2) Adults with intellectual disabilities and their
families, whose high infection and death rates have highlighted the hazards of
congregate housing, and who are actively generating new designs for long-term
assisted living; (3) Black Disabled Lives Matter activists who underscore the
intersection of race and disability in COVID health risks and are developing
accessible physical and digital tools for supporting online advocacy and
protests; and (4) Black subjects facing mental health challenges. The project
will also consider the potentials for new remote practices in mobile crisis
intervention, peer counseling by trained mental health patients, and teletherapy
pioneered by groups responding to these challenges to help support the disabled
community. Findings will be published in academic journals and publicly
accessible white papers and public media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.