* 2043817
* Assessing Students' Integration of Knowledge for Deep Learning in Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Lei Bao, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,884.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by analyzing and improving
students' learning of key concepts in introductory physics courses. To advance
STEM education across the nation, one need is to foster deep understanding of
core knowledge within the various STEM disciplines along with concepts that cut
across the disciplines. Teaching methods that promote the integration of
knowledge have been shown to be effective in creating deep conceptual learning;
however, the research on how to measure such deep learning is limited. In this
project, the project team plans to develop assessment methods that provide new
features for evaluating the levels of knowledge integration and deep learning
achieved by individual students. By probing the specific paths that students
follow when solving problems, these assessments can inform instruction to
effectively help students achieve deep conceptual understanding. Because the
core ideas underlying many physics concepts are essential to a wide range of
STEM disciplines, the assessments developed in this project should provide
useful tools for improving knowledge integration in related STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although there is a wealth of literature about the
misconceptions that students taking physics for the first time commonly have,
more research is needed to study the knowledge structures of students with
regard to knowledge integration and deep conceptual understanding. As a central
part of this project, the project team plans to develop conceptual frameworks
and associated assessments for concepts typically taught in introductory physics
courses. Conceptual frameworks are composed of central ideas of concepts,
contextual features, intermediate processes, and links between those components,
and are used to represent students' thinking pathways as they solve problems.
Major activities in the project will include (1) developing conceptual
frameworks for selected topics in introductory physics to model the knowledge
integration process of student learning; (2) developing assessment instruments
that measure the progression of knowledge integration in students' learning of
selected topics in physics; and (3) producing a knowledge base of assessment
outcomes and implications regarding students' achievement of deep conceptual
understanding in physics. The education research will primarily explore the
extent to which features of assessment design -- which include the familiarity
of question contexts, components and connections within a question, and aspects
of conceptual models required by a question -- can be used to measure the
developmental levels of students' knowledge integration. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.