* 2043382
* Acquisition of a Volumetric Velocimetry System
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Erika Rader, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 11/30/2023
* USD 276,822.00

Fluid flows in nature vary intrinsically over space and time. Simultaneously
mapping the flow field within a three-dimensional (3D) volume will allow the
full characterization of not only the flow field, but also the pressure field
and any shear and normal forces within the fluid and at boundaries. This will
have a transformative impact on our ability to characterize solute mixing,
particle and solute transport, and aquatic organisms, ranging from
microorganisms within porous media to fish moving in a river. This project funds
the acquisition of a Volumetric Velocimetry System (VVS) to support experimental
research that will map flow fields in physical models of geoscience phenomena.
The VVS will provide researchers the capability to acquire volumetric
realizations of flow structures using this minimally invasive tool. Example
applications of the system include model studies of breakout during surface lava
flow which will improve prediction of when lava will arrive at specified
location. In a second application, the VVS will probe critical questions about
and solute and sediment grain transport in streambeds. Results from these
studies will, for example, improve predictions of channel stability and be
applied to the design of river restoration projects. Lastly, volumetric
descriptions of the experimental flow fields from this system will be powerful
tools for the validation of complex computational models, which are becoming a
common investigative tool even though in many circumstances models are not
benchmarked with proper data. A web presence highlighting VVS projects will
provide visualizations and links to available data. A partnership with a local
middle-school teacher will facilitate visits of local students to the Center for
Ecohydraulics Research at University of Idaho. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
acquisition of a Volumetric Velocimetry System (VVS) will enable researchers to
overcome the crucial shared challenge faced by scientists and engineers who seek
understanding of the fundamental nature of several types of fluid flows: the
inability to acquire all three temporally and spatially resolved components of
velocity data and their spatial and temporal derivatives, whose information will
allow direct solution the Navier-Stokes equations retrieving information on the
pressure and force distribution. Moreover, volumetric descriptions of the
experimental flow fields from this system will be powerful tools for the
validation of complex computational models, which are becoming a common
investigative tool even though in many circumstances models are not benchmarked
with proper data. Pursuing these research avenues will yield insights into
geoscience phenomena, including entrainment in deep-sea hydrothermal systems and
breakout during surface lava flows. In addition, coupling the VVS with the
refractive index matching will probe critical questions about microbial
colonization of pore interstices, turbulence dissipation at and within
streambeds and its impact on organisms, and solute and sediment grain transport
in streambeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.