* 2043988
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Equitable Food-Security: Disaster-resilient supply chains for pandemics and extreme weather events
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Ioannis Kakadiaris, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 06/30/2022
* USD 49,994.00

Food insecurity is the lack of consistent and reliable access to nutritious food
needed for an active, healthy life. It is a significant problem in Harris
County, Texas, where over 14% of households and 23% of children were food
insecure at the beginning of 2020. This problem has been further magnified
during recent devastating events, including Hurricane Harvey and the coronavirus
(COVID-19) pandemic. It is unclear how the nutritional needs of Houston's
vulnerable populations will be addressed amidst multiple disasters, including
hurricanes and flooding, COVID-19, economic disruptions, and systemic food
insecurity. The Houston Food Bank (HFB) serves the Greater Houston area and
collaborates with over 1,500 partners to address families' needs experiencing
food insecurity. Disaster preparation and response decisions have been mainly
based on incomplete data, human intuition, and pro-bono input from consulting
firms. The COVID-19 pandemic has further induced stresses on the organization’s
funding and personnel. While the HFB has absorbed and adapted to flooding events
and other disasters in the past, it envisions organizational transformation to
engage in resilience-building strategies that go beyond current practice. Thus,
there is an urgent and critical need for HFB and other such regional food banks
to develop and utilize decision support systems that intelligently aid in
disaster preparation, response, and performance measurement. Unaddressed,
emergency food security supply chains are unlikely to ensure efficient,
equitable, and effective distribution of food and related
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s goal is to improve the resilience
of nonprofit food banks’ supply chains by developing and deploying methods and
technology systems that enable food banks to fully prepare for disasters,
respond to the needs of the communities impacted, and evaluate their performance
during disasters. This planning grant involves the preparation of a detailed
plan for the deployment of a research-centered socio-technical project to
develop and implement decision-making tools that will facilitate integrated
disaster planning between HFB and nonprofit agencies involved in food
distribution. The specific objectives are to (1) Design organizational
resilience indicators and mapping of food equity needs using different census
data at low levels of aggregation (e.g., the CDC Social Vulnerability Index) and
HFB’s client network, (2) Design a multilayer, complex network for HFB,
consisting of interdependencies both upstream and downstream, (3) Design
decision-making tools for disaster management using computational game theory
and deep reinforcement learning, and (4) Design the collection of same-day
privacy-preserving data from underserved and vulnerable populations over a
potentially disrupted communication infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.