* 2043796
* OPUS: Understanding How Climate Change Will Alter the Ability of Pathogens to Control Gypsy Moth Populations, and the Consequences for Forest Economics
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Gregory Dwyer, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 06/30/2024
* USD 328,466.00

When they think of infectious diseases, most people think of diseases like
covid-19 or HIV that have big negative effects on people and the economy. Few
are aware that infectious diseases also keep pest insects in check, by killing
insects before they can destroy forests. The gypsy moth is a classic example.
Gypsy moth populations are held in check by a fungus disease that can kill more
than 90% of gypsy moth caterpillars in a single spring. Since the fungus disease
was introduced in 1989, gypsy moth defoliation has been very low, reducing the
costs of gypsy moth attacks by millions of dollars every year. The fungus needs
cool, moist conditions, however, and so the hotter, drier conditions that
climate change is bringing to the US may lead to a gypsy moth comeback. Before
the fungus was introduced, a virus disease killed many gypsy moths, but whether
the virus can control gypsy moths in the future is unknown. This project asks,
what will be the economic costs of a gypsy comeback, and can a virus comeback
reduce these costs? Results will be presented to forest managers for input and
refinement, and will be used to inform management decisions. Additionally, a
graduate student and a technician will be trained in population and economic
modeling.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To answer these questions, the researchers will
use a combination of ecological field experiments, infectious disease modeling,
and economic modeling. They will use field experiments to estimate key
parameters of their disease model, notably the severity of competition between
the virus and the fungus, and how this competition depends on weather. The
researchers will then extend their disease model to describe long-term virus-
fungus competition, and the extent to which the virus can replace the fungus as
climate change leads to hotter and drier climates. To understand the economic
consequences of virus-fungus competition, the researchers will first
parameterize regression models that quantify the economic costs of gypsy moth
defoliation. They will then insert the predictions of climate change models into
their virus-fungus competition models to predict how climate change will affect
gypsy moth defoliation. The final step will be to quantify the costs of climate
change on gypsy moths by inserting the model predictions of defoliation levels
into the economic models. This work will provide a rare quantification of the
effects of climate change on a species interaction, and of the economic costs of
such effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.