* 2043863
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Hyperlocal Services to Prepare Rural Communities for Extreme Weather-Related Natural Disasters
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2021
* Jerald Brotzge, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

Rural communities across the US are particularly vulnerable to extreme weather-
related hazards and natural disasters. With increases in frequency, severity,
and levels of impact from extreme weather events,there is an imperative need to
innovate equipping rural communities for greater preparedness and resilience.
However, services provided by community organizations often lack spatial
granularity,academic research products often ignore long-term sustainability and
commercial products are often not designed for rural areas as profits margins
are low. In this project, we will initiate an engagement-driven collaboration
among academic researchers, community/civic partners and stakeholders to create
scalable,sustainable, transferable and hyper-local services to assist rural
communities with preparing for and recovering from extreme weather-related
hazards and natural disasters. Designed for rural communities explicitly, our
model is transferable to the rest of the US by leveraging the national
Cooperative Extension system, Extension Disaster Education Network and
transportation technology transfer centers. As rural communities supply food and
water, the benefits from this collaboration also flow to suburban and urban
systems that are dependent upon rural areas. Furthermore, the main intellectual
contribution from this project is physically inspired computer vision (CV). This
work will significantly advance CV for meteorological applications by estimating
vertical profiles of horizontal wind speeds. If successful, this transformative
approach will greatly enhance the accuracy of weather forecasts worldwide, far
beyond the extreme weather forecast we focus on in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the agricultural sector in
New York (NY) state and the local-level transportation/energy infrastructures
that support it. The main objectives are (1) to test technological feasibility,
financial sustainability and social acceptance of the envisioned hyper-local
services, and (2) to identify and integrate human/organizational resources
towards creating an engagement hub for rural community resiliency to extreme
weather. Teaming with civic and community partners across NY, we aim at three
major innovations: turning a conventional camera into a low-cost, easy-to-deploy
and highly accurate weather station and vertical profiler; developing IoT-based
sensing packages to bridge critical data gaps; and optimizing a numerical model
for hyper-local extreme weather forecasts using a genetic algorithm and machine
learning techniques. Then we will test the effectiveness of integrating these
innovations by creating a prototype hyper-local service to improve winter storm
emergency response for local highway departments in rural communities.
Leveraging existing programs and connections, the team will apply various
participatory action research tools and mechanisms with partners to promote
effective collaborations. This project is in response to the Civic Innovation
Challenge program, Track B—Resilience to Natural Disasters—and is a
collaboration between NSF and the Department of Homeland
Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.