* 2043437
* Navigating Mainstream Institutions and Non-Traditional Alternatives Post-Incarceration
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Megan Denver, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 297,178.00

Reducing recidivism rates is a key challenge for criminal justice practitioners
and policymakers. Reintegration involves increased participation in traditional
social, economic and political institutions aided by social support as people
transition home from prison. Formerly incarcerated individuals encounter
barriers to successful reentry and long-term reintegration due to criminal
record (or “CORI” in Massachusetts) exclusions. However, this population may
also strategically avoid contact with mainstream or “surveilling” institutions,
and as a result, stand on the outskirts of society. As a reentry leader in
Boston describes, the reason for an employment rejection “may not be your CORI,
it might be your credit [score].” Distrust of the law and those who enforce it
can further negatively influence perceptions as negative sentiment travels
swiftly through communities via social networks. However, little is known about
how people make decisions about engaging in mainstream or alternative sources
(such as banks compared to payday loans), perceived advantages or consequences
of these choices, whether distrust of law enforcement and other factors shape
these choices, and whether institutional engagement varies as people desist from
crime or have fewer interactions with the criminal justice system. Understanding
this (dis)engagement process is critical for promoting public safety and
improving reintegration into society for the approximate 600,000 prisoners who
return to their communities annually and begin navigating the unsteady reentry
terrain.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through a partnership with the Office of
Returning Citizens (ORC) in Boston, MA, the research project will interview
three sets of adults. First, those who have visited the ORC and were last
released from prison at least one year ago will be interviewed (Group 1). The
researchers will ask each person from this group to identify individuals who are
also formerly incarcerated but have not received any ORC services for the next
set of interviews (Group 2). Then returning citizens who are within a year post-
release will be interviewed through the ORC (Group 3). In-depth, one-on-one
interviews with approximately 120 men and women will provide novel data on how
people perceive, interact with, and avoid four non-criminal justice domains:
medical, financial, political, and employment. The project will examine whether
legal cynicism and broader systemic distrust influence choices to connect with
such entities, and the potential implications of exclusion and avoidance in both
the immediate reentry period and long-term integration process. Recognizing the
roles race, gender and intersectionality play in reentry experiences, the
project will examine similarities and differences across study participants. The
policy recommendations derived from this study will not only have direct
implications for Boston and the surrounding area, but will also be adaptable to
other jurisdictions that release large portions of incarcerated adults back to
marginalized communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.