* 2043634
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: City of Bridges:  Using New Transportation Options to Drive Low-Income Mothers to Greater Success in Pittsburgh
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2021,12/31/2021
* Karen Lightman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 49,899.00

Low-income residents of American cities tend to live far from the districts
where job creation is concentrated, and therefore incur high transportation
costs (in terms of time and money) when seeking employment outside their
neighborhoods. These high transportation costs depress income, limit employment,
and lower socioeconomic mobility. This is known as the spatial mismatch problem,
and it is likely to pose even bigger challenges for low-income mothers with
young children, given their parental responsibilities. While this problem has
existed for decades, the recent and widespread diffusion of smartphones has
enabled a proliferation of new transportation options that offer some of the
flexibility of personal vehicles without the high fixed cost of vehicle
ownership. Could these new transportation options significantly expand the
geographic and socioeconomic mobility of low-income mothers? If so, how? To
explore these possibilities, this project proposes a set of field experiments
which provide low-cost access to these transportation options for a treatment
group and compare the mobility and socioeconomic outcomes to a control group.
The experiments can use the GPS capabilities embedded in modern smartphones to
measure the quantity and nature of increased geographic mobility thereby
conferred on low-income mothers in the treatment groups. Through innovative
partnerships with local government agencies, this project will measure the
impact of increased geographic mobility on socioeconomic mobility in the short-
run and the long-run. Through partnerships with a diverse set of regional
nonprofits, this project will directly involve low-income mothers in our
research design. The results of the research will provide immediate guidance for
policymakers seeking to fund practical policy and engineering solutions to the
spatial mismatch problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the rapid diffusion of
these transportation options across the country and around the world, policy
lessons derived from our study could be implemented in hundreds of cities,
potentially impacting the lives of millions. The research will also support
fundamental breakthroughs in the modeling of regional transportation systems.
Transportation researchers currently have limited visibility into how new
transportation options are impacting multi-modal transit choices within regional
transportation systems. By leveraging the detailed data collected through our
proposed research, this project will create new methods for modeling these
regional transportation systems. The new models will reflect the growing
interaction between conventional mass transit and a range of complementary new
(and old) transit technologies. The knowledge gained from these models could
further expand mass transit ridership and resident mobility, while also
promoting environmental sustainability. This project is supported by the CIVIC
Innovation Challenge program Track A. Communities and Mobility: Offering Better
Mobility Options to Solve the Spatial Mismatch Between Housing Affordability and
Jobs through a collaboration between NSF and the Department of Energy Vehicle
Transportation Office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.