* 2043412
* Open-Source Renewables: Coupling Resilience to Natural Disasters with Environmental Justice
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Zachary Dodds, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 46,840.00

In a region where earthquakes, heat waves, wildfires and an increasingly
unreliable grid are an inescapable reality, resilience hubs bring community-wide
benefit. Through the partnership of an innovative community-based non-profit
dedicated to extending the reach of renewable energy to low-income households
and a leading college of science and engineering, we propose to undertake civic
engagement, collaborative research, cost analysis and meticulous planning,
yielding a project with significant community impact, ready to deploy in the
coming year. Most resilience hubs are built in a top-down-fashion by outside
experts who determine where these centers will be sited, the services they will
offer, and how they will be operated. The project team believes that they can
build a better resilience hub if they situate the know-how, talent and potential
of those whose needs these sites are intended to address at the center of the
project planning. The project team proposes to use community engagement to
assess just which services are deemed essential, where the centers can optimally
be sited, and how they will in fact be operated in the event of a natural
disaster or power shutoff. Absent a crisis, too, this project proactively
leverages resilience hubs' clean-power generation to support renewable energy
affordability across the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages
renewable-energy to create resilience hubs that are economically self-sustaining
whether or not threats become crises. The project will pair a community non-
profit with a local higher-ed consortium to deliver a family of models that (a)
account for energy-use-and-cost across CA's complex of renewable/traditional
sources and delivery/storage, (b) are tunable across needs, use-patterns, and
community identities, and (c) are publicly available for refinement to serve
other geographic, market, and community-identity conditions. The models, in
turn, yield strategies to maximize renewable-power resilience hubs' community
support: when the grid is operating normally, hubs generate power used to tilt
energy-cost-effectiveness toward renewables. This renewable-energy-shift
specifically supports the lowest-income members of our diverse community: those
for whom renewable energy is least accessible. In a crisis, resilience hubs can
be immediately islanded into an operating power-base from which further crisis-
response proceeds. This positive feedback loop is perhaps the project's most
important piece: advancing community agency and cohesion via crisis-readiness.
Whether or not the future makes islanding necessary, this project will not be an
island. Its models and template for community-driven resilient energy will be
available and tunable, to find and deploy analogous positive-feedback loops
across our nation's widely-varying communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the CIVIC Innovation Challenge program Track B -
Resilience to Natural Disasters: Equipping Communities for Greater Preparedness
and Resilience to Natural Disasters through a collaboration between NSF and the
Department of Homeland Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.