* 2043060
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Community Hub for Smart Mobility
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Devrim Ikizler, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

Due to issues of housing affordability, Americans often must live far from their
jobs. This spatial mismatch causes commuter traffic congestion resulting in an
annual $29 billion loss to the US economy. Furthermore, many transportation
systems were designed decades ago for outdated working and living patterns,
often leaving communities without the transportation infrastructure they need.
This project addresses these issues through development of a novel “Community
Hub for Smart Mobility” (CHSM) concept. CHSMs will be community-level hubs where
residents can access multiple modes of transport such as (e-)bike shares,
e-scooters, ride hail, electric vehicle charging stations, and public transit.
By utilizing a development process informed by community member input as well as
quantitative modeling, CHSMs will directly address the unique transportation
needs of community residents. CHSMs will provide more mobility options, increase
access to jobs, and improve the overall efficiency of affected transportation
systems. The findings from this project will contribute to knowledge not only in
the field of transportation, but also participatory design through a novel
community-based model.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project
is to develop, implement, and evaluate a Community Hub for Smart Mobility (CHSM)
in Austin, TX. This project will design and develop a CHSM in a community
identified as impacted by a job/housing spatial mismatch. In Stage 1 of this
project, the research team will engage in a co-creation process with residents
through community conversations to understand the community’s actual
socioeconomic and travel needs. The research team will integrate this feedback
with quantitative modeling to predict the unique transportation need of the
community. Findings will be shared and revised with community members in an
iterative feedback loop until both the community and research team are satisfied
with the results. In Stage 2, leveraging the strong partnership with the City of
Austin and further community involvement through workshops and surveys, the
project will develop and evaluate the CHSM pilot site. The site will not require
new construction or development, instead utilizing existing infrastructure,
services, and spaces (e.g., situating the CHSM on an unused parking lot). After
successful development and implementation of the site, the research team will
collect ridership datasets and perform additional surveys, interviews, and focus
groups to evaluate the success of the CHSM. The CHSM model has the potential to
be implemented in similar communities throughout the US, and the results from
this pilot will serve as a model for tackling the job/housing mismatch through
community-based mobility solutions nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is in response to Track A – CIVIC Innovation Challenge - Communities and
Mobility a collaboration with NSF and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.