* 2043534
* PFI-TT: Organic innovation in phenylalanine-containing seed coatings and treatments to maximize crops of economic importance
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Katherine Warpeha, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 05/31/2024
* USD 307,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project offers alternative products for more
sustainable farming practices. The expected outcome of this technology
development and commercialization project is expected to reduce pest pressures
and increase food security, improving community economic and environmental
stability. Growers involved in testing the proposed technology will give
feedback on treatment modalities to provide a foundation for commercialization
processes. Industry and academic personnel will actively mentor graduate
students and undergraduates recruited to the project, with efforts to recruit
underrepresented students in STEM. Entrepreneurial training and leadership
development of graduate and undergraduate students will consist of immersion in
the science and business of food and agriculture. Undergraduate students will
have independent projects that contribute to the overall project direction. All
students will be involved in the agricultural community which provides a network
of training and employment opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
translational research project will develop materials that differentially affect
growth processes in the plant life cycle. Resistant pest populations are growing
and their management costs billions in lost revenue in the US while contributing
to health problems and environmental erosion. Hurdles to attaining sustainable
and effective pest treatments include finding novel such as breeding for
resistances have created bottlenecks: pest populations adaptations are outpacing
the solutions. There are three objectives to this project: 1) Design single and
combinatorial products that target pests like soybean cyst nematode; 2) Test the
most promising prototypes under field conditions at field sites in various
states and across soil types; and 3) Commercialize effective products to address
the pests that cause crop loss. The proposed methods may address responses of
pest interaction at developmental, cellular and biochemical levels to make
products formulated to dysregulate and disrupt known pests. By developing
products to exploit plant and pest growth strategies, the project may reveal
mechanism(s) of action or a cooperative mechanism between plant biosynthesis and
defense pathways, leading to improvements to integrated pest
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.