* 2043858
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Data-driven and Community Engaged Planning Tools For Addressing Spatial Mismatch
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Patricia Romero-Lankao, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,825.00

To address spatial mismatch, housing agencies seek to locate affordable housing
proximate or well-connected to jobs and opportunities. At the same time, transit
agencies strive to expand access while minimizing operational costs and energy
consumption. Both of these efforts are often done at scales that limit the
ability to do deep, community-engaged planning around housing and transit needs.
The goal of this planning grant is to identify gaps in current methods of
estimating spatial mismatch from both a stakeholder and community perspective;
to explore and document models based on data from the community; and design
internal and community-facing frameworks for cross-sector planning tools.
Ultimately, this will enable the creation of an analytical framework for
addressing spatial mismatch using quantitative and qualitative approaches and
develop transparent scenario planning tools. The project brings together
community-engaged planning, housing policy and finance, transportation demand
and network modeling, transportation energy-efficiency, and data-driven public
policy analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to build community-
informed frameworks representing spatial mismatch, which lay the foundation for
planning tools that directly integrate with housing and transportation planning
processes. Accessibility is a function of the transit quality experienced by
individuals (i.e., travel cost, time, reliability) and the proximity and
connectivity to jobs that match a worker’s skills and other opportunities.
Existing methods to study spatial mismatch force an inferential structure on
low-income traveler choice; additionally, they focus on adjustments to transit
while treating housing as fixed, and vice versa. Spatial mismatch is neither a
binary nor static metric, nor can it be measured by empirics alone: its
measurement requires community input in the form of travel patterns,
constraints, and needs, as well as the quality of transit connections. This
project aims to develop a framework for probabilistic, non-linear path models of
spatial mismatch interventions, that allow for qualitative data to inform
quantitative metric construction. The community engagement process will allow
for identification of gaps in current planning processes and new variables that
belong in the calculation of accessibility. This project is in response to the
Civic Innovation Challenge program, Track A— Communities and Mobility: Offering
Better Mobility Options to Solve the Spatial Mismatch Between Housing
Affordability and Jobs—and is a collaboration between NSF and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.