* 2043869
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: MICOPP: Mobility Improvements to achieve transportation equity in Communities through joint Optimization of Public and Private community-based resources
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Pan Li, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

Legacy industrial cities face numerous barriers to creating an equitable
transportation system for all residents. Such is the case of Cleveland, Ohio,
whose once vibrant public transportation system has weakened amidst decades of
population loss, suburbanization, the relocation of job hubs away from the
central city, and the concentration of affordable housing in neighborhoods
marked by segregation and concentrated poverty. The confluence of these factors
translate into transportation insecurity for low income households. The vision
for this project is to leverage an existing community collaboration tackling the
spatial mismatch (Paradox Prize) together with new technologies to take
advantage of both public and community-based transportation assets and resources
for advancing transportation access, affordability, and security in low-income
urban communities. Building on existing data and scholarship, and using
technologies to reduce cost and increase efficiency in the current system, this
project will identify bottle-necks and inefficiencies in the system to guide new
investments and resource allocations to dynamically foster better transportation
access, connecting affordable housing and employment opportunities.
Additionally, this project will work across transportation, artificial
intelligence, social science, cyber-physical systems, smart city, and IoT
applications, leading to better connections between low-income communities and
access to jobs, affordable housing and wraparound services.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project envisions a collaborative effort that will lead to the
development of a hybrid transportation system called “Mobility Improvements to
achieve transportation equity in Communities through joint Optimization of
Public and Private community-based resources (MICOPP)”, with potential
applicability to other urban communities challenged by sprawl and population
decline. This planning process will involve active participation of all project
stakeholders to make sure that the community needs, available resources, and
user and systemic bottlenecks in accessing transportation choices are clearly
identified. Using available data, artificial intelligence mechanisms will be
developed to jointly optimize public and community-based transportation
resources, given safety, availability and affordability constraints with the
objective of maximizing the extent that the system serves the community.
Appropriate metrics will be devised to evaluate the effectiveness of MICOPP and
study the tradeoffs in investment decisions. This project is in response to the
Civic Innovation Challenge program, Track A— Communities and Mobility: Offering
Better Mobility Options to Solve the Spatial Mismatch Between Housing
Affordability and Jobs—and is a collaboration between NSF and the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.