* 2043347
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Mobilization and transport of contaminants to groundwater in flood-impacted unconnected communities in South Texas following Hurricane Hanna
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Vikram Kapoor, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Boyer
* 10/31/2021
* USD 15,000.00

With a potential increase in the occurrence of major hurricanes making landfall,
there is an immediate need to understand their impacts in vulnerable coastal
areas. Flooding from heavy rain and ocean storm surge may damage infrastructure
and result in the release of sewage and other toxic chemicals into environmental
waters. Flood water could also enter groundwater systems and mobilize
contaminants to points of exposure. Particularly vulnerable are coastal
communities that lack basic water infrastructure and have many potential sources
of water pollutants. This study will collect groundwater samples from coastal
areas that were flooded after Hurricane Hanna made landfall on the south Texas
coast. It will generate necessary data to advance understanding on the impacts
to water quality and movement of microbial and chemical contaminants in coastal
groundwater systems subjected to catastrophic flooding and input of contaminants
after landfall of major storm events. Results will provide data than can inform
scientists, public officials, and community members on the spread and
distribution of contaminants after flooding from extreme storm events in coastal
areas. This information is essential for predicting and mitigating threats,
increasing resilience and access to clean water and minimizing health impacts in
coastal communities. The study will engage community members from underserved
populations, share results with stakeholders, and support and train students
from underrepresented groups in STEM fields. It will further prepare students on
rapid-response research under challenging circumstances. The primary objective
of this work is to advance knowledge and understanding about the immediate
impacts to water quality and contamination in coastal areas subjected to
flooding as a result of extremes events. It is hypothesized that contaminant
inputs during flooding events can serve as tracers that can be monitored
immediately following storms to gain knowledge about groundwater systems. The
project will collect data to assess contamination in groundwater systems
impacted by coastal flooding after the landfall of a major Hurricane in south
Texas, determine the pathways and residence times of contaminants in groundwater
following flooding by hurricanes, and quantify post-storm aquifer recharge and
transport of contaminants. The proposed work entails collecting groundwater,
runoff and river/lake samples from several flooded communities and use molecular
and chemical analytical methods to measure and monitor presence and
concentration levels of microbial contamination, trace metals, nitrates,
hydrocarbons, pesticides and other organic pollutants over a 5-months period
following Hurricane Hanna. The data will provide information on spatial and
temporal concentrations in relation to flooded areas after the landfall of
Hurricane Hanna. Mitigation and prevention efforts can then be designed to
explicitly address groundwater contamination. Information from this study will
be shared with outreach partners and stakeholders and used to develop factsheets
on the health-risks of the identified contaminants and aquifer protection. This
can translate to other communities in the US that have been affected by flooding
and are facing similar issues. Through data dissemination, the project will
educate and engage predominantly communities from underserved populations. The
project will support and train students from underrepresented groups and help to
broaden participation in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.