* 2043237
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): Promoting Cybersecurity Excellence and Diversity via Dynamic and Applied Learning Tactics
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Tony Coulson, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,367,880.00

This project supports continuation of the CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service
(SFS) program at California State University, San Bernardino (CSUSB). The CSUSB
program promotes cybersecurity excellence through a dynamic curriculum, unique
applied learning requirements, and a diverse student population. Students work
on a curriculum designed around the needs of government organizations seeking
well-qualified cybersecurity personnel. The program provides training options
for many in-demand skills within the federal government and encompasses four
bachelor’s and five master’s degree programs. A typical CSUSB CyberCorps®
student is well-versed in cybersecurity policy, tactics, threat analysis,
counterintelligence, networking, database, offensive and defensive hacking,
penetration testing, and forensics, including with applied professional
experiences. CSUSB's service area is richly populated with residents from
diverse ethnic backgrounds, including those groups that are currently
underrepresented in the cybersecurity field. In addition, most students are
first generation minority students, transferring from community colleges, often
from low-income and disadvantaged backgrounds. From tutoring to etiquette to
professional behavior, CSUSB places great emphasis on ensuring this diverse
student cohort (50% Hispanic and 43% female) learns the skills necessary to
successfully obtain and retain professional employment. The CSUSB SFS program
also mentors other institutions regarding best practices in recruitment
diversity, placement strategies, leveraging university resources, and program
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSUSB’s CyberCorps® program will continue as a
source of high-quality cybersecurity workforce personnel with three project
objectives. First, the program will train four cohorts of graduate and
undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds. Second, the project team will
provide ongoing academic support and mentoring to the scholars with the goal of
a 100% annual retention rate (barring extenuating circumstances). Last, the
program aims to place all scholarship recipients in federal, state, local, or
tribal cyber service positions, with at least 80% in federal executive branch
positions. The program’s components and its effectiveness will contribute to the
body of knowledge and best practice strategies for successful recruitment,
mentorship, retention, and placement of cybersecurity professionals. Under the
mentorship of experienced faculty and professionals, CyberCorps® students are
required to work in applied activities beyond the classroom including
competitions, research, and community outreach. The CSUSB program is also
pursuing unconventional approaches to showcase student talents from game
development and outreach to challenging technical projects, creating a
nationally recognized cybersecurity program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which
funds proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity
and aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior
cybersecurity workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are
required to work in cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal
Government organization for the same duration as their scholarship
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.