* 2043539
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Overcoming Mobility Inequity With New Open-Access Tools for Analyzing Spatial Accessibility
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Anne Dodge, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

This grant, a joint endeavor of the University of Chicago, the Metropolitan
Planning Council (MPC), and Brookings Institution, will fund a new set of
indicators that will help people compare different neighborhoods in terms of
“access poverty.” “Access poverty” is the idea that people who live in certain
neighborhoods have a harder time getting where they need to go - for work, for
school, for food, for services, and for care. This is a complicated problem; it
involves housing, businesses, public and private transportation, infrastructure,
jobs and employment opportunities, and essential local services. To build these
indicators, we need to work hand-in-hand with local organizations to learn more
about which assets people consider essential, how they move around their
neighborhoods, and the constraints on their time and choices. Historically,
these questions have been considered primarily in terms of jobs and affordable
housing; the “access poverty” indicator will ask bigger questions, taking into
account the full range of ways in which people need to move around their
neighborhoods in order to live their fullest lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to create a set of indicators to assess the
distribution of travel burdens across residential communities within the United
States. “Travel burden” is measured in terms of time or distance spent moving
from an origin to a destination. Given the complex nature of movement within
cities, the team will account for several modes of transportation as well as
detailed breakouts of travel burden across asset categories such as jobs,
housing, retail corridors, schools, childcare sites, health clinics, and other
places where people want or need to go in order to live productive and connected
lives. The research undertaken in the planning phase is to compare available
methods for calculating travel burden at the neighborhood level and evaluate
georeferenced points-of-interest datasets (as well as conventional employment
and housing sources). There are many methodologies for measures of travel
burden, these include isochrones, travel time matrices, and other spatial access
techniques that use travel data and population characteristics to generate
weighted travel costs. These measures can help with benchmarking, identifying
specific deficits across communities, and shed light on questions of equity both
within cities and across metropolitan areas at scale. This project is supported
by the CIVIC Innovation Challenge program Track A. Communities and Mobility:
Offering Better Mobility Options to Solve the Spatial Mismatch Between Housing
Affordability and Jobs through a collaboration between NSF and the Department of
Energy Vehicle Transportation Office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.