* 2043218
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: User-Centered Mobility Solutions (UCMS):  A New Vision to Connect Jobs and the Labor Force
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Lingqian Hu, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 49,782.00

A long-standing spatial mismatch has received significant attention between
predominantly African American neighborhoods in the central city of Milwaukee
and a large suburban employment center 15 miles northwest. Conventional fixed-
route bus services were implemented but determined to be inefficient, so they
were discontinued. Thus, the labor force (including employed workers and
unemployed workers who are actively looking for jobs) and employers continue to
struggle with the spatial mismatch. By adopting a fundamentally different
approach that is bottom-up—focusing on the core users and their respective
needs, this CIVIC Planning Grant (PG) will develop two pilot programs of User-
Centered Mobility Solutions (UCMS), which integrate new mobility technologies,
including transport network companies (TNCs) and micro-transit (e.g., Via), to
directly address mobility needs of two types of core users—the labor force and
employers. If successful, this project will serve as a new user-centered model
for other U.S. metropolitan areas with significant spatial
mismatches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initial PG activities will explore strategies
that overcome communication and institutional barriers to formulate intra-region
UCMS and to facilitate successful implementation. During this stage, the
research team will connect with workforce development organizations and business
organizations to recruit and engage core users, identify and address barriers,
jointly select alternative mobility services with core users, and achieve
commitment from core users to participate in the Stage 2 pilot programs. PG
stage outcomes include the pilot program plan, public involvement plan, and
evaluation framework. Stage 2 will implement the pilot programs and compare the
effectiveness of the labor force-centered and the employer-centered mobility
solutions at addressing the spatial mismatch problem. Successful implementation
and evaluation of the pilot programs will help to determine (1) whether UCMS can
solve spatial mismatch, and (2) whether a labor force-centered or employer-
centered strategy works better.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response
to Track A – CIVIC Innovation Challenge - Communities and Mobility a
collaboration with NSF and the Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.