* 2043358
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Hoomalu Halelea - Community-led Innovation for Integrated Flood Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,09/30/2021
* Thomas Giambelluca, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 49,997.00

In April 2018, Haleleʻa, Kauaʻi, set a U.S. record for 24-hr rainfall (49.69
in), causing $19.7 million in losses. Over two years later, with families and
businesses still recovering, the event offers an opportunity to enhance
resilience of area communities and other places worldwide which are increasingly
vulnerable to floods. The Hawaiian Islands comprise a model social-ecological
system of diversity in culture, rainfall, and ecosystems. Traditionally,
Hawaiian food security was underpinned by oversight of water resources built
across generations, but local knowledge alone can no longer encompass changes in
rainfall, species invasion, and shifting land use. This proposal offers a model
to restore capacity for local stewardship of waterways through scientific
partnerships to enhance monitoring and communication tools. This project will
enhance social and ecological community resilience to increasing flood risk
through: 1) Collaborative Research - Working with community members to integrate
diverse methods and knowledge of watershed change to enhance local level stream
management; 2) Piloting restoration and stream clearing; 3) Monitoring and
Communication to improve availability of historical and real-time
hydrometeorological data to understand flood hazards, and promote connectedness
around extreme events; and 4) Community Education and Training offering
educational materials to enhance holistic resilience to future disasters.
Project partners include seven community non-profits, the county disaster
planning and response agency, three university faculty specializing in water -
from atmosphere to groundwater - and one social scientist native to the study
area, along with a community lead experienced in indigenous stewardship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project goals and scope of research include interviews and
focus groups with community members, piloting stream restoration through
invasive species removal, installation of real-time weather stations to monitor
rainfall, development of a communication web portal, and course for community
education that will include in-person on-site learning and video instruction.
Researchers and community members will together integrate elders’ knowledge, and
historic stream data to generate research questions, place monitoring stations,
and investigate hydrological responses during extreme rainfall events. This
project provides a model for collaboration between university scholars, local
non-profits, and indigenous community members to enhance research,
infrastructure, and communication; provide monitoring, observation capability
and training opportunities and enhance local resilience to climate change. This
proposal will also contribute to understanding of cultural, social and
contextual aspects of resilience; model collaborative processes to generate and
assess locally relevant indicators of resilience over time; while testing
applications of hydrological science and communication technology to climate
change adaptation and planning. This project addresses Track B – Resilience to
Natural Disasters for the CIVIC Innovation Challenge a collaboration with NSF
and the Department of Homeland Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.