* 2043847
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Remote Monitoring of Small Rural Water Systems to Ensure Safe Drinking Water through Disasters and Natural Recovery
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Emily Kumpel, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

More than 45,000 community water systems in the US are small, each providing
water to up to 10,000 people. These systems, which provide a vital supply of
potable water to mostly rural communities, are faced with many challenges which
are made harder by natural disasters and pandemics such as COVID-19. To better
protect these water systems, including during emergency scenarios, this project
will develop and test tools to check the status as of these water systems
remotely as well and to support the operators who run the systems. This planning
project is a collaboration between academic and local government partners to
develop and pilot these remote sanitary inspection tools and water quality
monitoring systems while at the same time increasing access to skilled personnel
in small community water systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
is to support inspection and monitoring of small water systems and to ensure
continuity of operators during and after disasters. The specific aims of the
planning period are to: 1) Investigate and pilot tools for conducting remote
sanitary inspection and remote monitoring of water sources and treatment
infrastructure to improve delivery of safe water in small water systems through
disasters and recovery; and 2) Explore a model of enhancing human resource
capacity during emergencies in the form of shared operator programs. Partners
include the University of Massachusetts Amherst, two regional planning
organizations in western Massachusetts (the Franklin Regional Council of
Governments and the Pioneer Valley Planning Commission), and the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection. Specifically, this project will develop
and pilot a mobile system which simplifies and streamlines sanitary surveys and
inspections for source waters and treatment facilities; evaluate novel water
quality monitoring devices for application in small water systems; and develop a
model for a shared-operator program for the towns located in three counties. The
research questions will address gaps in knowledge in how to support the
continuity of small community water supply operations through disasters and were
developed from needs identified by civic partners. The proposed project would
directly address challenges small communities face due to the COVID-19 pandemic,
and help with preparedness for future disasters, including future pandemics and
extreme weather events. This project is in response to the Civic Innovation
Challenge program, Track B—Resilience to Natural Disasters—and is a
collaboration between NSF and the Department of Homeland
Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.