* 2043257
* Collaborative Research: Exoneration and Compensation: The Role of False Confessions
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Kyle Scherr, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 192,500.00

Instances in which innocent individuals are wrongly convicted represent serious
travesties of justice because the actual guilty offenders may go on to commit
other, sometimes serious, crimes and the wrongly convicted innocents languish in
prison for years (on average, over 13 years for serious crimes). The processes
involved with exonerating innocent individuals of wrongful convictions is not
well understood. Essential factors and aids necessary to facilitate these
innocents’ well-being and reintegration into society upon exoneration are even
less understood. A growing body of research has demonstrated that, although all
of these individuals are innocent, (a) the process to exoneration differs
depending on the circumstances associated with the wrongful conviction (such as
whether the person falsely confessed) and (b) the general public still perceives
these individuals as not entirely innocent, not entirely deserving of
reintegration aids such as job training and counseling, and less fit for office
jobs. A better understanding of the processes involved with exoneration attempts
and a deeper appreciation of the compensation and aids necessary to more fully
make these innocent individuals whole is critical to informing and developing
statutes and reforms that will facilitate their reintegration into
society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Although our legal system has witnessed a
proliferation of exonerations for wrongful convictions across the last decade or
two, the process leading to exoneration and the aftereffects of being exonerated
are not well understood. Differences in the process leading to exoneration,
types and degree of aid, and timeliness of receiving aids have all been
documented. Given that innocent confessors suffer a series of cumulative
disadvantages during their journey through the legal system, this project will
examine the idea that innocent confessors have particularly onerous experiences.
To address this idea, the project will use in-depth interviews with attorneys
who have worked on exoneration cases, exonerees (who have and have not falsely
confessed), and innocence advocates to examine structural-level (e.g., wrongful
conviction in a compensation statute state or not; exonerated with assistance
from an innocence project); case-level (e.g., false confession or not); and
individual-level (e.g., exoneration status, race) factors that influence whether
an exoneree receives no, partial, or full compensation, and the types of
compensation to explore how these aids (or lack of) impact post-conviction well-
being and reentry adjustment. The in-depth interviews are complemented with an
experimental field study of thousands of employers in five locations, comparing
their willingness to hire exonerees who did and did not falsely confess, guilty
paroled offenders, and those with no criminal history. The findings have the
potential to illustrate barriers to exoneree compensation, determine how receipt
of compensation and aid (type and amount) can influence post-exoneration re-
entry experiences, and causally demonstrate the obstacles exonerees face when
attempting to find employment. The ultimate goal is to inform state and federal
compensation statutes, leading states without statutes to adopt ones or states
with statutes to revise their current ones—such as removing controversial
restrictions around false confessions, including employment assistance to help
exonerees better adjust, and other aids that many exonerees desire but rarely
can access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.