* 2043134
* CAREER: Reconciling Model-Based and Learning-Based Imaging: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Ulugbek Kamilov, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 06/30/2026
* USD 283,342.00

Computational imaging is a rapidly growing area that seeks to enhance the
capabilities of imaging instruments by viewing imaging as a computational
problem. There are currently two distinct approaches for designing computational
imaging methods: model-based and learning-based. Model-based methods leverage
analytical signal properties and often come with theoretical guarantees and
insights. Learning-based methods leverage data-driven representations for best
empirical performance through training on large datasets. This project
reconciles both viewpoints by formulating a unifying framework that provides a
learning-based extension to the classical imaging theory. The results will have
broad use and transformative effects across a wide range of scientific,
engineering, and biomedical applications, such as 3D live-cell imaging,
structural analysis of complex materials, early diagnosis of Alzheimer disease,
and improved patient comfort in magnetic resonance imaging. The project will
also create unique opportunities for broadening research participation,
improving engineering education, and engaging the academic
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current theory of computational imaging is
inadequate for analyzing recent learning algorithms. Current algorithms are also
impractical for processing 3D (space), 4D (space-time), or 5D (space-time-
spectrum) datasets containing billions of variables. The framework developed in
this project addresses this gap by integrating physical and learned models for
fast processing of massive datasets. The framework also offers new theoretical
insights and rigorous performance guarantees when combined with mathematical
conditions on the underlying models. The framework will enable high-resolution
computational imaging in emerging applications, such as dynamic and quantitative
magnetic resonance imaging, x-ray microscopy, and cryogenic electron microscopy.
While this project explicitly seeks impact on computational imaging, it has the
potential to transform broader signal and information processing via
generalizations to audio and speech, communication theory, and graph structured
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.