* 2043255
* Pinpointing the neural mechanisms that support the remarkable visual fidelity of visual recognition memory
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Nicole Rust, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 539,985.00

We have all had the perplexing experience of seeing someone and remembering that
we know them, but not being able to recall any other details, such as who they
are or how we know them. In those moments, sometimes all that we can remember is
that a person is familiar to us. This highlights a difference in recognition
memory between familiarity memory and more detailed recollection memory. We rely
on familiarity memory every day to remember whether we know specific people and
things. Despite how important this type of memory is, we still do not understand
how familiarity memory works in our brains, although previous studies have
suggested that it may utilize a different brain network than recollection
memory. Understanding familiarity memory will help us develop therapeutic
approaches to treat memory disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease and other types
of dementia. It could also help us create more effective educational tools to
enhance learning in children and adults. This project seeks to understand how
different parts of the brain help us remember whether we’ve seen something
before. To figure this out, this project focuses on the question: how different
does a picture have to be for us to know that it’s different from an image that
we remember seeing before? This project compares the pattern of brain activation
during accurate familiarity memory with brain activity during confusions in
familiarity memory, in order to determine precisely what brain regions are
involved in supporting familiarity memory and in order to deepen our
understanding of the neural basis and architecture of recognition memory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this cross-species study focuses on
understanding how a network of key brain regions, believed to play a role in
memory, including inferotemporal cortex, perirhinal cortex, entorhinal cortex
and the hippocampus contribute to visual recognition memory. The research
explores this question in the context of a Mnemonic Similarity task, which
probes the ability of humans and monkeys to distinguish novel and familiar
images in the presence of lure images that are similar to images that have
already been seen. Aim 1 focuses on quantifying how often humans and monkeys
falsely remember seeing images as a function of how similar that the images are.
Aim 2 focuses on the neural basis of familiarity memory and investigates how
neuronal cell and ensemble activity in monkey inferotemporal cortex, perirhinal
cortex, entorhinal cortex and the hippocampus compare with one another and
correlate with memory behavior. Together, these results will, for the first
time, describe the differential and collective contributions of these brain
areas to shaping visual familiarity and the visual detail of visual recognition
memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.