* 2043637
* Computational Strategies for Balancing Trade-offs between Risk and Effort during Walking
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2025
* James Finley, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 04/30/2025
* USD 523,720.00

Understanding factors that contribute to fall risk has broad implications for
improving the health and quality of life for several populations with neuromotor
impairments, including people post-stroke, people with Parkinson’s disease, and
amputees. There are also significant medical costs associated with falls: In the
United States alone, falls among people who are at least 65-years old incur
costs of approximately $50 billion. Conventional approaches to reducing the risk
of falling focus on building strength or training people in more effective
strategies to recover from loss of balance. However, these approaches fail to
address the role of the choices that people make. For example, people may fall
because they have difficulty judging risk accurately, overestimate their
functional capacity, or tend to be risk tolerant. Developing methods to assess
individual differences in risk perception and risk preference during walking
could lead to a new class of fall-reducing interventions that improve a person’s
ability to identify and avoid potential risks that push them beyond their
physical capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current theoretical models of how
humans select features of their walking pattern primarily aim to minimize an
energy-related cost in a risk-neutral context. The overall objective of the
present work is to extend the current risk-neutral theory to a more
generalizable, and clinically relevant, risk-sensitive theory of locomotion. The
investigators will use a novel approach to examine how people balance trade-offs
between effort and risk during walking through the use of a risk-sensitive
decision-making framework. They will also determine if models of risk- and
effort-based decision-making in other domains explain age-dependent differences
in how people choose between routes associated with varying levels of physical
risk and effort. In addition to identifying fundamental principles of behavior
selection during walking, the work will also provide high school students with
practical experiences working at the intersection of experimental motor control,
biomechanics, and game development. The investigators will collaborate with a
local high school in Los Angeles to develop project-based activities focused on
statistical thinking and biomechanics that align with the Common Core and Next
Generation Science Standards. These activities will be made available for the
public to use through the USC Viterbi K-12 Stem Center, on the principal
investigator’s website, and via Github.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.