* 2043022
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Cybersecurity Workforce Preparation
* EDU,DGE
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Jean Mayo, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 01/31/2026
* USD 1,789,113.00

The nation is facing a significant shortage of well-trained and well-prepared
cybersecurity professionals. To meet this workforce need, the CyberCorps®:
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program at Michigan Technological University
(Michigan Tech) will train 20 undergraduate and graduate SFS scholars over a
five-year period. These highly-skilled SFS scholars will be ready to enter the
government's cybersecurity workforce upon graduation. Michigan Tech offers a
number of high-quality cybersecurity and computing degree programs and faculty
actively conduct externally supported research in emerging areas including
cyber-physical systems, mobile computing, and network architecture. Michigan
Tech also has a long history of offering cybersecurity outreach activities to
K-12 teachers and students and of providing excellent career services for
college students. The SFS program will create a supportive learning community to
help these students complete their college education and join the cybersecurity
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SFS program at Michigan Tech is a joint
effort of multiple departments and programs. SFS scholars will be chosen from
seven computing undergraduate majors and one cybersecurity master’s degree
program. The SFS program allows multi-disciplinary study and broader
participation with a mix of flexible curriculum tracks, including undergraduate
majors and minors in cybersecurity and accelerated or regular master’s degrees
in cybersecurity. The SFS program will also include student mentoring, training,
and management activities, as well as coursework and personalized academic
advising. Students will be mentored through individual meetings and group
meetings, undergraduate/graduate research, professional development workshops,
cybersecurity competitions/conferences, and outreach activities. In addition,
the SFS program will collaborate with the Pavlis Honors College at Michigan Tech
that affords students opportunities to design their own honors experience and
participate in a dynamic learning community. The SFS program will recruit and
retain underrepresented groups including women, minorities, first-generation /
low-income students, and persons with disabilities. Throughout the project
period, the project team will evaluate the effectiveness of conducted activities
and achievement of job placement goals. The formative and summative assessment
results will be used to refine the SFS program and apply best practices. In
addition, project outcomes and evaluation results will be disseminated
nationwide to help peer institutions and government agencies adopt best
practices in cybersecurity education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds
proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and
aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity
workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.