* 2043318
* Collaborative Research: Emergent motor timing influences perceptual timing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Dagmar Sternad, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 322,971.00

Many real-world behaviors, such as tapping to a musical beat, throwing a ball,
or crossing the street, depend on precise timing among perception, cognition,
and motor action. Luckily, our motor systems usually operate seamlessly in
concert with our perceptual and cognitive processes. Despite how they work
together in the real world, these aspects of behavior have been largely studied
separately in the laboratory. While that approach allows scientific rigor and
has provided significant insights into each subsystem, it says little about
their interaction, which may be fundamental to understanding human behavior. A
better understanding of how the temporal aspects of perceptual, cognitive, and
motor behaviors are interrelated also has the potential to advance technological
innovations, e.g., in cognitive neural prosthetics, a novel human-computer
interface for helping paralyzed patients and patients with amputations.
Identifying the temporal interactions among cognitive, perceptual, and motor
functions has other translational potential for developing new rehabilitation
paradigms for populations with impaired motor and perceptual timing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program aims to evaluate whether and how
timing in perception and motor control involves shared mechanisms that ensure
seamless integration and plastic co-modification. The experimental approach
combines a motor skill, throwing a ball in an augmented reality environment,
with a time perception task. Objective 1 explores how motor timing that emerges
from discrete throwing actions modifies perceptual timing. Objective 2 extends
this question to situations requiring rhythmic throwing actions. Objective 3
examines whether learned coupling of motor and perceptual timing persists in the
longer term. Taken together, this quantitative approach to understanding the
connections between perceptual and motor timing will contribute to developing a
unified theory of timing control in real-world contexts. The female investigator
team has also identified multiple outreach activities to foster and communicate
the integration of scientific research and STEM education and to increase
minority representation in the cognitive, perceptual, and motor
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.