* 2044077
* CAREER: Optimization-Based Computational Discovery of Decision-Making Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Qi Zhang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 05/31/2026
* USD 408,720.00

Decision making is fundamental to everyday life, but many decision-making
processes are poorly understood. For example, experts in the operation of
chemical plants make decisions based on years of experience, but their decision
strategies often are not well documented and, due to the complexity of these
manufacturing processes, are difficult to explain even to fellow operators. This
means the complete transfer of expert knowledge to new operators remains an
unsolved problem. Likewise in microbiology, cells can be considered autonomous
agents that make decisions regarding gene expression and cell metabolic
function. While we can observe the decisions cells make in experiments, we often
do not understand the motivation for these choices. Answering this question
would provide fundamental insights that could advance cancer treatment,
immunology research, and biomanufacturing operations. These challenges provide
the motivation for this research program which aims to develop a computational
framework that uses observations of decisions to uncover the underlying
decision-making processes. Our research will advance the theory and algorithmic
representation of this fundamental problem. Through our integrated research and
education activities, we will teach future scientists and engineers to use
advanced decision-making tools and promote interdisciplinary collaborations
between researchers that work in the field of decision
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our proposed approach is inspired by the principle
of optimality, which conjectures that autonomous agents generally make decisions
in some optimal fashion. Following this principle, we propose to model decision-
making processes as mathematical optimization problems in which decisions are
considered optimal solutions. Given a set of observations, each represented by
the decisions made in a specific situation, the goal is to infer the
optimization model whose solution results in the observed decisions; this is
referred to as Inverse Optimization (IO). The IO approach enjoys all the
modeling flexibility provided by mathematical optimization, facilitates
incorporation of domain knowledge, and allows the generation of inherently
interpretable decision-making models. In this research, we will develop
computationally efficient IO algorithms and apply them to a range of problems in
science and engineering. Three specific Aims are proposed: (1) learning unknown
objective functions, (2) learning unknown constraints, and (3) optimization with
IO-based models. Aims 1 and 2 focus on the development of computational methods
addressing the challenging aspects of IO, such as nonlinearity, discrete
decisions, model selection, and adaptive sampling. Mixed-integer programming,
bilevel optimization, and decomposition will be applied in innovative ways to
ensure computational tractability. In Aim 3, we will demonstrate how
optimization models derived from IO can not only help discover hidden decision-
making processes but also serve as surrogate optimizers and embedded models in
hierarchical optimization, with specific applications in bioprocess optimization
and environmental policy design. Because the principle of optimality enjoys
broad (albeit often approximate) validity and the IO methods developed in our
research will be generalizable, our work has the potential to broadly impact
artificial intelligence research, robotics, biology, healthcare, and even
management and behavioral science. We will pursue a set of activities that
include teaching K-12 students the basic concepts of decision science through
games, incorporating optimization into our chemical engineering curriculum,
establishing a short course on decision making, and organizing cross-
disciplinary workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.