* 2044670
* PFI-TT: Crowdsourced Road Geometry Estimation using Smartphones
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Lu Su, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is enabled by the development and
prototyping of a novel smartphone-based, crowd-sensing system that can estimate
road geometry features such as grade, curvature, elevation, cross slope, and
superelevation. Such a system can potentially act as a cost-effective and
scalable alternative to current road geometry acquisition systems which
typically employ ground or aerial surveys using specially-instrumented
vehicles/aircrafts. Information on road geometry can help in: a) improving
driving-safety and efficiency for both human-driven and autonomous vehicles, b)
improving smartphone/in-car localization and navigation services, especially in
areas with limited global positioning system (GPS) accuracy, and c) conducting
risk assessment and engineering design of road segments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to address the unique research
challenges introduced using smartphones as a sensing platform for the task of
road geometry estimation. First, due to low quality sensors, data from
smartphones is noisy and prone to drifts and biases. Second, to make the system
transparent to users, the Smartphone must be able to be placed in any arbitrary
position and orientation in the vehicle. Third, the crowd-sensing system is
characterized by varying QoI (Quality of Information) of data from different
sources/vehicles due to factors such as varying physical properties of vehicles,
varying quality of sensors on different smartphones, etc. Successful
implementation of the integrated solution will result in novel, heterogeneous
sensor fusion algorithms to handle sensor noise and arbitrary placement by
combining data from multiple types of sensors on the smartphone and data from
auxiliary sources such as remotely sensed road elevation. The project will
result in the development of data aggregation algorithms that combine multiple
users’ smartphone data in a QoI-aware manner to address the unreliability of
individual vehicle data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.