* 2044788
* CAREER: Probing the Thermal Relaxation Dynamics of Nanomaterials with Time-Resolved Calorimetry
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Dakotah Thompson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 01/31/2026
* USD 420,538.00

The conversion of energy from one form to another is central to a number of
emerging technologies such as solar cells and batteries. Nanoscale materials
play a key role in the development of these technologies due to their unique
electrical, optical, and thermal properties. However, energy conversion within
nanomaterials is a complex and highly dynamic process that remains poorly
understood. For example, the transient response of these materials to an
external stimulus often results in the generation of heat over very short time
scales of nanoseconds or less, which state-of-the-art experimental techniques
are not able to fully characterize. In this proposal, a measurement approach
will be developed that is capable of resolving these transient heat flow rates
with both picowatt resolution and nanosecond response time. The insights
obtained from these real-time measurements will not only enable improvements to
the conversion efficiency of the devices introduced above, but will also unlock
new classes of sensors and computer processors with higher bandwidth and lower
power consumption. The proposed research will concurrently promote educational
initiatives that will establish a pipeline for future researchers from south-
central Wisconsin to become leaders in the field of thermal nanoscience and the
larger STEM community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to develop an
experimental platform that will enable real-time, room-temperature measurements
of transient heat dissipation in nanomaterials as they relax over ultra-fast
time scales. Although this measurement is extremely difficult due to the
miniscule and rapidly-evolving heat signatures, it represents a crucial
supplement to established pump-probe techniques and first-principles modelling
approaches that will provide a detailed mapping of the relaxation pathways in
these materials for the first time. The PI will leverage extensive technical
expertise in nanofabrication, precision instrumentation, and thermal modelling
to develop a novel calorimetric approach that is orders-of-magnitude more
sensitive and more dynamic than the calorimetric techniques in use today. Using
this platform, fundamental and technologically-relevant questions about the
thermal relaxation dynamics of nanomaterials will be answered including, but not
limited to, the following: What pathways are responsible for non-radiative
recombination of excitons in quantum dots? How are structural phase transitions
induced in polymorphic 2D materials? What role does magnon-phonon coupling play
in the Bose-Einstein condensation of magnons within
nanostructures?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.