* 2044007
* Tribal Constitutions: Constructing Power by Developing Structures of Self-Governance
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Beth Red Bird, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 01/31/2024
* USD 383,488.00

There are 345 federally recognized tribes within the continental United States,
and tribal sovereignty—its genesis, expanse, interconnection with the U.S.
federal government, and distinction from U.S. state governments—is a contested
and complicated topic. Beyond its legal ramifications, its definition impacts
tribal culture, member well-being, and even tribal survival. Tribal
constitutions serve as a component of tribal sovereignty, and many tribal
governments regard their constitutions as a cornerstone of self-determination.
But constitutions do not develop in a vacuum; they are the result of historical
trajectories and power processes that shape modern states. The decision to
constitutionalize, and the content of a constitution, give insight into how a
society thinks about self-determination, self-governance, and justice. This
relationship is complicated in the context of tribal constitutions because
tribes, as sovereign-dependent nations, developed their claims to self-
governance in the shadow of empire. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators have
compiled a comprehensive database of 1,053 tribal constitutions or amendments
from 304 tribes (88% of the currently 345 federally recognized Indian tribes in
the continental U.S.), representing nearly 150 years of tribal constitutional
history. They have developed a comprehensive coding scheme to map constitutional
provisions and track historical change over time. Using this database, they will
study four constitutional areas closely connected to sovereignty: (1) tribal
constitutional origins; (2) citizenship and rights; (3) tribal courts; and (4)
legislative power. Each area of research raises questions of how power is
constructed, whether through coercion, resistance, economic development,
institutional structures, etc. Finding answers to these questions will depend on
comparison of numerous institutions, a reading of complex constitutional
documents with interacting institutional forms, and methods which allow
visualization of changes over time. The investigators will use a multi-
methodological approach, combining computational social science methods, causal
analysis, and qualitative legal analysis. This research exploring the documents
and institutions of tribal governance will expand our understanding of tribal
power today and its development over time. The findings will contribute to
discussions of tribal sovereignty and the relationship between tribes and the
federal government and will bring tribal governance into the rich field of
constitutionalism and comparative constitutionalism. Centering the experience of
tribes in constitutional studies will not only advance work on colonialism and
self-determination, it will provide concrete insights into the ways in which
constitutional language shapes political discourse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.