* 2044721
* STTR Phase I:  Genome Editing in Loblolly Pine for Sustainable Fiber Production in the Southern United States
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Rodolphe Barrangou, TREECO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to support the domestic lumber industry, specifically
for loblolly pine, through biological research. The proposed project brings
forestry within the scope of the emerging science of genome editing with
powerful impacts. Enhanced traits allow commercial entities in pulp and paper
manufacturing to save energy and chemical costs; a pulp and paper facility can
potentially reduce costs by up to 6%, exceptional for an industry that provides
everyday items, such as hygienic tissue and cardboard for deliveries, at thin
profit margins. Furthermore, trees play an important role in carbon
sequestration, but they need to survive the temperature changes and potential
infestations. With the advance of the proposed technology, editing forests could
eventually gain acceptance as a significant avenue to bioresource sustainability
and carbon sequestration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project combines the
insights of tree genetics with the power of genome editing to generate enhanced
genotypes with functional attributes that improve tree growth, processing and
sustainability. Based on an integrated predictive model of genes responsible for
phenotypes of commercial interest in relevant species, it is possible to select
combinations of genome editing targets responsible for enhanced phenotypes, such
as lignin content and syringyl/guaiacyl ratio, to modulate the composition of
trees as to increase their propensity for processing, their environmental
resilience, or valuable commercial features. Using CRISPR-based genome editing
technologies, the project will multiplex target these genetic sequences
concurrently to generate the intended genetic alteration combinations, using
expertise in delivery to commercially relevant elite germplasm. Conventional
breeding in forestry is slow and cumbersome because the long generation time of
trees requires decades per breeding cycle. No alternative technology is
currently feasible for accelerated genetic improvement of forest trees. With the
proposed technology, annual crops can be efficiently bred on biannual or annual
cycles with the same or improved properties as their conventionally-bred
counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.