* 2044589
* I-Corps:  Water filtration systems that integrate organic antibacterial membranes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Manuel Lobato, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of membranes with carbon nanoparticles to treat water for the
removal of bacteria, converting it into drinking water. Well over two billion
people live without adequate water sanitation, posing a major threat to human
health. Diarrheal disease, which is mainly caused by poor sanitation and
contaminated water, is a leading cause of death in children under five years old
and vulnerable populations around the world. The common method used to ensure
pathogen-free drinking water is chlorine disinfection. Chlorine is a toxic
chemical, is highly corrosive and has a negative impact on human health. One way
to address water disinfection is membrane filtration. This project explores
translation of novel membranes to treat water, focusing on the removal of
bacteria. The proposed membranes are a modification of commercial membranes to
make them more efficient, resistant and with greater durability than those
available in the market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project advances
translation of novel membranes based on carbon nanoparticles (UDD), which can
significantly reduce fecal Col/cm3 concentration in polluted water. A death rate
between 94%-97% was observed in UDD-treated water plates depending on UDD
concentration. One-way Anova analyses of untreated and UDD treated samples
showed a significant bacteria reduction depending on UDD concentration with a
95% confidence interval. Moreover, when UDD was incorporated to commercially
available water filtration membranes, results showed a significant difference in
fecal bacteria concentration between commercial and modified membranes when
T-test analysis were performed thereby enhancing its bactericidal properties.
This research paves the way for the use of UDD as a new disinfection material
for water treatment. The improvement of the mechanical and bacteriological
properties of the membranes used for reverse osmosis potentially lowers
maintenance costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.