* 2044792
* CAREER: Investigating the Molecular Factors that Underlie Myelin-Associated Glycoprotein Binding
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Nathan Wittenberg, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2026
* USD 525,045.00

Interactions between biomolecules govern all life sustaining processes. This
project will investigate the interactions between biomolecules that are
associated with the lipid membranes that form the boundaries of cells in the
nervous system. Cholesterol is a major component of the lipid membranes, and it
can alter the structure and function of other membrane-associated molecules,
like lipids, carbohydrates, and proteins. Specifically, this project will
investigate how cholesterol alters the binding of lipids that contain
carbohydrates to proteins that regulate cell-cell interactions in the nervous
system. The protein that is at the center of these studies, myelin-associated
glycoprotein (MAG), is an inhibitor of neuron growth, and determining the
molecular factors by which its interactions are modulated by cholesterol and the
proteins it clusters with will illuminate the mechanisms through which it acts.
Synergistically with research activities, the PI will design teaching laboratory
modules that demonstrate the properties and analysis of lipids and membranes
(liposome characterization, supported membrane formation, molecular diffusion),
biosensors, and fluorescence microscopy. Additionally, an advanced graduate
level course on biosensors will be developed to expand the reach of this project
to the classroom as well as the laboratory. This course will rely heavily on the
use of active learning teaching methods, and it will expose chemistry,
biochemistry, biology, and engineering students to the wide variety of
techniques that can be used to detect and characterize
biomolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
determine, through quantitative analytical measurements, the factors that
modulate biomolecular interactions responsible for the adhesion of lipid
membranes to one another. The specific focus of the project is on the
quantitative analysis of interactions between MAG on one membrane and its
ganglioside and protein receptors on another. MAG is a sialic acid-binding
immunoglobulin-type lectin (Siglec) found in the nervous system on myelin where
one of its functions is to maintain adhesive interactions between myelin and
axon membranes. Biding of MAG to gangliosides (GD1a and GT1b) and Nogo receptor
1 (NgR1) on neurons inhibits axonal growth and is a significant obstacle to
nervous system repair. The first aim of this project will determine how
cholesterol modulates MAG-ganglioside binding events and the membrane-membrane
interactions they cause. The second aim will determine how membrane phase
separation into lipid raft-like domains influences spatial and temporal aspects
of MAG-ganglioside interactions. The final aim will determine how the
stoichiometry of the MAG receptor complex (NgR1/p75/LINGO-1) influences the
MAG’s binding affinity and thus membrane-membrane interactions. The mechanism by
which anti-LINGO-1 antibodies disrupt MAG-NgR1 interactions will also be
determined. This project will involve undergraduate and graduate students in the
design, execution, and interpretation of data obtained with quartz crystal
microbalance (QCM-D) biosensing, Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET), total
internal refection fluorescence (TIRF) microscopy, and equilibrium fluctuation
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.