* 2044850
* Wave- and Wind-Driven Flows Near the Beach
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Steve Elgar, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 906,682.00

Currents flowing along the shore transport sediments and pollution, place stress
on the bottom and affect total water levels, flooding, beach erosion, and
subsequent recovery. Yet few observations of these important alongshore flows
exist in the inner-surf and swash zones, especially during storms, and the
physics driving them during existing observations is undetermined. Along with
wave-forcing and alongshore water-level gradients, evidence suggests wind-
forcing also may be a significant driver of very shallow-water alongshore
currents. Understanding of the physics driving shallow-water flows is needed for
nearshore hydrodynamical, morphological and shoreline evolution, and wave
overtopping models. This project will leverage funded efforts during the DUNEX
study in Duck, NC in fall 2021 with additional moored instrumentation and remote
(drone) sensing of the very-near shore to enable evaluation of the wave and wind
processes driving alongshore flows near the beach. The project will provide an
important new dataset to the community, train a post-doctoral scholar, and
contribute to societal interests through informing management of nearshore zones
subject to storm-forced erosion and inundation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will obtain in situ and remotely sensed field observations for a range
of wave conditions to estimate the terms in the momentum balance governing the
nearshore zone. Hypotheses to be evaluated are, 1) the forcing of alongshore
flows near the beach is cross-shore (depth) dependent; 2) opposing water-level-
gradient and oblique-wave forcing drive alongshore flows that change direction
between the surf and swash zones, and; 3) oblique-wave and wind forcing dominate
inner-surf and swash flows during storms. The DUNEX-funded fieldwork (USCRP,
USGS, NSF, USACE, and DoD), which this project builds upon, includes an
alongshore array of surfzone ADVs, a single cross-shore transect from the dune
to the inner surf with pressure gages, ADVs, and lidar, and frequent bathymetry
surveys at the U.S. Army Corps Field Research Facility (USACE-FRF) in fall 2021.
FRF also maintains a directional wave array at 8-m, a tide gauge, several
anemometers, and a lidar that collects beach and dune topography hourly. The
expanded observations proposed here include two cross-shore transects of
pressure gages. Additionally, surface flows can be estimated by tracking
breaking-wave-generated foam in sequences of images. Drone-based particle image
velocimetry and the Optical Current Meter have been used in the past in surfzone
conditions. This project will extend and hone these techniques for the swash
zone. Observations during storms and moderate wave conditions will be compared
and contrasted to examine how processes differ as wave and wind conditions
change. The results could significantly improve the ability to predict flows
near the beach, the corresponding storm-induced changes to coastal morphology,
and the subsequent recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.