* 2044415
* CAREER: Properties of Solutions to Singular Stochastic Partial Differential Equations from Quantum Field Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Hao Shen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2026
* USD 103,291.00

This mathematics research project focuses on studying the small-scale behavior
of some quantum field theory models in physics. The research aims to produce an
accurate description and understanding of the ultraviolet divergence phenomenon.
In the study of the standard model of elementary particles, for example,
physicists often use Monte-Carlo simulation; the research carried out in this
project aims to reveal why discrete simulation can accurately predict the
behavior of a continuous quantum field, how quickly dynamical algorithms will
converge to the quantity being observed, and to what degree a homogenized
approximation can effectively describe the macroscopic nature of a many-body
problem. The project also includes two educational components, focusing on
rejuvenation of the Graduate Student Probability Conference (GSPC), which is
entirely run by graduate students primarily from the US, and a Stochastic
Partial Differential Equations (SPDE) education program that is vertically
integrated across the full spectrum of academic research. The GSPC and the SPDE
education program seek sustained long-term benefit to the future generations of
the probability community.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on studying
the properties of the solutions of some singular stochastic partial differential
equations. In recent years, there has been rapid progress in the construction of
the solutions of these equations, and the project aims to study the properties
of the solutions that have been constructed. Specifically, the investigator will
study the universal limits of the stochastic Yang-Mills equation and explore the
connections between stochastic partial differential equations, large-N problems
in quantum field theory, and the theory of mean field limits. Recently developed
theory of solutions will play a central role. The PI aims to develop rigorous
proofs for results that make practical predictions. These studies are
anticipated to result in profound connections with physics and even to influence
other natural sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.