* 2044394
* Regulation of Cell Adhesions by Mechanical Force
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Tamara Bidone, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 03/31/2024
* USD 396,319.00

This project aims to understanding how biological materials respond to
mechanical force. Adhesion receptors are proteins in the plasma membrane that
mediate cell binding to other cells or to the extracellular matrix. These
receptors sense and transmit forces between cells and the external environment.
Specifically, integrins transmit mechanical and biochemical information. This
information critically guides life processes such as embryonic development, and
also plays a role in diseases such as cancer, hypertension, osteoporosis and
atherosclerosis. Integrins undergo drastic, long-range changes in response to
biochemical signals or mechanical stresses. Exactly how integrin amino acid
residues rearrange in response to force is largely unknown due to the technical
challenges in observing shifts in residue positions and interactions at the
single protein level. This hampers our ability to understand or modulate these
processes that can lead to disease. This research will employ cell biology,
computational simulations, biophysics, chemistry and material science approaches
to elucidate the detailed pathways of force-dependent changes in integrins
conformation and their roles in cell regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching objective of this research is to understand, at near-atomic level,
how integrin conformation is modulated by mechanical force and how the resultant
conformational transitions regulate cell behavior. The research team will
develop new numerical tools to perform molecular dynamics simulations of
integrins under force. These models will be used to predict mutations that
stabilize or destabilize specific integrin states, which will then be tested
experimentally for their effects on mechanosensing in live cells. By combining
modeling with experiments, we will elucidate detailed pathways of force-
dependent conformational transitions and their role in biology. This
multidisciplinary approach will broaden the participation of diverse communities
and underrepresented groups and positively impact engineering and material
science education. Furthermore, this research may result in new approaches to
design and produce biomimetic and smart materials for engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.