* 2044599
* PFI-TT: Enabling More Scans per Machine through in Magnetic Resonance Imaging Data Processing
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Madhur Srivastava, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2023
* USD 296,558.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to reduce Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI) scan-times and improve patient throughput. This techology will be
beneficial for patients as well as healthcare providers. Shorter scan-times will
improve patient comfort, especially for patients that are young, elderly, and/or
claustrophobic. Improved throughput will increase accessibility, allow patients
to receive MRI scans in a timely manner with less wait-time, and contribute to
better healthcare outcomes. For healthcare providers and imaging facilities,
shorter scans and better throughput will increase operational efficiency,
revenue potential, and patient satisfaction. The technology can be leveraged to
help accommodate rising healthcare demand from an aging population. The graduate
student selected for technology development will obtain research experience and
educational training to pursue entrepreneurship following the completion of the
project. A team of 10 undergraduate students from underrepresented groups will
also participate in the applied research and software development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will provide a novel signal
processing approach that inputs the poor quality (noisy) images obtained at
short scan-times and outputs a noise-free image, similar to what would have been
obtained after a long data acquisition time. In MRI, image quality is usually
inversely proportional to scan-time. Longer scan-time yields better image
quality and vice versa. The algorithm isolates noise from raw MRI data by
distinguishing between their distinct characteristics: noise is random while raw
MRI data contains patterns/features. There are two novel features of the
approach: 1) ability to identify and separate noise; and 2) the application in
denoising raw MRI data. Compared to conventional signal processing methods such
as filtering methods, the team's proprietary wavelet-shrinkage-based denoising
method can process low signal-to-noise ratio signals without the limitations of
inadequate noise removal or signal distortion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.