* 2044602
* CAREER: Engineering electrochemical reversibility in disordered materials for high energy density batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Joshua Gallaway, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/28/2026
* USD 510,112.00

Rechargeable batteries that can be implemented at the scale of the power grid
are needed for widespread adoption of renewable energy. These batteries must be
non-flammable and inexpensive because safety and cost are paramount concerns for
large-scale battery installations. This CAREER project will conduct fundamental
research on advanced battery materials that have the potential for greater
energy density and cycle life, while operating in non-flammable water-based
electrolytes. Among the possible grid-scale battery options, rechargeable Zn-
MnO2 batteries are attractive because the basis materials are inexpensive, safe,
and widely available. However, the reversibility of the MnO2 reaction requires
the addition of Bi, sometimes paired with other transition metals such as Cu.
However, the action of these additional metals at the molecular level is not
known, and this knowledge is important to rationally engineer the material for
optimal use. This project addresses this problem by using advanced
characterization techniques to observe electrochemical interactions between MnO2
and the added metals in real time during battery cycling. The observed
structure-function relationships will then be exploited to engineer the
materials for improved batteries. An integrated education plan will develop
materials and tools to train research students in effective scientific
communication through the internet and blogging. This is because it would be
transformational if every researcher had skills to communicate the importance of
their work to the general public. Online materials will be produced about the
importance of electrochemistry and energy storage, as well as online scientific
educational materials for Boston area K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will examine electrochemical mechanisms in electrodes with MnO2 that has
been doped with one or more metal cations. Previous work has demonstrated that
during cycling Bi promotes formation of a layered birnessite form of MnO2 that
is disordered or lacking in long-range structural periodicity. Determination of
atomic positions in such a material requires techniques based on short-range
order such as X-ray and Raman spectroscopy. In the case where MnO2 is dual doped
with Bi and Cu, the three metal atoms (Mn, Bi, and Cu) are all electrochemically
active during battery operation, meaning interactions such as electron mediator
effects between the metals may be important, and this will be assessed. Work
will begin with the synthesis of well-characterized, crystalline model compounds
of doped MnO2, from which structural motifs can be established and atomic
positions can be refined. Information from these model compounds will then be
used to characterize dynamic atomic positions and interactions in electrodes
during cycling, as observed by operando techniques in real-world disordered
materials. To understand the electrode system as a whole, solubility of the
dopants will be probed to account for transport of species via the electrolyte,
and the impact of Zn cations on the MnO2 mechanism will be studied. The insights
gained will aid development of rechargeable Zn-MnO2 batteries, and also
contribute to understanding the electrochemistry of multiple redox-active sites
in layered materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.