* 2044372
* Improving Quantitative Reasoning through General Education Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2025
* Katherine Follette, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 01/31/2025
* USD 299,965.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by exploring how general
education science classes affect undergraduate students’ numerical skills and
attitudes about mathematics. Numerical skills such as estimation and graph
reading have strong positive relationships with science literacy, understanding
of risk, and sound financial decision making. Introductory college science
courses for non-majors serve an important role in improving numerical literacy,
as they reach a large proportion of non-STEM major undergraduates. Previous work
indicates that students’ quantitative reasoning skills and attitudes also affect
how they view and participate in STEM majors and careers. This project aims to
increase understanding of effective practices in developing numeracy in general
education science courses. To do so, it will survey general education science
courses across the nation, using the Quantitative Reasoning for College Science
(QuaRCS) survey. Results of this survey will identify science courses in which,
over the semester, students show greater improvements in quantitative reasoning
and attitudes toward mathematics. A small group of the instructors of these
highly effective courses will be invited to participate in a working group to
create new tools for numeracy instruction in introductory science classes.
Improving numeracy instruction in general education science courses has the
potential to broaden mastery of core quantitative skills everyone needs for
making decisions in today’s complex world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s
overall goal is to identify rigorous, research-validated strategies for
effectively teaching numeracy through science courses. Innumeracy and poor
attitudes toward mathematics are pervasive challenges in undergraduate science
education that disproportionately affect students from underrepresented and
underserved groups. The project has two specific aims: (1) to better understand
the landscape of introductory science courses, including the ways in which
numerical skills, demographics, and affective variables such as math anxiety and
confidence interact; and (2) to examine the practices of instructors whose
students show improvements in numerical skills or attitudes about mathematics
over the course of a semester. The validated QuaRCS assessment instrument is the
centerpiece of the project’s large national study. The data from the survey will
enable identification of instructors who are making a difference in one or more
of the three QuaRCS measurable student outcomes: the ability to correctly solve
quantitative reasoning problems in real-world contexts; attitudes toward
mathematics and associated numerical self-efficacy; and metacognitive awareness
of their own numerical skills. Key research questions include: (1) To what
extent are demonstrated correlations between demographic variables and score on
the assessment mitigated by affective variables such as self-efficacy, perceived
utility of mathematics, self-reported effort, and math anxiety level; and (2)
How often do introductory science instructors foster improvements in the student
outcomes measured by QuaRCS. This work will represent a significant step toward
understanding effective classroom practices and pedagogical techniques for
helping students improve numerical and scientific literacy. Additionally, the
project will continue the ongoing process of improving the QuaRCS instrument, in
particular working to ensure that the survey items are culturally relevant to a
broad cross-section of students. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.