* 2044748
* Medicaid, Medicare, and Social Security for Couples and Singles
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Mariacristina De Nardi, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 01/31/2024
* USD 282,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid jointly
account for a large share of Federal government expenditures (45 percent in
2017) and the cost of these programs is projected to increase due to aging
population and rising medical costs. Most of the research on these topics do not
consider the distinction between couples and singles. This project utilizes a
rich framework including both couples and singles to examine taxation, Social
Security, and Medicaid, with the goal of evaluating the costs and benefits of
these programs. The findings in this research will have broad policy
implications on these government programs. The research will respond to the
urgent need in understanding these costs and benefits given the recent COVID-19
induced recession and corresponding challenges in raising taxes and financing
government programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will yield two
main contributions. First, it will carefully estimate a rich structural model of
longevity and medical expenses risks, and bequest motives of couples and singles
during retirement. Second, it will develop an overlapping-generations model with
working and retirement stages for couples and singles and it will use this model
to study the costs and benefits of several Social Security, Medicare, and
Medicaid reforms, in conjunction with various tax changes. The first part of the
project will yield new findings about the elderly, which will help in
understanding the risks that they face and the tools that they currently have at
their disposal to insure these risks. The second part of this project will
explore how to reform Medicaid, Medicare, and Social Security in a model that
incorporates couples and singles, the risks that they face, and their motivation
to work and save.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.