* 2044684
* PFI-TT: Sensing Stress-Induced Chemical Fingerprints Emitted by Plants Using a Network of Electronic Noses
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Ralph Dean, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 05/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will be on enhancing food security, the
environment, as well as health and workforce safety. The proposed project is the
first step to make a remotely operable, networked, low-cost, fast, sensitive,
and selective detection method that identifies plant diseases in field and
storage settings. Plant diseases cause up to 30% yield loss worldwide on an
annual basis. To preserve yield, farmers rely on fungicide application to
protect their crops from pathogen infections. Several major pathogens of staple
crops produce toxins that are extremely hazardous to humans and animals when
ingested. In this project, Fusarium Head Blight in wheat and barley will be
targeted. Successful commercialization of this technology may translate into
higher crop yield, reduced environmental pollution, and improved conditions for
human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed translational research and
technology development project will advance the understanding of volatiles
released by plants under various stress conditions and develop the required
sensor technology and data processing techniques to detect specific plant
volatomes to diagnose stress before visible symptoms. The PFI team will collect
volatiles released from plants exposed to specific disease stress under
controlled settings and will analyze the samples to identify the volatomic
fingerprint for the types of stress with high impact, specifically Fusarium Head
Blight in wheat caused by the fungus Fusarium graminearum. The PFI team will
also improve the sensor design to enable differential testing (sample vs. clean
air) capability in the field environment as well as increase the immunity of the
sensor response to common environmental changes. Innovation in the fields of
plant biology, chemistry, electrical engineering, and data science will be
brought together to enable the successful commercialization of this
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.