* 2044623
* PFI-TT: Development of Polymeric Organosilica Membranes for Hydrogen Purification at 100 – 300 oC
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Mark Swihart, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 12/31/2023
* USD 249,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is that the silica membrane products
will enable low-cost production of hydrogen gas, (H2, a clean energy carrier),
and carbon dioxide (CO2, a greenhouse gas) capture for utilization or storage on
a large scale - economically mitigating CO2 emissions to the environment.
Specifically, the program will bring the technology beyond the laboratory by
demonstrating scalability of membrane production using conventional processes
and capitalizing on the long-term stability of the membranes when used with
realistic gas streams. The team seeks to license the technology to a membrane
manufacturer and developer, which can then conduct pilot-scale field tests of
the membrane systems and offer small commercial systems for separation and
purification of H2 from various industrial streams. The students participating
in this program will benefit from interdisciplinary training on membranes and
separation, H2 purification and carbon capture, materials science and
engineering, and advanced manufacturing. The research will become a valuable
vehicle to attract students from underrepresented groups at various levels
(graduate, undergraduate, and high school) to experience entrepreneurial multi-
disciplinary research and inspire them to pursue STEM careers and
entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to demonstrate the
potential of polymeric organosilica (POSi) membranes by meeting three
milestones. (1) Prepare membranes with 50% higher H2 permeance and three times
higher H2/CO2 selectivity than current commercial membranes by optimizing
polymer precursors and fabrication conditions; (2) Scale-up membrane production
(10 – 100 m2 membrane area) using industrial roll-to-roll facilities; and (3)
Demonstrate continuous long-term (2-4 weeks) performance and stability with
simulated gas mixtures. The key innovation of the technology is a facile means
of preparing an ultrathin layer (10 nm or less) of inorganic material on top of
polymeric membranes, providing superior H2 permeance and H2/CO2 selectivity.
Such polymeric membranes are routinely produced in industry, and they provide
excellent mechanical support for the ultrathin inorganic selective layer during
processing and use. the team's approach represents a new, scalable,
reproducible, and low-cost means of preparing inorganic membranes for gas
separation, in contrast to the high cost and poor scalability of existing
production routes, which have prevented the adoption of high-performance
inorganic membranes for gas separation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.