* 2044954
* CAREER: Fine Structure of the Singular Set in Some Geometric Variational Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Luca Spolaor, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2026
* USD 342,094.00

The study of Geometric Variational problems is one of the oldest and most
fascinating topics in Mathematics. Solutions to these problems describe
equilibrium configurations of physical systems and provide canonical tools to
study the geometry and topology of manifolds. Physically this can be observed
for instance when three soap bubbles merge on a common line forming a corner, or
studying the structure of the transition region of an iceberg melting into
water. The goal of this project is to investigate the structure of such singular
solutions, which is often the major stumbling block in their application to
Geometry, Topology and Physics. Central to the project is an integrated plan of
educational activities. This consists in the organization of a REU program and a
winter Graduate School &lt;br/&gt;at UCSD on recent trends in Geometric
Analysis. The PI will invite experts in the field for five days stays at UCSD to
increase the overall activity of the seminar, expose graduate students to the
most interesting results and open questions, and encourage
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on two of the most
classical and influential Geometric Variational problems: Minimal Surfaces and
Free-Boundary problems. Minimal surfaces provides canonical objects to study the
topology of manifolds and are a good model for soap films and partition
problems. Free-Boundary problems are fundamental in modeling a wide range of
physical phenomena, such as phase transition (e.g. the melting of ice into
water), flows with jets and cavities, shape optimization type problems and the
pricing of American options. Solutions to geometric variational problems are
known to exhibit singularities. In the context of Minimal Surfaces, the PI will
investigate the regularity of the singular set for Area Minimizing hypersurfaces
and for surfaces in any codimension, both in the integer and modulo p cases. For
Free-Boundary problems, the focus will be on the structure of the set of so-
called branching points for the Two-Phase problem and the Vectorial Alt-
Caffarelli problem, and its relation with the set of points of high frequency of
solutions to the Signorini problem. This will be achieved refining some new
techniques recently introduced by the PI and his collaborators, and by
developing new ones, which will have an impact in many other problems in
Geometric Analysis. One of the major goals of the REU program and the winter
Graduate School is to introduce undergraduate and graduate students to these
problems and techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.