* 2044834
* CAREER: Study and Design of Modular Aminophosphine Ligands for Cross-Coupling Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Miles Johnson, University of Richmond
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 518,663.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Miles Johnson of the University of Richmond is developing ways to improve
the efficiency and sustainability of catalysts for cross-coupling reactions –
chemical transformations that link carbon-based building blocks into larger
molecules. Cross-coupling reactions are used extensively in chemical industry
and the catalysts that promote these processes depend on molecules that are
bound to the metal center called ligands. Dr. Johnson and his research group are
developing new ligands to identify characteristics that promote fast and
selective catalysis with abundant first row transition metals. These ligands are
easy to prepare and can be modified in a systematic way to identify and tune the
attributes that control catalysis. Undergraduate researchers on Dr. Johnson’s
research team and undergraduate students in laboratory courses at the University
of Richmond are working together to prepare these new ligands and study their
activity. To improve accessibility to STEM disciplines at different levels of
education, Dr. Johnson is also serving as a mentor for the University of
Richmond Integrated Science Experience (URISE), a program intended to support
students from groups underrepresented in STEM during their transition to
college, and participating in workshops to engage Richmond area high school
students and their teachers in chemistry on the University
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Miles Johnson and his research group are
designing and testing aminophosphine ligands to discover new cross-coupling
reactions and understand the mechanisms of existing ones. The modular synthesis
of these ligands is designed to enable identification of the key steric and
electronic properties that control reactivity in C–N, C–B, and C–O bond-forming
reactions. Models are being developed to correlate the salient features of these
ligands with the reactivity that they impart in cross-coupling processes. These
studies are critical for supporting the continued development of sustainable
first row transition metal catalysts that are not as well understood as their
precious metal analogues. Undergraduates in the Johnson group, laboratory
courses, and a pre-first year program have been integrated to provide
opportunities for a variety of different types of students to contribute to this
research program and obtain hands-on experience in solving problems relevant to
sustainable chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.