* 2044840
* CAREER: Temperature and microplastic effects on coral physiology and reproduction
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2026
* Jacqueline Padilla-Gamino, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2026
* USD 781,767.00

This project involves research on the biological impacts of climate change and
plastic pollution in one of the most diverse and productive ecosystems on Earth.
At present, limited information exists on the abundance and distribution of
microplastics (plastic particles &lt; 5 mm) in tropical systems. This research
examines microplastics abundance and chemical identity in Hawaiian coral reefs
using samples from water, sediments, and coral tissue. Multiple stressor
experiments are providing key insights on the reproduction and the long-term
effects of microplastics in corals with a compromised health state (bleached).
The experiments address controversial findings in this emerging field such as
how corals are more affected by plasticizers and what microplastic types are
“tastier.” Understanding if and what type of microplastics can interfere with
biological processes in corals helps to elucidate the extent to which
microplastics cause metabolic disorders and influence the survival and
recruitment of future generations. When used in the context of global change,
these data are critical for predicting the potential impact of these combined
stressors on future corals and coral reefs. This project creates and an
integrated program that promotes citizen science, middle-school student
engagement and ocean literacy and research for schoolteachers from Hawaiian
immersion schools. The foundational insights gained through the research
objectives improve our capacity to predict the response of coral communities to
thermal bleaching events and microplastic pollution and can be applied to
conservation and management efforts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Climate change and
pollution are major drivers in the degradation of coral reef ecosystems
worldwide. Around 8 million tons of plastic end up in the oceans every year and
the majority of plastic items currently found in the ocean are microplastics.
Recent evidence suggests that microplastic pollution can negatively affect
corals. However, little is known about the abundance, exposure and risk of
microplastics in coral reefs or whether microplastics will increase the
vulnerability of corals to climate change. The research objectives are to: (i)
Assess if and how temperature and microplastics (plastic particles &lt; 5 mm)
affect coral gametogenesis, fecundity and physiological performance with both
field and laboratory studies, (ii) Quantify if bleached corals are more likely
to ingest microplastics due to heterotrophic plasticity, (iii) Examine the
physiological effects of microplastics exposure in corals under thermal stress
and during recovery after bleaching, and (iii) Understand the mechanisms by
which microplastics exposure may impact spawning synchrony and gamete viability.
The proposed education program is integrated with the research program by (i)
designing a citizen science project to quantify and collect plastic data in
Hawaiian beaches, (ii) providing research opportunities to middle-school
students from low-income schools to gain first-hand field and research
experience and (iii) developing a workshop for Hawaiian teachers using the
bilingual NSF-LTER children’s book as a research and educational
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.