* 2044677
* PFI-TT: Flexible Electronic Devices for Harvesting Body Heat toward Self-Powered Wearable Health Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Mehmet Ozturk, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2023
* USD 249,950.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project lies in enabling wearable devices that
can be used for remote, vigilant, and long-term health monitoring. The COVID-19
pandemic has recently highlighted the acute need for such devices to
manage/protect individual and public health, particularly for those with chronic
underlying conditions. Continuous monitoring of multiple biomarkers is one of
the key enablers of precision and personalized medicine. However, current
products on the market are not capable of providing the medical and scientific
community the necessary access to high-resolution and longitudinal data. These
systems typically lack multiple sensing modalities while also suffering from
short battery life. To address the need, wearable platforms must operate with no
interruptions to collect high granularity data over time and establish
individual health baselines. This can be accomplished by harvesting the excess
energy from the human body and/or the environment to power the sensors and the
electronics. Such battery-free devices have the potential to revolutionize the
medical industry by empowering individuals to gain control of their own health
while significantly reducing medical costs by decreasing the need for frequent
doctor visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project introduces a flexible electronic
energy harvesting device that can be worn on the body to harvest excess body
heat and convert it to electrical energy. The device relies on a unique liquid-
metal material which conducts electricity like a metal while offering water-like
viscosity to realize electrical circuitry with ultimate flexibility and
stretchability. The technology is compatible with roll-to-roll manufacturing, a
highly desirable attribute in flexible electronics to reduce costs. The primary
goal of the project is to increase the technology readiness of the harvester to
increase its commercialization potential. The research includes systematic
studies geared toward assessing and improving the long-term reliability of the
harvester while enhancing its manufacturability by introducing materials and
processes that offer lower-cost and manufacturing ease without compromising
device performance. Research tasks include new flexible materials for enhanced
performance, comfort, and robustness. The new materials and devices will be
tested on the human body during different physical activity levels and under
different ambient conditions. The harvesters will be subjected to repetitive
cycles of external stresses such as heat, moisture and mechanical deformation.
The results will be used to identify potential failure mechanisms, materials and
process solutions will address such mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.