* 2044189
* Building Adaptability for Teaching Online through Peer-Reviewed, Active-Learning Resources and Professional Development
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Michelle Smith, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 04/30/2024
* USD 85,510.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping life science college
instructors teach online lessons using active-learning instructional practices
housed in the CourseSource repository. This Institutional and Community
Transformation Level 1 project will increase the number of published open
educational resources (OERs) for a variety of undergraduate online classrooms
(e.g., synchronous and asynchronous online classes, hybrid classrooms that
combine in-person and online teaching). OERs are educational materials that are
available in the public domain. CourseSource publishes peer-reviewed OERs that
implement research-based, effective pedagogical techniques. Increasing the
number of freely-available online OERs addresses an immediate need by providing
lessons and professional development to instructors. It also addresses a long-
term need by assembling an extensive set of resources that meet the growing
demand for online education. Because CourseSource has built a diverse and large
community who uses its materials, this project will directly improve instruction
for hundreds of instructors and thousands of undergraduate biology
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unifying goal of this project will be to
share effective online lessons and help biology instructors implement them to
benefit their students. Furthermore, advancing the progress and development of
peer-reviewed, pedagogically sound OER materials can benefit the larger academic
landscape as it moves towards providing low- or no-cost access to high-quality
resources for instructors and students. This project will: 1) Use information
from the OERs published in CourseSource to determine how instructors implement
active-learning instructional strategies online, 2) Evaluate short- and long-
term online professional development programs designed to help instructors find,
adapt, implement, and share online lessons, and 3) Explore how OERs can support
instructors in using online lessons that include active-learning pedagogies.
Since CourseSource publications include a section in which authors delineate
their instructional approaches, they can be mined to determine the type and
frequency of active-learning practices as well as alignment with instructional
design practices, the Universal Design for Learning (UDL) framework, and
evidence-based strategies for online instruction. The results will identify
strategies that will easily transfer across contexts, situations where
instructors need greater support to initiate and maintain these practices in
online environments, and ways active-learning can be enhanced by the online
format. This project will also create multiple professional development programs
for instructors in which they learn to write about and publish their online
lessons and implement previously published OERs. These programs will be assessed
through surveys and a Social Network Analysis. The results will allow the
exploration of whether and how instructor beliefs about online teaching change,
and if professional development programs can create and sustain instructor
support networks. Finally, interviews with instructors who are implementing OERs
in their classroom will be used to determine how the availability of
instructional materials influences instructor pedagogical decisions. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.