* 2044072
* Testing the Use of Co-requisite Precalculus Instruction to Improve Undergraduate Students' Success in Calculus 1
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jill Faudree, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,320.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing access to STEM
fields for undergraduate students who need additional support to succeed in
introductory Calculus courses. Co-requisite instruction can help academically
underprepared undergraduate students succeed academically and stay on track to
their intended STEM degree. The potential impact of co-requisite courses is
particularly relevant for linear course sequences like the Precalculus through
Calculus course sequence. This project aims to test an integrated approach to
increase success in Calculus 1 through co-requisite Precalculus instruction. The
project will rapidly identify students who will likely benefit from precalculus
corequisite instruction and provide them with this support. In doing so, the
project will test a data-driven, quick-response strategy for helping students
succeed in Calculus I and subsequent Calculus courses. If this approach is
successful, it could provide Institutions of higher education with a practical
and effective strategy to ensure that students have more equitable access to
success in college-level mathematics courses. It is expected that this approach
will be of particular benefit to undergraduates whose education has been
severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year
Engaged Student Learning Level I project at University of Alaska Fairbanks aims
to implement an experimental academic intervention that will measure Precalculus
content knowledge acquisition, success in Calculus I, and persistence to
Calculus II for roughly 500 Calculus I students. A key focus of the project will
be the implementation and evaluation of an experimental 2-credit co-requisite
Precalculus course over four semesters. Through an experimental design, student
cohorts with access to the intervention will be compared to historical cohorts
with similar measures of academic preparation. The comparison will provide a
multifaceted evaluation of the effectiveness of co-requisite instruction in
support of the Calculus sequence and provide a rigorous test of whether co-
requisite Precalculus instruction in support of Calculus 1 contributes to
increasing student success in Calculus 1. Materials developed from the
experiment, including identification protocols, curriculum materials, and
statistical methods and analyses, will be publicly shared through a public
project webpage. This project is funded by the NSF IUSE: EHR Program, which
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.