* 2044136
* Seismological studies of cratonic lithosphere: investigating lithospheric rheology, heat flow beneath ice sheets, and the origin of mid-lithospheric discontinuities
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Karen Fischer, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 04/30/2024
* USD 280,976.00

There are fundamental differences between the oceanic crust that comprises the
seafloor and the continental crust on which humans live. Continental crust is
thicker and lighter than oceanic crust. It is also, on average, much older: the
oldest oceanic crust is 200 million years whereas the oldest continental crust
is 4300 million years. All of these differences—thickness, buoyancy, and age—can
be attributed to the properties of and the processes occurring within the
Earth’s mantle. This study will use seismic waves generated by earthquakes to
image the mantle beneath continents, employing methods similar to those used to
perform CT scans on the human body. The study will seek to answer questions
about how the events that formed and subsequently modified the continents imbued
them with their buoyancy and longevity, which are crucial to their habitability.
In terms of broader impacts, the project will support one graduate student and
several undergraduates, including at least one from an under-represented group
in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will advance understanding of the
processes that form and modify cratons by developing new models of the seismic
attenuation, velocity, and anisotropy structure at several cratons around the
globe. To accomplish this, the study will: (1) perform co-located analyses of
Rayleigh wave attenuation and anisotropic phase velocity, Ps and Sp receiver
functions, and shear-wave splitting; (2) determine depth-dependent models of
shear velocity, shear attenuation, and azimuthal anisotropy from the body- and
surface-wave data using both forward and inverse approaches; (3) test hypotheses
for the origin of midlithospheric discontinuities by interpreting the seismic
models together with the elastic properties of peridotite and hydrous phases and
with anelasticity experiments; (4) through incorporation of mantle-xenolith and
heat-flow data, develop a method for estimating lithospheric thermal and
chemical structure that can be applied in ice-covered
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.