* 2044616
* CAREER: Back to the Future--Integrating Research on the Mid-latitude Climate Response to Rapid Warming with Experiential Curriculum that Turns Knowledge into Action
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Elizabeth Thomas, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 337,948.00

There are critical gaps in high-resolution records of past climate variability
in Northern Hemisphere mid-latitudes, specifically records spanning rapid
warming events. This proposal addresses the hypothesis that during rapid warming
events, defined as several Â°C of warming per century, Northern Hemisphere mid-
latitude net summer precipitation decreases, and winter precipitation increases,
regardless of boundary conditions. This hypothesis is based on future scenarios
for climate in this region, but these forecasts have large uncertainties. The
researcher will test the hypothesis and fill one of these gaps by vetting and
applying an approach that uses biomarkers and stable isotopes of Hydrogen in
lake sediments to reconstruct temperature, precipitation seasonality, and net
summer precipitation in the Laurentian Great Lakes region. The resulting high-
resolution records will span the three largest warming events in the past 15,000
years, each of which occurred under different boundary conditions, and the most
recent 500 years. This research will further test the hypothesis throughout the
Northern Hemisphere mid-latitudes using a paleoclimate database spanning the
past 15,000 years, which will be improved and expanded as part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be integrated into an education
program (course and summer internship) that prepares diverse undergraduate and
graduate students (University at Buffalo, NY) for Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math (STEM) careers by training them to understand and
communicate climate science in socio-culturally relevant contexts and to solve
complex problems. The course and internship focus on a real-world project in
which students partner with local businesses and use scientific research as the
basis to develop carbon footprints and strategic climate action plans for these
businesses. This program will also address the educational research question,
how do students from different socio-cultural contexts understand and
communicate knowledge about complex systems, and what aspects of the project-
based curriculum facilitate this communication?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
examining the precipitation response to abrupt climate change in the Northern
Hemisphere mid-latitudes, this project will train 2 graduate and 5 undergraduate
research students and will provide information for adaptation measures in a
highly populated and economically important region. Furthermore, students will
directly translate research results into strategic plans that businesses can use
to reduce their carbon footprint and build resiliency. The framework developed
for businesses will be made publicly available and disseminated through regional
business networks. This thoroughly vetted curriculum will be used to train 75
diverse students for STEM careers and will be made available for use by other
educators. The research and education aspects of this project emphasize
recruitment and retention of students underrepresented in
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.