* 2044657
* CAREER: Tissue engineering of developing human heart: The role of microenvironment in cardiac development and congenital heart disease
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Vahid Serpooshan, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2026
* USD 550,000.00

The developing human heart has a remarkable ability to transform itself under a
variety of influences, including blood flow, tissue biomechanics, and tissue
composition. Alterations in these parameters may result in abnormal growth of
the heart, increasing the incidence of congenital (present at or before birth)
heart disease. The overall goal of this CAREER project is to utilize advanced
bioengineering tools, including 3D bioprinting and human induced pluripotent
stem cell technologies, to create bioartificial tissue constructs that can serve
as high-fidelity models of the human heart. The engineered models serve as a
research enabling platform to examine cellular processes involved in normal
development of the human heart as well as the formation of various heart
defects. The research will be integrated with multiple educational programs
geared towards building a dynamic scientific community in the joint biomedical
engineering program at Emory University and Georgia Institute of Technology. The
fundamental biomaterials design and bioprinting, stem cell culture and
differentiation, and cardiac cellular biology principles will be integrated into
various educational activities. Education plans include design and development
of educational tools and outreach to local high school students through (A) a
joint summer internship program; (B) bi-annual biomedical science and
engineering exhibitions; and (C) outreach activities in the Children's Heart
Research and Outcomes (HeRO) Center at Emory University. Further, the project
includes plans to develop a new summer hybrid course that is specifically
designed to introduce the basic principles of 3D bioprinting and its use in
various biomedical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigatorâ€™s
research focus is on using a multidisciplinary approach to design and develop
micro/nano-scale tissue engineering technologies with the ultimate goal of
generating functional bioartificial tissues and organs. Toward this goal, this
CAREER project focuses on: (1) Engineering 3D in vitro developing human heart
models (3D-iDHHs)--embryonic, fetal, neonatal and adult--using human induced
pluripotent stem cell derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) and endothelial cells
(ECs) that display functional maturity/stability for several weeks; and (2)
Evaluating the ability of 3D-iDHHs to decipher clinically relevant mechanisms of
congenital heart diseases (CHDs), e.g., hypoplastic left heart syndrome and
dilated cardiomyopathy. A state-of-the-art 3D bioprinting systems will be used
to build devices, allowing precise control of the tissue microenvironment to
achieve functional and structural biomimicry. The project will build upon
preliminary achievements to create various perfusable 3D cardiac tissue
constructs utilizing hiPSC-derived cardiac cells to reconstruct the dynamic
microenvironment of the developing human heart. Multi-material 3D bioprinting
enables creating perfusable heart chamber-like constructs, allowing for exposure
of cardiac cells to varying environmental factors such as flow hemodynamics,
stiffness, and tissue composition (Aim 1). The project will then explore the
utility of these 3D-iDHHs to decipher microenvironmental mechanisms underlying
CHDs (Aim 2). This research could ultimately lead to the development of novel
and more effective clinical interventions and/or therapeutics to treat various
CHDs. More broadly, this device could be integrated with other tissue/organ
models in a human-on-a-chip for a systems-level understanding of various
developmental disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.