* 2044915
* Collaborative Research: Sedimentary signature of shallow and tsunamigenic megathrust ruptures: Observations and physical models from recent catastrophic events
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Leonardo Seeber, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 601,477.00

The 2004 Sumatra and the 2011 Tohoku-Oki mega-earthquakes and tsunamis were
catastrophic geologic events with major societal consequences. Both produced
huge ruptures in areas of subducting tectonic plate boundaries that were not
expected to have such large earthquakes. The large fault displacement reached
the sea-floor of oceanic trenches, causing the huge tsunamis. Plate boundaries
like these are the most consequential source of submarine earthquakes,
especially tsunamigenic ones, and the only source of similarly large
earthquakes. These two most recent ones were particularly significant in
stimulating marine research and in providing further understanding of mega-
earthquakes and associated tsunamis. Data on earlier large events are critical
to addressing where and how often such events occur and what to expect from
them, but few such events are available with instrumental data. The only
recourse is reconstruction of older mega-earthquakes from their record in
sediment deposits. Pioneering deep-water research in submarine earthquake
geology is now using the sedimentary signature of the Tohoku-Oki earthquake to
recognize signatures of previous large earthquakes. This research is advancing
our understanding about the unique characteristics of sedimentation events
associated with exceptionally large earthquakes and helping to distinguish them
in the sedimentary record. Typical event deposits include laminated, chaotic,
and homogeneous sediments (“homogenites”). This study will combine field
observations, including deposits and documentation of widespread surface
sediment mobilization, with a novel laboratory “sediment shaker”, to better
understand the unique attributes of these rare but devastating events. The
project supports the training of students and an early career
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The largest megathrust earthquakes at subduction
margins remobilize sediment over ruptures 100s of km wide, leaving
characteristic event-deposits in the stratigraphy. They generally include an
acoustically transparent layer that is lithlogically, physically and
geochemically homogeneous (“homogenite”), plus acoustically laminated layers
with a wide range of sedimentary structures and composition (“turbidites”). The
muddy homogenites from the 2011 Japan earthquake have been recently discovered
to derive from widespread remobilization of surficial (few cm) sediment, while
sand-rich turbidites are thought to derive from slope failures and diverse
sources. This difference holds for other earthquakes and settings, suggesting
distinct remobilization processes. This hypothesis will be tested by laboratory
experiments that will explore whether these processes respond to different parts
of the earthquake spectrum. Another question to be addressed is whether the
exceptionally large and sustained long-period oscillations of the sea floor
above M≥9.0 megathrust ruptures can entrain surficial sediment and thus account
for the homogenites. Exceptional data sets from the 2011 Tohoku earthquake will
be available to conduct the experiments. Through collaborations, samples from
the Cascadia Margin, Lesser Antilles and Balearic Abyssal plain will be added.
The comparisons of global observations from geophysical and core data with the
physical experiments, will provide a major step forward in understanding the
ways in which earthquakes remobilize sediments and advances the field of
submarine paleoseismology to recognize megaquake event
deposits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.