* 2044348
* CAREER: Vapor-Liquid Separation for Sustainable Condensation Heat Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Xianming Dai, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2026
* USD 409,827.00

Improving the performance of condensation heat transfer reduces size, weight,
and cost in refrigeration, air conditioning, heat exchangers, and thermal
management systems. To achieve a large heat transfer coefficient, condensates on
a surface must be rapidly removed to provide liquid-free areas for vapor-liquid
phase change to occur. The ideal surface is one that provides a large heat
transfer area and rapidly removes condensates for sustainable condensation.
Present challenges include the removal of ultralow surface tension refrigerants
and the lack of long-term durability of engineered surfaces. The goal of this
CAREER project is to address those challenges by developing a vapor-liquid
separation process to advance condensation heat transfer of ultralow surface
tension fluids, and integrate the new knowledge into education to train the next
generation of heat transfer leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to achieve: (1) dropwise condensation of ultralow surface tension
fluids (e.g., R134a), and (2) sustainable vapor-liquid separation that provides
large liquid-free areas for rapid condensation. The proposed approach will use
the newly developed durable quasi-liquid surface to achieve dropwise
condensation and rapid removal of ultralow surface tension condensates. The
super slippery quasi-liquid surface will prevent the dropwise to filmwise
transition. To achieve a high heat transfer performance, the vapor and liquid
will be separated on a slippery rough surface with quasi-liquid lubrication
which will provide a large surface area for condensation. X-ray nano-imaging
will be used to investigate the nucleation and liquid removal inside
microstructures of the slippery rough surfaces. The surface durability and
sustainable condensation performance of quasi-liquid lubricated microstructures
will be studied under various subcooling and shear stress conditions. The
preliminary results in heat transfer and materials fabrication provide a solid
foundation to execute those activities. The proposed project is in line with the
PIâ€™s long-term career goal to address heat transfer challenges by incorporating
learning from multidisciplinary areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.