* 2044098
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Knowledge-to-Action: Enhance Community Disaster Preparedness and Resiliency through Physical and Virtual Drills
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2021
* Michael Lindell, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

This project will use a community capabilities approach (CCA) to achieve
disaster preparedness and resilience that complements a community capitals
framework (CCF) which focuses on the community’s availability of resources. A
CCA framework focuses on the policies and plans that communities have adopted
and implemented to “absorb, recover from, and more successfully adapt to adverse
events”. The CCF is based on the fundamental framework of emergency management -
hazard mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery. To operationalize this
vision, the objective of this project is to establish a transdisciplinary cross-
sector knowledge-to-action network (KTAN). This network will co-develop new
community-university partnerships (CUP) to enable evidence-driven solutions that
foster evacuation preparedness and, thus, community resilience. This broadening
of participation allows the project team to (1) hold virtual KTAN workshops to
co-design physical reality/virtual reality (PR/VR) drills and resilience
programs; (2) develop quantitative metrics of preparedness; and (3) create
inclusive activities that focus on population segments. This project will (1)
yield significant societal impacts to engage community leaders, members,
emergency responders, local and state emergency managers (EMs)/incident
commanders (ICs), and researchers; (2) achieve interdisciplinary integration of
social, engineering, and computer science to spark novel ideas at the
intersection of them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project bridges existing gaps
in connecting theoretical frameworks and emerging tools to help identify and
assess the gaps in community preparedness and resilience programs. This project
specifically uses a combination of PR/VR drills to validate indicators of
evacuation preparedness through a new CUP. The project team has two goals: (1)
develop an appropriate technology for PR/VR drills that tests the effectiveness
of evacuation plans/procedures and, thus, identifies gaps in them; (2) conduct a
survey of EMs/ICs to collect data on authorities’ decision-making times,
distributions, and EMs’ past experiences in drills and actual evacuations to
determine how drills can be designed more effectively to test plans. The key
innovations are (1) the new cross-sector KTAN that translates theoretical
research into actionable programs; (2) the use of PR/VR drills to assess the
effectiveness of plans/procedures; (3) the innovative use of a phone app and
pre/post surveys to collect participants’ movements and risk perception changes;
(4) the inclusion of residents and visitors at hotels, special facilities (e.g.,
schools, hospitals, nursing homes, jails), and vulnerable groups (e.g., people
with disabilities, low-income, and tribal communities); (5) the accurate
estimation of evacuation time estimate (ETE) components. This project will
foster interdisciplinary collaborations and develop new CUPs to enhance
community disaster preparedness and resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is in response to Track B - CIVIC Innovation Challenge - Resilience to
Natural Disasters a collaboration with NSF and the Department of Homeland
Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.