* 2044692
* PFI-TT: Development of a New Technology for Removing Perchlorate from Water
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Scott Oliver, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 04/30/2024
* USD 258,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will address one of the key societal
issues of potable water. Perchlorate is highly toxic and is present in
contaminated groundwater of at least 75 known sites nationwide due to past
manufacture of propellants, explosives, and fertilizers. This project seeks to
develop a promising new technology for removing the perchlorate from water.
Scale-up work is needed in order to treat large volumes of contaminated
underground water. The materials are sustainable and the technology limits will
be determined with regard to treating large volumes of groundwater pumped from
the extraction wells. The commercial impact could be significant, saving
companies and state governments the expense of the single-use resins currently
in use for removal of perchlorate from water. The determination of the limits of
the materials will confirm the cost-effectiveness of the technology for cleaning
bodies of water polluted by this toxic compound. The researchers involved in the
project will gain practical knowledge of regulated water treatment in an end-
user environment. The undergraduate students from two NSF summer research
programs(NSF REU and NIH ACCESS) will continue to participate in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will continue to develop a
perchlorate removal technology, which began with model solutions and progressed
to actual contaminated underground water from an industrial site. With small
volumes (50 to 500 mL) at a time, the prototype cationic materials the team has
developed release environmentally-friendly species upon uptake of the
perchlorate in record speed, amount and selectivity over other species in the
water such as chloride. In addition, the team can reuse the material by driving
the perchlorate back out with excess of the original species, giving a highly
concentrated waste form for disposal (but more likely reuse as perchlorate
source for industry). The team will set up a flow column where the water is
pumped or cycled through/past the ion exchange material. Once optimized in the
lab, larger volumes will be pilot tested directly at the industrial extraction
wells. The treated water will be probed by a suite of instrumentation available
in the lab. The goal is to establish a low-cost treatment for entire bodies of
contaminated underground water at polluted industrial
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.