* 2044092
* A Perceptual Scaling Approach to Eyewitness Identification
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Thomas Albright, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 04/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Eyewitness identification has long played an important role in criminal
investigations and prosecutions, where identifying the culprit is critical to
the criminal justice process. Based on advances in understanding of perception
and memory, this project will examine the role of “fillers” in lineups. Fillers
are the individuals in a lineup known to be innocent who serve to challenge
eyewitness recognition. The research will develop a novel method for filler
selection based on a combination of human and machine measures of facial
similarity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds upon a new paradigm for the
design and conduct of lineups for eyewitness identification. Drawing upon
perceptual scaling, well-established in sensory psychology, this approach will
be used to estimate the strength of eyewitness memories, and thus to generate
large libraries of facial images in which the degree of facial similarity is
quantified. This research will help to reduce susceptibility of the eyewitness
to decision bias and will provide quantitative measures of the perceived
similarity of faces. These measures, in combination with a machine learning
algorithm, will be used to create a model witness, which is an algorithm that
reproduces similarity judgements of human observers and predicts perceptual
similarity for new faces. The project will yield an objective system for
selecting fillers in order to optimize eyewitness fairness and
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.