* 2044958
* CAREER: The stereochemical basis of target selectivity encoded by specificity-determining loops in peptide-binding domains
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Jeanine Amacher, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 660,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Jeanine Amacher from Western Washington University to
investigate how loops that are structurally conserved in various families of
proteins affect their binding to other proteins and their functions as
catalysts. Dr. Amacher’s group will determine how differences in the amino acid
sequences that make up these loops help define the interactions that
specifically targets a protein to its binding partner or affect its activity as
an enzyme. Results from studies on these structural loops will reveal molecular
principles to understand protein interactions that control how cells
communicate. This project will train undergraduate and masters level graduate
students in protein biochemistry and structural biology. The research and
educational components of this project are integrated through specialized
training in computational biology for undergraduate students and for their
mentor. In addition, students at local primarily undergraduate institutions and
community colleges will be connected with PhD students and postdoctoral research
associates from regional research-intensive universities for “near-peer”
mentoring through a regular Life Sciences Symposium hosted at Western Washington
University. The importance of scientific communication in society will be
integrated into an upper-level Honors “Bioethics of Emergent Technology in
Biomedical Research” elective course to be offered at the host institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the hypothesis that the selectivity
and/or activity of catalytic and noncatalytic domains of critical signaling or
regulatory proteins are determined by conserved structural loops. The studies
will characterize structurally-conserved loops in bacterial sortases, two of
which are known to affect specificity, along with site-specific contributions of
previously identified specificity-determining loops in SH2 and SH3 domains of
the human Src oncogene protein that mediate protein-protein interactions.
Natural sequence variation will be applied to design chimeric proteins and other
loop variants. The structure-function relationship of these loops with respect
to encoding target specificity will be determined using FRET(Fluorescence
Resonance Energy Transfer)-based activity assays, X-ray crystallography, and
molecular dynamics simulations. In addition, biochemical and computational
methods, including the structure prediction program ROSETTA, will be used to
trace the evolutionary roots that lead to target specificity of conserved loop
sequences. This project will identify common principles that broaden the
understanding of the relationship between sequence and specificity in
structurally-conserved loops across several protein families. Finally, a better
understanding for the specificity of sortases will potentially expand the
application of sortase-mediated ligation as a tool for protein
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.