* 2044927
* CAREER: Direct Interrogation of Proton-Coupled Electron Transfer Reaction Dynamics and Mechanisms with Cryogenic Ion and Ultrafast Vibrational Spectroscopies
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Joseph Fournier, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 05/31/2026
* USD 645,420.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Joseph Fournier and his group at
Washington University in St. Louis are using sophisticated laser techniques to
study very fast chemical reactions. Specifically, Dr. Fournierâ€™s group is
investigating a special class of reactions in which protons and electrons
simultaneously move from one molecule to another. These reactions are at the
heart of many fundamental biological and chemical processes, including
photosynthesis and cellular respiration, but are difficult to study with
existing experimental methods. In order to overcome such difficulties, Dr.
Fournier and his students are developing a new approach that allows them to
directly track the reactions in real time with molecular-level detail. The
results of their measurements help to unravel and quantify the most important
factors that drive these reactions, which is vital information for understanding
key biological processes and for developing new molecules for applications in
green energy and chemical synthesis. The project also includes an effort to
modernize physical chemistry education at the undergraduate and graduate levels,
as well as outreach events that introduce St. Louis-area high school students to
the ways in which the quantum mechanical behavior of atoms and molecules affects
the world around us. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalytic processes driven by proton-
coupled electron transfer (PCET) reactions are ubiquitous in chemistry and
biology, yet the current understanding of these reactions and the ability to
quantitatively predict mechanisms and reaction dynamics involving PCET remains
limited. Dr. Fournier and his team are using a suite of infrared spectroscopy
techniques to study PCET reactions for a series of biomimetic model complexes.
These spectroscopic techniques include gas-phase cryogenic ion vibrational
spectroscopy (CIVS), solution-phase two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy
(2DIR), as well as the development and implementation of a novel approach called
time-resolved cryogenic ion vibrational spectroscopy (TR-CIVS). The TR-CIVS
measurements will systematically probe well-defined systems in the gas phase
with both high frequency resolution and ultrafast temporal resolution, with the
goal of characterizing the elusive proton transfer coordinate in more detail
than previously possible. The experiments target the identification of transient
intermediates and the dynamics of their formation, and will probe the role of
tunneling and low-frequency hydrogen-bonding modes in the proton transfer
process. This work aims to provide important insight for understanding PCET
mechanisms and to aid in the development of new computational models that
predict how the chemical architecture of catalytic systems determines their
reactive properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.