* 2044733
* PFI-TT: Scalable Thermal Spray Deposition of Surface-Engineered Washcoat Catalysts for Vehicle Emission Control Systems
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Ruigang Wang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 264,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop an emission control
prototype product with novel, surface-engineered catalysts for exhaust
abatement. Clean air represents a significant societal benefit. Various mobile
and stationary emission control systems are included in current solutions to
reduce adverse environmental and health impacts. The adoption of support-
promoted and surface-engineered catalysts with low temperature activity can have
a global impact for the industrial applications in automotive catalytic
converters and many industrial operations including electrical power plants,
refineries and chemical plants, and surface coating facilities. Personnel
involved in this project includes one graduate student and undergraduate
students, who will gain innovation, technology transfer, and entrepreneurship
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines a continuous thermal
spray inline coating technology with surface-engineered catalytic washcoat
materials to enable a 90% pollutant emission conversion rate below 150 C in
automotive catalytic converters. Current emission control catalysts are
relatively ineffective during the cold start period because the cold start
temperature is lower than the light-off temperature of catalysts, leading to
significant levels of pollutants emitted into the ambient air. By tuning the
shapes and surface defects of cerium oxide (CeO2) supports and activating the
metal-support interface, the surface-engineered catalysts offer low energy
barriers for the formation of key intermediates and open reaction pathways as
well as an increase in active sites for pollutant gas conversion at lower
temperature. This project will apply the advantages of the continuous thermal
spray technology to provide rapid, scalable production with high precision and
controlled coating thickness, significantly reduced waste relative to
conventional wet-chemical batch processes, reduction or elimination of harmful
organic solvents, and fully integrated one-step
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Partnerships
for Innovation (PFI) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.