* 2044424
* PFI-TT: A tool to automatically generate and optimize programs to operate on complex big data
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Saman Amarasinghe, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project in enabling the future commercialization
of a Tensor Algebra Compiler (TACO) that utilizes sparse data processing to
expose hidden data properties that can lead to improvements in many fields. As
the world becomes more digitized and heavily instrumented, sparse data sets are
captured and stored in centralized repositories on the cloud. These enormous
data sets are in every conceivable area, such as daily traffic information,
social interactions, purchasing patterns, population genomics, and environmental
monitoring. However, analyzing and using this data requires the use of many
complex tensor and matrix algebra algorithms on sparse data sets in a high-
performance and scalable manner. Thus far, the state-of-the-art systems are too
complicated or have limited capabilities to let practitioners harness the full
potential of these data sets. This PFI translational research and technology
development project will use compiler technology to make sparse data processing
simple and accessible to students, scientists, data analysts, and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TACO is the first sparse tensor algebra compiler
that can take any complex tensor algebra expression (where each tensor can be
from any existing sparse and dense tensor format) and generate high-performance
Central Processing Unit (CPU) and Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) code comparable
to the current state-of-the-art, hand-optimized libraries. With TACO, sparse
tensor algebra can be put on the same compiler transformation and code
generation footing as the dense tensor algebra and array codes. The proposed
project will commercialize TACO enabling easier analysis of complex data. The
power and simplicity of TACO may lead to more analysis and better algorithms,
further expanding the economic and societal impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.