* 2044963
* CAREER: Systems and Architectural Support for Accelerator-Level Parallelism
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Yuhao Zhu, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 04/30/2026
* USD 357,415.00

This CAREER research project designs software-hardware collaborative mechanisms
to sustain the performance and energy-efficiency improvements in today's world
where applications are increasingly deployed on chips with a wide variety of
hardware accelerators. Achieving this goal requires efficiently managing the
concurrent use of accelerators in an application and globally optimizing across
accelerators through detecting, analyzing, and modifying the task flow and data
flow in applications. This research unlocks next-generation software innovation
in emerging domains, such as augmented/virtual reality, smart sensing, and
mobile robotics. The research agenda is complemented by an educational/outreach
agenda. The project will: (1) promote inter-disciplinary research between CS and
the Archaeology, Technology, and Historical Structures (ATHS) program at
University of Rochester by helping reconstruct and render Elmina Castle, a
UNESCO World Heritage Site, on mobile virtual reality devices; (2) offer
undergraduate students inclusive opportunities for hands-on experience in
emerging application domains and hardware acceleration; (3) re-structure
undergraduate and graduate curricula to incorporate cross-domain acceleration;
and (4) teach hands-on Introduction to Computing courses to students from the
Vanguard Collegiate High School and Wilson High School at the Rochester City
School District.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project breaks away from
conventional research on individual accelerators. The key intellectual merit is
the pursuit of mechanisms that globally optimize across accelerators. The
research is complementary to improvements in individual accelerators. The
technical approach is two-pronged: 1) design mechanisms that approach the upper
bound of acceleration by reducing the overhead of accelerator interaction,
including inter-accelerator data communication and task coordination; 2) design
systems to go beyond pure acceleration to enable algorithms that share metadata
across accelerators. The research project aims to develop programming interfaces
and compiler support that expose data flow, task flow, and metadata sharing
opportunities across accelerators. The language and compiler are supported by
lightweight dynamic mechanisms that detect and adapt to the flows at run time as
well as new hardware structures for efficient inter-accelerator data
communication and task coordination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.