* 2044361
* Collaborative Research: Microbiome mediation of multi-trophic interactions in a tree diversity experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Karin Burghardt, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 05/31/2025
* USD 359,983.00

Sometimes referred to as the great unseen, plant-associated bacteria and fungi
are hidden yet potentially pivotal components of ecosystems. Although the global
leaf surface area is more than double the surface area of the earth, the drivers
and functions of leaf microbes are still mostly unknown, particularly for trees.
Because forests provide ecosystem services to humans, including climate
mitigation, timber production, nutrient retention, water filtration, and habitat
for diverse plants and animals, understanding the role of plant-associated
microbes in forests is critical. Forests that house a diverse mixture of many
tree species may be more productive than stands with only a single tree species,
in part because of their interactions with microbes. However, natural forests
are losing diversity worldwide, and nearly all forest plantations and
restorations are planted as single species stands. This research project
explores the value of forest biodiversity, including trees and their associated
microbes, by linking the effects of tree diversity to leaf chemistry and the
associated communities of leaf microbes, root microbes, and insects. By
determining whether and how tree and microbial diversity affects important
ecological functions like tree productivity, this project will help determine
best practices for sustainable forests and silvicultural plantations. Additional
project impacts include engagement with invested stakeholders through workshops,
the development of a field-based “Bugs and Microbiomes” educational module, and
training opportunities for undergraduate interns, graduate students, and post-
doctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project
is to predict the effects of microbes on tree productivity during the critical
canopy closure stage of forest establishment. Researchers will utilize a large
scale (32 acres) tree biodiversity experiment established in 2013 in Edgewater,
Maryland, USA. Specifically, the project will track how tree species diversity
affects above and belowground microbial diversity, while simultaneously
characterizing leaf chemistry, insect communities and damage, and tree
productivity. Targeted laboratory experiments will further determine the
strength and directionality of the relationships observed under field
conditions. Finally, a quantitative modeling approach will be used to link
project components to determine their individual and combined effects on tree
productivity. The results will provide a model for understanding how changes in
multiple components of plant diversity ultimately influence plant productivity
over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.