* 2044034
* SCC-CVIC-PG Track A:   Enabling Safe, Community-wide Bike-to-Work Strategies via Participatory Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,09/30/2021
* Anastasia Loukaitou-Sideris, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 49,936.00

This university-community collaboration aims to advance the state-of-the-art in
active and sustainable mobility for commuters. The project seeks to use
innovative ecosystems of smartphone based technologies to grow and sustain
communities of bicycle commuters that ride to work together in both ad hoc and
regular groups, improving mobility while working around limitations of current
transit infrastructure in Los Angeles, a region ranked as having the highest
commute-related worker stress levels in the nation. This project uses
smartphone-based participatory sensing, photojournaling, ad hoc group route
planning, and dynamic visualizations suitable for community spaces that together
help individuals overcome barriers to bike commuting, including perceived safety
risks. The proposed solution works around and intends to inspire the necessarily
slower changes to city infrastructure needed to address the “spatial mismatch”
of housing and workplace locations, addressing the effects of that mismatch
through gains in transportation “satisfaction” over the otherwise dominant lens
of “efficiency.” In this planning effort, the project team of university
researchers and community organizations will work with residents, workers,
employers, and service organizations to address research questions necessary to
prepare a prototype implementation for our study area, including gathering
information on bicycling ownership and practices, barriers to bicycling to work,
costs of transportation and housing, employer support for bikeshare programs,
willingness to make tradeoffs to ride in groups, existing community
relationships and structures, collective identity dynamics, smartphone
penetration, and the potential role of smartphone based participatory sensing
technology. Results of this project will include the research agenda and
evaluation metrics for a Stage 2 project that demonstrates how mobile smartphone
support for group commuting by bicycle can turn a commute into a safe,
productive, fulfilling and sustainable time investment, reduce vehicle miles
traveled (VMT), and directly address many of the challenges posed in the program
solicitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines community-led training
with a modest but innovative ecosystem of cloud-supported smartphone tools, such
as privacy-preserving automatic route documentation, data-driven ad hoc group
formation and planning of emergent group bike routes, facilitated digital
journaling and exhibition that involves groups and the larger community in
journaling their process of “becoming a bicyclist”, evolving digital self-
portraits of the groups (and larger biking community) available on mobile
devices and the web, and a public feed of de-identified safety and satisfaction
incidents. Critical to our approach is this use of creative expression and self-
documentation to enhance feelings of identity and sustain the groups brought
together by the systems we envision. The collaboration addresses spatial
mismatch by demonstrating that a cycling based approach can treat the "mismatch"
“symptoms” more productively and more immediately than the underlying structural
conditions and at lower cost by making bike-to-work a compelling and satisfying
alternative. Then, this experience can drive more significant infrastructural
change to support biking itself and contribute to the civic conversation around
better models for full commute and “first mile / last mile” public transit
options in the longer term. This project is supported by the CIVIC Innovation
Challenge program Track A. Communities and Mobility: Offering Better Mobility
Options to Solve the Spatial Mismatch Between Housing Affordability and Jobs
through a collaboration between NSF and the Department of Energy Vehicle
Transportation Office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.