* 2044800
* Collaborative Research: Using Multisystem Deep-Time Thermochronology to Decipher Neoproterozoic Exhumation Patterns in Time and Space
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Christopher Keller, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 349,282.00

Earth’s history as recorded in rocks is frequently incomplete in any one place,
with gaps of missing time known as unconformities. While common, such gaps
typically occur at different times in different places. A major exception is the
unusual abundance of such gaps across multiple continents shortly before the
start of the current geological Eon, and shortly before the diversification of
shelly fossils in the famous Cambrian Explosion. The origin of this global gap
in the rock record, known as the Great Unconformity, has been a subject of
debate for some time. One of the recently proposed hypotheses links the
unconformity to glacial erosion during the global “snowball Earth” ice ages that
occurred about 715-660 and 740-735 million years ago. Because erosion decreases
the depth (and thus temperature) of rocks beneath the surface of the crust, one
test of this hypothesis involves minerals known as thermochronometers. These
minerals record the past temperatures that they have experienced over time, due
to (for instance) the rate of diffusion of isotopes produced in these minerals
at a known rate by radioactive decay. While time alone provides some constraints
on the cause of erosion, the time resolution of thermochronometers is limited in
rocks this old. Consequently, in order to distinguish glacial erosion from
erosion associated with the normal operation of plate tectonics, we propose to
study not only the timing but also the spatial pattern of erosion over this time
period, using thermochronometers collected from both stable continental
interiors and less stable continental margins. Since the glacial erosion
hypothesis predicts substantial erosion of stable crust in the interior of the
continents, while the tectonic hypothesis predicts erosion only near
tectonically active regions, the spatial distribution of erosion will allow us
to determine whether erosion associated with the Great Unconformity was the
result of glacial processes, tectonic processes, or both. The results will allow
us to formulate and test new questions about the environmental consequences of
the Great Unconformity, and the relationship between the Great Unconformity and
the Cambrian Explosion. In addition to producing peer-reviewed publications and
open-source software, our results will be incorporated into professional video
content designed to be accessible to the broader public and for use in
undergraduate courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Neoproterozoic Era encompassed
a number of significant changes in Earth’s systems, including major
diversification and complexification of the biosphere, episodes of extreme
glaciation, and breakup of the supercontinent Rodinia. Preliminary data suggest
that this time interval also saw a period of surprisingly robust erosional
exhumation on the order of several km. Such exhumation could be a key link in
connecting Earth-system processes, if it were widespread enough in extent,
significant enough in magnitude, and had the correct timing. Recently, Keller et
al. (2019) proposed a link between widespread glaciation and cratonic
exhumation, specifically linking Neoproterozoic “Snowball Earth” glaciations to
the phenomenon of widespread unconformity spanning the late Neoproterozoic.
However, this proposal has subsequently been contested by Flowers et al. (2020),
who instead attribute late Neoproterozoic exhumation and the Great Unconformity
to normal tectonic processes associated with the breakup of Rodinia, and propose
that Neoproterozoic glaciation had little if any erosive impact. Unfortunately,
many previous thermochronologic studies, including that of Flowers et al., have
focused on regions that were cut by Neoproterozoic faults, not truly
tectonically stable — requiring the two hypotheses to be differentiated by
timing alone, a tricky proposition given the large time uncertainty of
thermochronologic time-temperature (t-T) inversions. Here we will propose a new
thermochronologic test, based instead on the contrasting spatial patterns of
exhumation predicted by tectonic and glacial mechanisms between stable cratonic
interiors and less stable, tectonically active regions. This project will
provide integrated research experience and professional-development training for
a first-generation- postdoctoral fellow, who will collaborate across three
institutions (Lehigh, Dartmouth, and Illinois), and will support two early-
career PIs. Undergraduates at all three collaborating institutions will also be
engaged in the project as summer interns and receive exposure to the research
process, including experimental planning and communication of results. Given the
level of public interest in the Great Unconformity, we will collaborate with
Kindea Labs to produce content that can be integrated both in undergraduate
class lessons and in popular science media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.