* 2044852
* CAREER: Implications of phytoplankton trait adaptation for biogeochemical cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Naomi Levine, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2026
* USD 812,351.00

Photosynthetic microbes (phytoplankton) are vitally important for maintaining a
habitable planet. These tiny organisms contribute approximately half of global
photosynthesis, and form the base of the marine food web -- thereby supporting
global fisheries and other marine ecosystem services. Understanding how these
essential microbes will evolve as the oceans change is essential for predicting
future shifts in marine ecosystem dynamics, global carbon cycling and climate.
However, we still lack fundamental knowledge about how phytoplankton may adapt
to future environmental changes. In addition, the representation of
phytoplankton evolution has not yet been explicitly included in global climate
models. As a result, our predictions of future carbon cycling and climate-
feedbacks do not include this important mechanism (evolution) that will alter
marine ecosystem dynamics. This project is developing and testing new hypotheses
related to phytoplankton adaptation using a new framework that combines
evolutionary theory with ecological and physical ocean models. This project
investigates how phytoplankton community dynamics will be altered by adaptation
in a changing ocean and the implications of these changes on ocean carbon
cycling. In this age of big data, it is imperative that we provide our students
with a deeper, more rigorous foundation in data analysis and experience with
computational tools. This project is generating a set of computational modules
aimed at increasing the quantitative curriculum provided to environmental
studies students at both the undergraduate and K-12 level. This curriculum is
being broadly distributed using online platforms with particular focus on
providing access and training to Minority Serving Institutions. A key aim of
this project is to increase quantitative curriculum for under-represented groups
with the ultimate goal of increasing representation in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is providing new insights
into phytoplankton trait adaptation in a dynamic environment by combining an
evolutionary model of trait adaptation with a mechanistic, trait-based quota
model for phytoplankton dynamics. By explicitly validating the model with
physiology data from published experimental evolution studies and then applying
the model to realistic environmental fluctuations (temperature, light and
nutrient limitation) from a global circulation model, this study is scaling-up
the impact of phytoplankton adaptation to the global scale. Specifically, this
project is generating new hypotheses about the types of trait changes that might
result from adaptation under multi-stressor selective pressure, constraining the
relevant timescales for marine phytoplankton adaptation, and creating new
understanding of the implications of phytoplankton adaptation for carbon cycling
and ecosystem dynamics. The project is creating a novel framework for
understanding the complex multi-dimensional problem of phytoplankton trait
adaptation to multi-stressors and new understanding of how carbon cycling might
change in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.