* 2044390
* Developing and Analyzing an Online Cultural Mindset Module for Improving Multicultural Engineering Team Effectiveness
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Brent Jesiek, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,974.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving how engineering
students work in multicultural teams. Success as an engineer today requires
multicultural collaboration. To help engineering students sharpen their cultural
skills, many engineering courses place students into multicultural teams.
However, evidence suggests that students in these teams often struggle with
psychological barriers, such as mistrust, that prevent effective collaboration.
To mitigate these barriers, students of diverse cultural backgrounds need to
develop the skills and aptitudes that support working together effectively. This
project aims to build a scalable and sustainable tool to help engineering
students develop multicultural teamwork skills. It will apply research about
mindset to develop an online learning module that will be integrated into
introductory engineering courses. Findings from the project will be incorporated
into CATME (Comprehensive Assessment of Team Member Effectiveness), a widely
used, freely available tool for forming and managing undergraduate teams in STEM
and other courses. Implementing the online learning module is expected to
improve collaboration in diverse STEM environments and equip engineering majors
for the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve engineering students’
multicultural teamwork skills, the project aims to develop a cultural mindset
module in three stages. In stage 1, the project team will complete a
comprehensive literature review, focus-group interviews, and a survey of
engineers in multicultural teams and use these data to develop a prototype
cultural mindset module. The second stage will determine mechanisms of cultural
mindset effects in teams, generating knowledge to refine the module through a
teamwork survey of current undergraduate engineering students and iterative
pilot testing. The third stage will determine the module’s effectiveness with a
randomized controlled trial in a first-year engineering program and follow-up
surveys. It is expected that students who participate will demonstrate more
positive attitudes and constructive behaviors in multicultural teamwork,
resulting in improved climate and performance of their teams. Project findings
will be disseminated in engineering education and psychology conferences and
journals, and the module will be released on repositories of engineering
education and cultural learning resources. The results generated by this project
may catalyze future research on educational interventions that support a diverse
society, as well as advance efforts to create more positive cross-cultural
relations and inclusive climates in engineering programs. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.