* 2044837
* CAREER: Predicting ecosystem metabolism of rocky intertidal communities in warming and acidifying oceans.
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Nyssa Silbiger, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2026
* USD 799,511.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The devastating impacts of global
warming and ocean acidification (OA) on rocky intertidal ecosystems are expected
to increase as the oceans continue to warm and acidify. Further, loss of
critical foundation species as a result of anthropogenic stressors lead to
changes in local conditions that alter ecosystem functioning. While data exist
on the physiological response of individual organisms to OA and warming in rocky
systems, far less research has been conducted on community and ecosystem-scale
metabolic responses. The proposed work provides a critical step in understanding
how altered environmental conditions affect ecosystem functioning in rocky
intertidal systems through the combination of controlled laboratory studies,
field experiments, and a synthetic modeling approach integrating experimental
results with pre-existing time-series data. The proposed work is focused on the
overarching question: How does shifting environmental variability and loss of
foundation species interact to affect ecosystem functioning in rocky intertidal
communities? The PI is integrating research with ecological and quantitative
educational opportunities including classroom and hands-on training in lab/field
methods in marine ecology, and data science and coding bootcamps for
undergraduate students. Importantly, these opportunities financially and
educationally support traditionally underrepresented students at one of the
largest minority-serving institutions in the country. This project provides
support for intensive mentoring and training for 35 undergraduate students (25
in data science and 10 in field/lab science, all paid), 2-3 masters students,
and hands-on marine ecology opportunities in the classroom (~125 students). In
addition to formal education, the PI is collaborating with an artist-in-
residence to communicate science to the broader public through interactive and
immersive art installations in Los Angeles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because rocky
intertidal systems provide important ecosystem services including food
production, coastal protection, and tourism, it is critical to understand how
warming (both air and ocean), acidification, and altered community states affect
reef-scale ecosystem metabolism. While information exists on responses of a
variety of individual intertidal taxa to temperature stress, ocean
acidification, and habitat loss, there is notably less on the response of
ecosystem metabolism (e.g. NEP and NEC) to these stressors. This proposed work
is focused on a series of conceptual knowledge gaps and tests mechanisms through
which different warming regimes, lowered pH, and community disturbance lead to
altered community metabolism and ultimately affect ecosystem function.
Specifically, this study: 1) Describes community thermal performance curves of
multiple ecosystem functions under differing pH conditions in experimental
mesocosms, 2) characterizes drivers of ecosystem functioning (e.g. Net Ecosystem
Production [NEP] and Net Ecosystem Calcification [NEC]) in situ using natural
changes in environmental variability before and after a disturbance, and 3)
integrates 16 years of publicly available community composition and
environmental time-series data with lab and field data to hindcast ecosystem
metabolic rates and predict how ecosystem metabolism may change in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.