* 2044325
* The Critical Digital Pedagogy Project: Teacher Preparation for Inquiry-Based Online STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Todd Levine, Carroll University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 298,880.00

This project aims to serve the national interest of improving STEM teaching and
learning by identifying and integrating critical digital pedagogy methods to
prepare pre-service teachers to teach inquiry-based STEM education effectively
in online learning environments. With the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, both
K-12 and higher education underwent a dramatic shift to primarily online
instruction. With the realization that multiple modes of instruction are
possible, pre-service teacher programs must prepare students to teach in online
environments. This IUSE Engaged Student Learning Level 1 project seeks to
combine inquiry-based approaches to learning with critical digital pedagogy. It
supports Carroll University faculty members in transforming their teaching to
facilitate inquiry-based STEM education in online learning environments. In
turn, this is expected to improve undergraduate STEM teaching and learning for
pre-service teachers at Carroll University, as education faculty will integrate
critical digital pedagogy methods into their K-12 STEM methods courses. Critical
digital pedagogy impels the reimagining of how and where learning occurs, and
how all students and teachers, regardless of culture, ability, or boundaries are
empowered (Stommel, 2014). When combined with inquiry-based learning the
approach offers the opportunity to address meaningful real-world problems in
ways that require critical and creative thinking and emphasize community and
collaboration. Such an integrated and sustained multidisciplinary perspective is
intended to prepare Carroll pre-service teachers to teach inquiry-based K-12
STEM education in a variety of delivery methods, including in fully online
learning environments. The long-term goal is to develop a critical digital
pedagogy model that prepares pre-service teachers to facilitate the learning of
STEM concepts and processes in online learning environments that are equitable
and inclusive of all learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implementation of
inquiry-based practices that value active learning, immersion in authentic
settings, engagement in reasoning and problem solving, and the development of
creativity are shown to facilitate effective student learning. However, the
implementation of these pedagogical methods and the accompanying research are
contextualized within in-person learning environments. Therefore, this project’s
first objective is to identify best practices for incorporating critical digital
pedagogy into inquiry-based, online STEM education for pre-service teachers, and
begin integrating these new instructional techniques into methods courses. A
second objective is to increase STEM and education faculty members’ efficacy
around the incorporation of critical digital pedagogy into methods courses for
pre-service teachers. The third objective is to use new instructional techniques
to improve pre-service teachers’ sense of efficacy for effectively teaching
inquiry-based STEM education in online learning environments. This project
emphasizes examination of equity and access issues in tandem with instructional
changes to ensure all students can access these learning opportunities in both
K-12 and higher education settings. The project investigators are collaborating
with the Wisconsin Evaluation Collaborative, within the Wisconsin Center for
Education Research at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, to conduct both
formative and summative assessments of the project. The results will be
published in peer-reviewed publications, presented at national conferences, and
distributed widely through an online professional development micro-credential.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools. The Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship (Noyce) Program is providing co-funding for this IUSE: EHR project
to support the project's preservice teacher preparation goals, which are well-
aligned with Noyce Program goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.