* 2044473
* Determining the Effectiveness of Live Coding on Student Learning in Introductory Programming
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* William Griswold, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,973.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing the success of
students in introductory programming courses. Teaching students how to program
remains a significant challenge in undergraduate computing education, as failure
rates in introductory courses remain high. This project will test a commonly
used teaching approach called live coding that may promote student learning of
programming skills. When using live coding, instructors work through the process
of programming in front of students during class, with the instructors
explaining their thinking as they go. Despite the popularity of live coding as a
teaching technique, its effectiveness has not been carefully studied or compared
to other teaching techniques. This project will experimentally evaluate the
effectiveness of live coding on student learning in an introductory programming
course. To do so, it will compare student learning outcomes when lectures
include a live coding approach versus when static code examples are used
instead. Better understanding how live coding affects student learning could
increase use of more effective teaching practices in programming classes, which
in turn could increase student success in introductory computer science. Given
the growing unmet need for trained computing professionals to fill well-paying
positions, this project has the potential to help grow a technologically capable
workforce and to ensure that students from all backgrounds have opportunities to
pursue computing careers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Prior research on live coding
has shown that students enjoy live coding because it is dynamic, holds their
attention, and allows them to ask "what-if" questions about the code itself. A
major limitation of previous studies regarding the effectiveness of live coding
is how the studies assessed student learning: the assessments (e.g., exams,
assignments) primarily measured students' conceptual understanding of
programming, but did not measure the programming process itself. To address this
limitation, this project will: 1) design and develop assessments to measure
programming process using in-person student observations and process data
generated by the integrated development environment; and 2) conduct controlled
experiments to study and evaluate the effectiveness of live coding versus static
code examples on both students’ conceptual understanding and their programming
process. If the hypothesis is supported that live coding benefits students with
little or no prior programming experience, greater implementation of live coding
pedagogy could support increased retention of students in computing, thus
increasing the diversity of the computer science workforce. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.