* 2044255
* Engaged Student Learning Off Campus: Hands-on Distance Learning in Engineering and Computer Science through Internet of Things
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* David Hicks, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high quality undergraduate
STEM education by developing and testing remote hands-on learning experiences in
engineering and computer science. Specifically, the project aims to support
student learning by providing them with physical devices and components related
to the Internet of Things (IoT). Students can use these IoT Kits for learning on
or off campus, thus enabling them to gain engineering knowledge and hands-on
skills that are traditionally available only in on-campus laboratories. The
learning experiences will include peer collaboration, increasing the potential
of the experiences to promote learning outcomes including team work skills. By
providing high quality, remote hands-on learning, this project has the potential
to mitigate limits to in-person learning, such those caused by the COVID-19
pandemic. In addition, learning with IoT Kits can free authentic learning
experiences from the physical and scheduling constraints of traditional
laboratories, thus supporting broader participation in computer science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop hands-on
assignments and projects that engage students in project- and problem-based
learning off campus using loaned IoT Kits. In addition, this project will
examine the effectiveness of students’ remote learning through IoT kits coupled
with hands-on assignments and projects. Furthermore, the project will
investigate a new paradigm for hands-on distance learning through the use of IoT
and related devices that are in the forefront of current technological
advancements. IoT-based learning materials and teaching protocols will be
developed to enable engaged student learning in situations that previously have
been inhospitable to such learning. This research will investigate whether such
flexibility in learning time and space increases students’ self-efficacy and
problem-based learning skills. It will further investigate peer collaborative
learning in distance hands-on projects and explore potential differences between
students when learning in remote collaborative learning environments. Successful
transfer of learning in remote hands-on engaged student learning scenarios will
be evaluated, particularly in the context of students from groups that are not
yet equitably represented in STEM. Project outcomes will be disseminated through
a project website for use by other institutions to broaden participation in STEM
education. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.