* 2044782
* Collaborative Research: Effects of Thermospheric Winds on Equatorial Spread-F
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Patrick Dandenault, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 224,797.00

The Earth’s ionosphere is a layer of atmosphere starting at about 50 miles above
the surface of the Earth with relatively high concentration of charged
particles. Long-distance radio communications on Earth rely on reflection of
radio waves by this layer; communications between satellites and ground stations
rely on radio waves passing through this layer. The quality of such radio
communications highly depends on density of charged particles in the ionosphere.
When there is large variation of the density, radio wave propagation could be
disrupted. One such large density variation at low latitudes is known as
equatorial plasma bubbles (EPBs), which are often created under the combined
influence of diurnal change of solar radiation and the atmosphere wind. How
these bubbles are related to the change of atmospheric wind is a fundamental
science question and its understanding could lead to better prediction of when
and where these bubbles may form and help to mitigate the interruptions they
create.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to employ
observations and modeling to investigate the relationship between thermospheric
neutral winds and equatorial spread F (ESF), which is a manifestation of bubbles
when detected by radars. The fundamental science question to be addressed is:
How does the day-to-day variability of neutral winds contribute to the onset and
evolution of EPBs? A multi-year observational data of concurrent thermospheric
neutral winds and EPBs in the low latitudes will be developed and used to
determine the relationships between winds and ESF/scintillation. The data will
enable monitoring of the development and evolution of ESF and provide a deep
insight into both the short-term (hourly, diurnal) and long-term (seasonal)
processes and the underlying physics. Additionally, the SAMI3 (Sami3 is Also a
Model of the Ionosphere) ionosphere model will be used to capture the
ionospheric dynamics associated with different thermospheric conditions, to
allow determination of how various scenarios give rise to EPBs/ESF and how they
evolve over short (diurnal) and long (seasonal) time periods. The SAMI3 model is
comprehensive and capable of addressing important problems in aeronomy that are
not accessible with other models. The combination of the data and modeling will
lead to a fundamentally deeper understanding of the dynamical processes
underlying EPBs and ESF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the long term, the ground-
based neutral wind observations could be used to forecast the likelihood of ESF
and predict the onset of scintillation and characterize its evolution with time.
Being able to predict and characterize ESF/scintillation from ground-based
sensors is critical for operational civilian and national security purposes.
Scintillation affects trans-ionospheric radio signals up to a few GHz in
frequency and as such can have detrimental impacts on systems such as:
&lt;br/&gt;a) Satellite-based systems that are used for communications,
positioning, navigation and timing. &lt;br/&gt;b) Both civil and national
security vertical and oblique (over the horizon) radar systems. &lt;br/&gt;c)
Scientific instruments requiring observations of trans-ionospheric radio signals
(e.g., radio &lt;br/&gt;astronomy). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All the software and
data from this research will be made publicly available. Support will be
provided to students and academics who may want to reproduce and advance the
findings using the models and the datasets. JHU/APL will provide in-house
participation of high-school, undergraduate, and graduate students to help them
get research, education, and professional development
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.