* 2044403
* CAREER: Blueprint for Unlocking New Energy Conversion Functionality in Chalcogenide Frameworks through Precisely Designed Composition, Electronic Structure and Surface Coordination
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Jesus Velazquez, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2026
* USD 307,500.00

Non-Technical Summary: An entirely new palette of materials is required to
enable a sustainable terawatt-scale energy infrastructure. The development of
functional materials with properties that facilitate renewable energy conversion
and storage represents a promising approach that takes direct aim at this
problem, one of the defining challenges of our time. This project, which is
supported jointly by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research and the Catalysis program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems, has far-reaching
impact on both national and global sustainability, the accelerated discovery of
economically viable energy conversion materials. The classes of materials being
explored in this effort have properties such as electrical conductance, efficacy
of solar-energy absorption, and electrochemical reactivity towards carbon
dioxide reduction that are programmable as a function of their structure and
elemental make-up. PI Velazquez’s study is comprised of an iterative combination
of experimental research and computational modeling. The focus of this project
is to combine state-of-the-art materials synthesis with experimental evaluation
of electronic and structural properties in tailor-made solid-sate materials such
that their properties of relevance to energy conversion can be accurately mapped
to their composition and structure. This effort is augmented by a predictive
computational modeling approach where favorable material properties are
predicted for entirely new elemental compositions, thereby yielding new
candidate materials in a closed-loop manner. In parallel with the experimental
effort, undergraduate and graduate students are trained to solve problems at the
interface between solid-state materials chemistry and chemical engineering; the
training program specifically supports underrepresented minority and first-
generation students. A major thrust of the educational plan involves curriculum
supplementation through remote integration of modern solid-state chemistry and
engineering research into high schools, thereby providing aspiring scientists
with the tools required to successfully engage in STEM research.
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: This research systematically elucidates
fundamental understanding of versatile classes of multi-dimensional metal
chalcogenides, revealing material property descriptors through ex situ, in-situ,
and operando measurements of atomistic and electronic structure in order to
inform predictive models for electrochemical and photoelectrochemical
reactivity. The PI hypothesizes that fine control over local metal-chalcogen
coordination, intercalant charge density, and binary/ternary stoichiometry
engenders desirable material properties that underpin energy conversion and
storage functionality, including binding-site carbophilicity/oxophilicity,
framework ionicity/covalency, and band gap/positions. To evaluate this
hypothesis, the composition and local geometry of small-molecule adsorption
sites in solid-state chalcogenide frameworks are systematically modified across
the span of a substantial design space in order to experimentally and
computationally elucidate trends in functionality that correlate with chemical
and physical properties. Experimental results borne out of these modifications
inform predictive machine learning-density functional theory models, which in
turn generate candidate framework compositions that will engender optimal
properties. This approach effectively closes a feedback loop between experiment
and theory; as such, the anticipated products of this study are new metal
chalcogenide materials and heterostructures from the 1D M2Mo6X6 (M = K, Rb, Cs;
X = S, Se, Te), 2D MX2 (M = Ti, Mo, W; X = S, Se, Te), and 0D/3D MyMo6X8 (M =
alkali, alkaline, transition, and/or post transition metal; y = 0–4; X = O, S,
Se, Te) composition spaces that predictably yield oxygenated fuels, mediate bulk
and interfacial charge-transport, and enable tunable photon absorption. More
importantly, this research is expected to yield a materials design toolset that
illustrates the importance of successfully iterative interplay between theory,
synthesis, structure elucidation, and electronic structure studies when it comes
to generating desirable solid-state properties. The intellectual merit of this
work stems from its integrative approach to material design, where a
foundational understanding regarding the effects of composition and structure on
emergent physical properties, chemical reactivity, and energy conversion-related
functionality is unraveled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.