* 2044563
* BREAD PHENO: Development and Field Testing of Paper-based Biosensors to Increase Productivity of Smallholder Agriculture in Developing Countries
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Omowunmi Sadik, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2021
* USD 30,000.00

Yams (Dioscorea species) are among the primary agricultural commodities and
major staple crop in Africa, India, South East Asia, South America and the
Caribbean. However, the crop is laden with serious production problems arising
from factors such as anthracnose disease, pests, and declines in soil fertility.
This project seeks to revolutionize yam production in developing countries
through the development and field-testing of low-cost genotyping/phenotyping
biosensors that contain an integrated paper-based biobattery. These proof-of-
concept devices will provide self-sustainable, field-tested sensing systems that
can be used to detect the presence of disease causing pathogens by smallholder
farmers in the developing world. The project will provide international
interdisciplinary research training for students and postdoctoral researchers.
All project outcomes will be available for use by the scientific community. DNA
sequences will be available through GenBank. Information about biosensors will
be provided through multiple mechanisms that include peer-reviewed publications
as well as organized field-testing by smallholder farmers using standard
protocols and handouts.

This project will address some of the fundamental research and constraint issues
associated with decreased yam production in developing countries. This project
aims to develop and characterize the next generation of low-cost biosensors that
can be used to assess differences in virulence and inter- and/or intraspecific
genetic diversity in fungal isolates that cause anthracnose diseases in
Dioscorea alata and Dioscorea cayanensis, two species of yams. Specific
objectives are to (i) conduct molecular and biochemical characterization of
healthy and fungal-infected yam varieties to identify DNA markers associated
with up to 150-180 field-collected fungal isolates; ii) use markers as the basis
for designing a multiplex SNP paper-based bioassay to detect the presence of
fungal pathogens; iii) attach biosensor that is powered by a novel microbial-
based bio-battery to the back of a smartphone; sensor signals could be read
visually or via custom-based applications (apps) to be developed for
smartphones; and, iv) develop standardized protocols for screening yams for
anthracnose resistance using the new biosensing tools as a first step to
deploying the technology in the field. It is anticipated that the proposed
devices can serve as a model for transforming low-cost tools into precision
agriculture to promote increased food production in developing countries in
developing countries. In addition, the project can potentially shift the
paradigm for flexible and stackable paper-based batteries by enabling, through
their architecture and design, exceptional electrical characteristics and
functionalities.