* 2044095
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Community Based Ride-Hail Pilot: One Car,  Multiple Opportunities
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Michael Smart, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

Decades of evidence suggests that car access provides significant advantages in
the labor market. Yet for many, cars are financially out of reach. This project
proposes to create a community-based ride-hail program to better connect
communities with opportunities. The project team's community partner
organization, Vehicles for Change (VFC), will subsidize vehicles to low-income,
car-less individuals living in Baltimore. In return, recipients will provide a
number of weekly rides to other car-less Baltimore residents to access
employment and essential services. The program expands VFC’s existing vehicle
subsidy program and connections within the community. This pilot will enable VFC
to connect multiple people—rather than single households—to essential services
for every car they distribute. If the project team can provide 50 cars for this
pilot, the project can enable hundreds of residents to access jobs, healthcare,
and educational opportunities. The project will evaluate the success of
community ride-hail using original survey data of program drivers and riders, as
well as a control group comprised of those on the waiting list to receive a
vehicle from VFC. Measures of success would include employment and earnings
data—among others—for drivers, riders, and wait-listed individuals. Program
evaluation will significantly advance knowledge by assessing whether the effects
of car access could be “multiplied” by linking subsidized car ownership to a
low-cost ride-hail service for other car-less people.

The goal of this project is to assess the viability of a community-based ride-
hail program that connects low-income residents to jobs and other essential
services. This project plans to evaluate the economic and non- economic benefits
of this program for both drivers and riders. For drivers, the project team plans
to employ a panel- survey to assess the short- and medium-term effects of
participating in this program, and compare the results with a control group
drawn from the community partners’ networks. The team will augment the panel
surveys with interviews with drivers and surveys of riders to provide a robust
understanding of both qualitative and quantifiable effects of a community ride-
hail program to inform best practices for scalable and transferable programs.
This project is supported by the CIVIC Innovation Challenge program Track A.
Communities and Mobility: Offering Better Mobility Options to Solve the Spatial
Mismatch Between Housing Affordability and Jobs through a collaboration between
NSF and the Department of Energy Vehicle Transportation Office.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.