* 2044839
* CAREER: The Geography of Mental Health: Understanding contextual, compositional, and external stressors.
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2027
* Maggie Sugg, Appalachian State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 10/31/2027
* USD 384,963.00

This project advances the understanding of the complex relationship between
mental health and geography across an array of mental health outcomes ranging
from less severe (e.g., depression, crisis help-seeking behaviors) to more
severe (e.g., suicide). The findings of this research are potentially
transformative for both mental health and geographical research because it uses
geographic methods to identify populations with elevated mental health risks and
creates a conceptual framework for environmental and social drivers of patterns
in mental health outcomes. On a more fundamental level, this project raises
awareness of the impact of COVID-19 and environmental stressors on mental health
and the populations at risk for adverse mental health consequences. The model
and research approach developed in this project are likely to be generally
useful for evaluating mental health stressors in numerous locations. The
project's educational activities target first-generation college students and
K-12 educators who use instructional technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mental
disorders and suicide are an acute public health crisis. There is a critical
need to understand the myriad of mental health disorders and implement public
health interventions at multiple levels. This study examines mental health
across contexts using a geographic lens to describe a complex set of interacting
factors that produce adverse outcomes. More specifically, this project will
address the following research questions: (1) What are the spatial and temporal
patterns of mental health outcomes (e.g., suicide, self-harm, depression,
anxiety, etc.)? (2) What are the underlying contextual factors (e.g., community-
level poverty, racial segregation) and compositional (e.g., gender, age, veteran
status, lethal means) that influence these outcomes? (3) What are external
stressors (e.g., COVID-19 pandemic, natural disasters) that lead to increased
mental health outcomes? The methodology leverages multiple population-based
datasets and uses methods that analyze the external causes of different mental
health outcomes. This project's findings will be enhanced through collaboration
with colleagues and students in psychology, ensuring that the information
derived from this project is put into practice rapidly, accurately, and
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.