* 2044303
* CAREER: The Disk/Halo Link: Synthesizing Gaseous Tracer Samples in the Milky Way
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Jessica Werk, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 05/31/2026
* USD 714,594.00

The Milky Wayâ€™s gaseous circumgalactic medium is a fossil record of the
formation of our Galaxy and a large reservoir of material for future star
formation. Only 5% of the volume of this gaseous halo is currently mapped. Dr.
Werk and her team will map the full extent of the warm ionized halo gas. The
observations will further our understanding of the chemical composition and flow
of gas in the halo. Dr. Werk will expand her successful community college
transfer program at Seattle Central College to include five additional colleges
across Washington State. The transfer program provides mentorship for students
as they successfully transition to a 4-year STEM program at the University of
Washington. In addition, the program provides full programmatic support to
astronomy undergraduates with student-focused research opportunities and
learning initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Werk and her team will map the
full extent of the warm ionized halo gas using observations of halo stars,
distant quasi-stellar objects (QSOs), pulsars, and fast radio bursts (FRBs). The
metallicity of the ionized CGM will be measured using 40 lines of sight towards
UV-bright stars in the Galactic halo that lie within close proximity to a known
pulsar. The low velocity, ionized, extended MWCGM (Milky Way gaseous
circumgalactic medium) will be characterized by subtracting measurements of
unsaturated Si IV and C IV absorption profiles toward halo blue horizontal
branch stars from the same measurements toward distant QSOs nearby in
projection. A line profile analysis will quantify the contribution of non-
thermal processes to the MWCGM energetics. Approximately 150 pairs of QSOs and
stars will be analyzed including new UV-bright QSO targets at low Galactic
latitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.