* 2044049
* RII Track-1: Emergent Quantum Materials and Technologies (EQUATE)
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Matthew Andrews, University of Nebraska
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 05/31/2026
* USD 12,533,435.00

In the “second quantum revolution,” quantum mechanics is applied to information
theory and information technology. The State of Nebraska is participating in the
second quantum revolution by launching an interdisciplinary, interdepartmental,
and multi-campus research and education cluster on Emergent Quantum Materials
and Technologies (EQUATE) to increase jurisdictional competitiveness in the area
of quantum science and technologies. The project focuses on research and
workforce development to advance knowledge on topics related to quantum
materials, technologies, and computation. Quantum materials are a new class of
materials that exhibit quantum phenomena at macroscopic length scales and are
expected to advance the technological landscape through the advent of quantum
technologies. These new technologies will revolutionize fields such as
information technology, medical technology, and cryptography, with impact on
security areas such as defense and banking. EQUATE converges for the first-time
the complementary quantum science and technology expertise of the University of
Nebraska at Lincoln, the University of Nebraska at Omaha, the University of
Nebraska at Kearney, and Creighton University, in partnership with Nebraska’s
community and tribal colleges, to open up unique opportunities for Nebraska.
EQUATE consolidates the quantum science and technology expertise of 20 faculty
researchers across the four Nebraska research institutions, establishing
collaboration and feedback between theory and experiment to guide discoveries
and expedite the findings of new emergent quantum materials and phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nebraska’s history of cutting-edge nanomaterials research
has positioned the EQUATE project not only to be at the forefront of quantum
materials research and education, but also to actively shape directions to help
secure the future economic well-being of the State of Nebraska and the nation.
EQUATE’s main research goal is to bring Nebraska to the forefront of scientific
discoveries and innovation in the design, synthesis, growth, and use of
materials and hybrid systems with large-scale quantum properties for
applications in sensing, metrology, communication, and information processing.
EQUATE is divided into three focused research groups (FRGs). FRG 1 will explore
the emergent phenomena driven by the complex interplay between correlation,
topology, and spin-orbit coupling in a variety of quantum and topological
materials. FRG 2 will address current limitations impeding quantum technology by
exploring solid-state spin qubits for quantum sensing and metrology, and photons
for ultrafast, compact, and low-power quantum communication nanophotonic
devices. FRG 3 will utilize Bose Einstein condensates for the implementation of
quantum emulation and quantum computation, which have applications in
fundamental problems of strongly-correlated, many-body physics and can
potentially allow quantum computation above the ultra-low temperature regime
that limits current platforms. The three FRGs complement each other by combining
fundamental science, applications, and computational activities. These are
necessary to advance quantum science knowledge and technologies in the
jurisdiction. The project also introduces quantum science topics and concepts to
various levels of participants, from K-12 students and their teachers to
university faculty, to train the next generation of quantum scientists and
engineers across participating institutions and throughout
Nebraska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.