* 2044340
* PFI-TT: Rapid Construction of Resilient Bridges using Modular Design
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Ashley Thrall, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 04/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the development of the modular joint
technology for the construction of resilient bridges with enhanced public
safety, reduced cost and time for construction, and improved lifespan. The
modular joint technology has the potential to replace ageing infrastructure and
to reconstruct bridges damaged by disasters, with a focus on 100-400 ft.
bridges. Of the 67,824 existing 100-400 ft. span bridges in the U.S., 23% are
structurally deficient or beyond the typical design life. Further, disasters
often destroy bridges, preventing effective evacuation efforts and leaving
displaced populations without access to food, water, or medical aid. To reduce
mortality and morbidity rates following disasters and to expedite economic
recovery, there is an urgent need to reconstruct damaged bridges. In addition to
addressing these needs, this project will support the education of two graduate
students in entrepreneurship and innovation, including research and coursework
leading to graduate degrees in Civil Engineering, coursework in entrepreneurship
leading to a Certificate, participation in I-Corps, and internships. Broadening
participation of underrepresented groups will be achieved through research
opportunities and an annual, “INVITE: InNoVatIon, Technology, and business in
Engineering” workshop for undergraduate students from multiple
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance the modular
joint technology for commercialization. The modular joint technology is a
paradigm change in design: the connection is the module and the members are
standard steel sections. The technology harnesses the benefits of modularity
(cost/time savings through mass-production) and trusses (high efficiency, ease
of design, longevity), while overcoming the deficiencies of existing modular
bridges (limited spans, unreliable pin connections) and conventional trusses
(high fabrication cost, difficult construction, lack of safety). Specifically,
the modular joint is comprised of a weldment/built-up section of webs and
flanges that includes a starter segment to connect to members or other modular
joints. Flanges and webs are connected independently through bolted splice
connections, forming a moment-resisting connection that provides the potential
for the structure to tolerate member loss. The proposed translational research
will address the remaining technical challenges for commercialization:
fabrication, construction, and safety. Research objectives include: (1)
identifying parameters for minimum fabrication cost while meeting structural
performance criteria, (2) investigating construction procedures and fit-up
strategies, (3) evaluating behavior under member loss and fatigue load cases,
and (4) developing design details and guidelines. Research will be performed
through rigorous numerical investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.