* 2044855
* CAREER: Concrete Hardness in Lattice-based Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* Shi Bai, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2026
* USD 294,852.00

With recent advances in quantum computing, cryptosystems tailored to be quantum-
safe are of great interest. One of the most promising candidates for post-
quantum cryptography is lattice-based cryptography. The security of lattice-
based cryptography however relies on the computational hardness of certain
lattice-based assumptions. The central goal of this project is to understand the
concrete hardness of these assumptions, investigating algorithms for the worst-
case and average-case lattice problems. The project aims to provide new insights
into the concrete behavior of lattice algorithms and understand their detailed
resource requirements. The integrated educational component of the project
involves a combination of mentoring, course (re)-design and science
communication activities, contributing to the development of a diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research activities in the project
include: (1) understand and improve the lattice reduction algorithms, including
the underlying enumeration and sieving algorithms, with a focus on their
concrete complexities; (2) investigate the impacts of deploying classical and
quantum algorithms in lattice reduction, and estimate their detailed resource
requirement; (3) develop robust models to guide the parameter selection for
lattice-based cryptographic systems. The research findings provide a systematic
approach to quantitatively understand the intrinsic hardness of lattice
assumptions. These results contribute to the standardization process for post-
quantum cryptography, guide the parameter selection, and provide a systematic
tool to the developers and end-users of lattice-based cryptography. The research
outcomes are to be published in peer-reviewed publications for the academic
community and to be disseminated to a broader audience through the education and
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.