* 2044865
* CAREER: Cognitively-Informed Memory Models for Language-Capable Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Thomas Williams, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2026
* USD 549,999.00

Robots that can communicate with people through spoken language stand to advance
the future of human work and to assist the most vulnerable members of society,
including children and older adults, people with disabilities, autism, or mental
illness, and people experiencing isolation, bullying, or trauma. One of the key
tasks that robots will need to do when talking with everyday people is referring
expression generation, which is the process of creating descriptions like "the
office at the end of the hallway." When robots generate such descriptions, they
need to do so in a way that is accurate (the description shouldn't be wrong),
natural (the description shouldn't sound awkward), understandable (the listener
should be able to interpret the description quickly and effortlessly), and
efficient (the robot should be able to generate the description without having
to pause and think for too long). To understand how robots might generate
descriptions in a way that satisfies these properties, we can start by trying to
understand how people do so. One reason we are good at generating referring
expressions may be because of our working, or short term, memory, which we use
to keep a small amount of timely and important information available in a way
that we can quickly and effortlessly access. The key idea of this project is to
give robots the same type of working memory capabilities, and the same ways of
thinking about what might be in peoples' working memories, so they will be able
to use that timely and important information to do a better job at generating
referring expressions. By taking this cognitively inspired approach, this work
will advance the state of the art of multiple fields, including AI, robotics,
and psychology. In addition, the educational aspect of this project aims to
develop materials that will help train the next generation of students working
at the intersection of these fields. To ensure the broadest possible impact,
these efforts will be integrated with the PI's department's activities relating
to Broadening Participation in Computing so that they reach currently
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical perspective, the
key goal of this research is to show how models of working memory that
appropriately cache task-relevant beliefs about goal-relevant objects will
enable robots to better perform referring expression generation. To this end,
the work will assess two key hypotheses: that cognitively inspired models of
working memory will enable robots to generate referring expressions in a way
that is more accurate, natural, computationally efficient to generate, and
cognitively efficient for the listener to process; and that goal relevance can
be leveraged to ensure that the most task-relevant information is retained
within those models. By addressing these hypotheses, the research will develop:
(1) the first algorithms for referring expression generation in robot cognitive
architectures that are informed by current psychological theories of human
working memory; (2) a fundamental new understanding of how robots can
intelligently manage and allocate resources within artificial working memory
models, (3) an understanding of which memory models will produce optimal
performance from both robotics and cognitive modeling perspectives; (4)
fundamental new understanding of how the goal relevance of entities and their
properties can be automatically assessed within integrated cognitive
architectures; (5) understanding of how goal relevance can be used to allocate
cognitive resources within robotic models of working memory; (6) understanding
of which goal-driven resource allocation strategies will produce optimal
performance from both robotics and cognitive modeling perspectives; and (7)
freely-available datasets of human-robot dialogues, and a freely-available
experimental framework to allow other researchers to collect additional such
dialogues, both of which will be permanently archived via the Open Science
Framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.