* 2044679
* NSF-BSF: SaTC: CORE: Small: Secure Massively Parallel Computations: Foundations and Constructions
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Elaine Shi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Over the past decade, there has been increasing interest in processing enormous
data-sets using large-scale clusters such as MapReduce and Spark. The most
widely-accepted theoretical abstraction of such computations is called the
Massively Parallel Computation (MPC) model. Since MPC algorithms are often
executed on sensitive data, it is imperative to develop privacy-preserving
techniques for efficient MPC-style computations. The project explores a new
theoretical foundation that enables efficient secure computation on MPC
frameworks, as well as efficient implementations. The solutions developed
provide privacy-preserving, large-scale data analytics without leaking private
information.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project combines cryptographic and
algorithms techniques, and is expected to lead to new theoretical understanding
of secure MPC and new concretely efficient secure MPC algorithms. The
theoretical thrust explores questions such as the setup and cryptographic
assumptions needed for realizing efficient secure computation on an MPC
architecture, and understanding the round complexity, communication efficiency,
and other suitable performance metrics. The practical thrust explores concretely
efficient instantiations of the theoretical paradigms developed, and validates
their practical scalability. The project organizes joint workshops on
cybersecurity for faculty and students in the US and Israel. Software tools
developed in the research project are made publicly available through open
source efforts. The project involves graduate and undergraduates students in
this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.