* 2044347
* Studying Student Support and Success Experiences to Improve Persistence of Nontraditional Students in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Stephen Brozina, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 02/29/2024
* USD 299,968.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing persistence of
students in undergraduate engineering programs. To do so, it will conduct a
study of nontraditional students in engineering with the goal of better
understanding how to support their completion of engineering degrees. Students
are considered to be nontraditional if they do not enter a four-year degree
program directly from high school. Nontraditional students are an increasing
proportion of undergraduates in the United States and often form the majority of
students in a college or university. Beyond not entering a four year degree
program directly from high school, nontraditional students often have other
characteristics, such as attending college part-time, having dependents, working
full-time when enrolled, being financially independent, and/or having
certifications other than a high school diploma. There is little research into
engineering students with such nontraditional characteristics. Filling this gap
is important because engineering has a generally low persistence and retention
rate and its curricula are often aligned with a traditional four-year
residential degree (e.g., group projects, study halls). Thus, there is a
pressing need to understand how support structures can be designed to be
effective for students with any nontraditional characteristics. This project
will strengthen the engineering community’s understanding of nontraditional
students, including development of guidelines to help institutions of all types
better support the success of nontraditional students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to an understudied area of
research: understanding the needs and experiences of nontraditional students in
engineering. The project research plan uses a theory-driven mixed-methods case
study of nontraditional students in engineering at Youngstown State University
over a three-year period and will produce a body of knowledge on experiences and
supports for nontraditional students in engineering. It will also generate
action-focused guidelines for improving persistence and success of
nontraditional students in engineering. This project will examine three research
questions: (1) What is the holistic experience of current nontraditional
students in engineering? (2) How do nontraditional students in engineering
engage with co-curricular supports as they progress through their degree
program? and (3) What impact do nontraditional student characteristics have on
student integration and student success? Major data sources include a survey of
over 1,000 nontraditional students in engineering, focus groups, and reflective
diaries completed at multiple points throughout the semester. A significant
project outcome will be to generate new knowledge and disseminate guidelines for
supporting nontraditional students’ academic, social, and professional
integration, and their sense of engagement with their institutions. These
outcomes can directly contribute to improved persistence and retention of
engineering students. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.