* 2044177
* A Multi-Requisite Mathematics-Intensive Summer Program for Pre-service Elementary Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Debra Ward, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 02/28/2025
* USD 296,399.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a mathematics-
intensive multi-requisite program for pre-service elementary teachers who have
low college-entry scores in mathematics. The multi-requisite course will allow
students to complete in one semester a course sequence which would traditionally
take four semesters. This Track 1: Engaged Student Learning Project incorporates
peer mentoring, affective-domain interventions, alternative assessments, and
research-based pedagogical practices. The course is designed to increase the
completion and retention rates of pre-service elementary teachers, enhance their
mathematics efficacy, decrease their mathematics anxiety, and improve their
mindsets toward mathematics. Utah Valley University students who have a declared
major of Elementary Education and have a mathematics placement score that falls
below that required for entry into traditional college-level mathematics courses
are targeted. Successful completion of the course meets the entry-level
mathematics requirements for the Elementary Education program. Increased
mathematics self-efficacy and reduced mathematics anxiety among those completing
the course is expected which should increase the potential for becoming
effective teachers of elementary mathematics. It is expected this can increase
the number of elementary teachers who communicate positive mathematics attitudes
to their students because these future teachers have developed a growth mindset
towards mathematics coupled with reduced mathematics
anxiety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to establish a
model math-intensive multi-requisite curriculum for developmental—math-level
students majoring in Elementary Education which will be transformative for these
future educators. This curriculum intends to incorporate interventions to
effectively improve persistence and completion, develop efficacy for learning
and teaching mathematics, improve students’ mindsets toward mathematics, and
address students’ mathematics anxiety. Along with this goal, this project aims
to bolster the research base on pre-service teachers who are placed into
remedial or developmental mathematics. Thus, this project intends to contribute
to the existing research pertaining to mathematics efficacy levels, mathematics
anxiety levels, and mindset tendencies for students majoring in Elementary
Education at a primarily undergraduate, open-enrollment institution. The project
utilizes an experimental research, two-iteration program development design. In
the research design, data is collected from the treatment groups of each
iteration of the program while comparative data is collected from a single
control group at the beginning of their course sequence and again at either the
end of their course sequence or at the end of a two-year tracking timeframe. The
project intends to collect quantitative data on mathematics self-efficacy,
mathematics teaching efficacy, mindset, and mathematics anxiety through
pre/post-tests from treatment and control groups. Additional quantitative data
is expected to be collected in the form of sequence completion rates and next-
semester retention rates for treatment and control groups. In addition, the
project intends to collect qualitative data measuring mathematics efficacy,
mindset, and anxiety from the treatment groups through individualized teaching
portfolios. The project has the potential to broaden participation in Elementary
Education to those who are not initially strong in mathematics and may help
retain educators who might otherwise leave the profession citing lack of content
knowledge in mathematics. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools. The
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship (Noyce) Program is providing co-funding for
this IUSE: EHR project to support the project's pre-service teacher preparation
goals, which are well-aligned with Noyce Program
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.