* 2044904
* CAREER: Using Metal-Organic Frameworks to Harness Molecular Catalysts for Selective C-H Functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Casey Wade, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 01/31/2026
* USD 685,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Wade of The Ohio State University will address the challenges in C–H
bond functionalization by investigating the design of new heterogeneous
catalysts containing immobilized transition metal complexes capable of selective
C–H bond activation. Catalytic C–H bond functionalization offers a powerful and
efficient means of preparing complex organic molecules used in the
pharmaceutical and fine chemical industries. However, many catalysts currently
employed for C–H functionalization reactions rely on rare and expensive metals
and require high loadings to achieve a desirable level of activity. In addition,
there is a growing need for catalysts capable of facilitating site-specific
functionalization in substrate molecules containing multiple C–H bonds. This
research will develop greater understanding of the effects of catalyst
immobilization on catalytic activity and product selectivity, and has the
potential to impact the production of fine chemicals. Dr. Wade will integrate
his research with outreach activities that promote student engagement in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Dr Wade and
his team will be involved in Virtual Meet a Scientist and Bringing Opportunities
for Research Involvement to Chemistry Classrooms (BORICC) programs that connect
researchers with high school science classrooms in regions that lack access to
STEM outreach opportunities. These programs are designed improve student
perceptions of scientists, increase enthusiasm for pursuing STEM-based careers,
and support secondary education goals and curricula in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalyst deactivation processes such as dimerization and
ligand disproportionation are prevalent in homogeneous reactions. Metal-organic
frameworks (MOFs) offer versatile platforms for the design of single-site
heterogeneous catalysts that are resistant to intermolecular deactivation and
decomposition processes owing to site-isolation effects. The well-ordered
structures of MOFs also offer unprecedented opportunities to manipulate the
secondary coordination sphere around a catalytic site and enable regio- or
chemo-selective transformations. With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Wade will investigate new strategies for
the design MOF-based C–H borylation and amination catalysts containing
framework-immobilized, organometallic active sites. These studies exploit the
well-defined spatial arrangement of linkers and metal nodes to engender non-
covalent interactions that chaperone substrates for site-selective C–H bond
activation. Benchmarking studies will be employed to evaluate the effect of
different catalyst immobilization strategies and MOF supports on catalytic
activity and selectivity. Structure-property relationships will be developed and
applied for design optimization of site-selective C–H borylation and amination
catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.