* 2044613
* CAREER: Imaging enhancer-mediated transcriptional regulation in 3D genome
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2025
* Bomyi Lim, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 12/31/2025
* USD 453,877.00

This project will elucidate the role of 3D genome organization in gene
regulation during development by engaging graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students in the cutting-edge field of quantitative biology. Proper gene
regulation is crucial for the smooth execution of various cellular functions.
Indeed, too much or too little gene expression in the wrong place or at the
wrong developmental stages often leads to developmental defects. The folded
structure of the DNA polymer plays an important role in gene regulation, in
addition to direct interactions between regulatory elements and the target gene.
The overall goal of the project is to characterize the spatial and temporal
range of gene expression that ensures normal development upon perturbation of 3D
genome organization in early Drosophila embryos. An undergraduate design project
in quantitative biology and a virtual outreach program for high school students
will be established to enhance students’ involvement in interdisciplinary
research in quantitative biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent development
of various “seq” techniques have advanced the field of transcriptional
regulation by providing a genome-wide perspective of enhancer-promoter
interactions and gene activity. However, it is still unclear how long or how
closely a specific arrangement of architecture proteins, enhancers, and
promoters in a given cell should be maintained to result in proper gene
expression. This question will be addressed by tracking dynamic changes in
chromatin organization and transcriptional activity in individual living cells.
Multiple approaches, including genome editing, quantitative live imaging and
mathematical modeling will be employed in early Drosophila embryos to examine
the structure-function relationships of genome topology and gene activity.
Specifically, long-range enhancer-promoter interactions and inter-allelic
associations will be perturbed and the effects on transcriptional dynamics will
be characterized in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.