* 2044245
* PFI-TT: Development and Flight Tests of an Aircraft Safety System
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Nilton Renno, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 09/30/2023
* USD 329,995.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is aviation safety, in particular the
development of an icing detection system. Ice is a major cause of aircraft
accidents, even for airplanes approved for flight in icing conditions like
commercial transport jet aircraft. Indeed, through customer discovery, the team
found that there is a need for new icing detection technologies that respond
directly to changes in the US Code of Federal Regulations as well as the new
certification requirements of the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA). In
addition to aviation, the technologies proposed technologies could be used to
detect ice hazards on bridges, roads, and other infrastructure systems.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop and flight test a
complete aircraft icing detection system. Recent changes in Aircraft
Certification Specifications (ACS) requires new types of icing detection systems
that do not yet exist in the market. Supercooled Large Droplets (SLD) have
caused several airplane accidents in the last few decades. In most General
Aviation (GA) airplanes ice detection currently consists simply of notifications
that the air temperature is near or below 0 degrees Celcius; However,
temperature measurements alone are not enough for detecting the presence of
hazardous icing conditions. Commercial and Business Aviation airplanes have more
complex icing detection systems, but they only measure ice accumulation on
mounted probes and may not measure ice on other areas of the plane, resulting in
hazardous flight conditions. The proposed system is capable of probing the
airspace around airplanes, detecting SLDs, measuring cloud liquid water content,
and detecting ice accretion where ice can create hazardous flight conditions.
This project will also contribute to the education of engineering students
interested in entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.