* 2044997
* CAREER: Molecular and Data-Centric Modeling of Cell-Penetrating Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Reid Van Lehn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2026
* USD 330,007.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems in the Engineering
Directorate contribute funds to this CAREER award. It supports research,
educational, and outreach activities to advance the fundamental understanding
and design of nanomaterials. Spherical metal nanoparticles less than 10
nanometers in diameter are promising materials for biomedical applications
because they can circulate in the bloodstream for long periods of time and
interact with target cells. Some applications, such as the delivery of nucleic
acids, require nanoparticles to enter the cell interior by crossing the cell
membrane - the barrier that separates the cell interior from the environment -
without damaging the cell. A small number of nanoparticles have exhibited this
desirable cell entry behavior, but the mechanisms underlying this behavior are
not understood. Consequently, general rules for designing nanoparticles that can
efficiently cross the cell membrane do not exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will utilize a combination of computational methods to address this knowledge
gap and test hypotheses to understand how the properties of nanoparticles affect
their interaction with cell membranes. Such methods permit the analysis of
nanoparticle properties and interactions that are difficult to discern
experimentally and to gain insight into the fundamental mechanisms by which
nanoparticles enter cells. New machine learning methods will be further
developed to predict how nanoparticle properties can be synthetically tuned to
facilitate cell entry. This computational approach will permit the creation of
new types of nanoparticles more rapidly than would be possible through
experiments alone, enabling the rational design of next-generation nanomaterials
with various biomedical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports integrated education and outreach activities. The PI will create
visually appealing, interactive, and easily accessible computer simulations that
illustrate molecular-scale phenomena. These simulations will be used as a
“computational microscope” to demonstrate nanoscale phenomena to the public and
grade 6-12 students during events hosted on the University of Wisconsin-Madison
campus. They will also be integrated into a range of undergraduate chemical
engineering courses and disseminated broadly through online resources. The
project will further help train the next generation of scientists in
computational science by providing research opportunities for undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups and local high school teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
research, and integrated educational, and outreach activities to advance the
fundamental understanding and design of functionalized nanomaterials. Designing
materials to efficiently deliver cargo to intracellular targets without adverse
side effects would have a transformative impact on biomedical applications
including protein and drug delivery, gene editing, and bioimaging. Surface-
functionalized gold nanoparticles have the potential to achieve this goal, but a
longstanding challenge is designing nanoparticles that can enter cells without
being trapped in endosomes and without disrupting the cell membrane.
Surprisingly, some nanoparticles can non-disruptively penetrate into cells by
translocating across the cell membrane, potentially enabling exciting new
avenues for intracellular delivery. However, cell penetration mechanisms remain
largely unknown, inhibiting the optimization and design of cell-penetrating
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this knowledge gap, this project
will use molecular dynamics simulations at multiple length scales to understand
the thermodynamic and kinetic factors that influence the insertion of
nanoparticles into lipid bilayers and test the hypothesis that bilayer insertion
predicts cell penetration. The objectives of this project are to: (1)
characterize mechanisms of bilayer insertion for different nanoparticle
compositions using all-atom simulations with enhanced sampling techniques, (2)
determine the impact of bilayer composition on nanoparticle insertion and
penetration with coarse-grained simulations, and (3) train machine learning
models to discover new classes of synthetically accessible cell-penetrating
nanoparticles. Computational predictions of new cell-penetrating nanoparticles
will be experimentally verified by collaborators at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison. These studies will provide new insight into nano-bio interactions that
will impact understanding of diverse classes of nanomaterials and demonstrate
how the combination of machine learning and molecular simulation can inform
nanomaterial design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports integrated
education and outreach activities. The PI will design simulation modules that
utilize molecular dynamics simulations to illustrate nanoscale phenomena.
Modules will be: (1) visually appealing, to engage students and illustrate
concepts; (2) interactive, to increase student engagement and improve learning
outcomes; (3) accessible, to ensure simulations can be performed without
computational expertise; and (4) distributable, to maximize impact without
requiring substantial computational resources. Modules will be designed in
collaboration with educational experts then integrated into outreach events to
impact grade 6-12 students, integrated into classes within the University of
Wisconsin-Madison chemical engineering curriculum to engage undergraduate
students, and will be disseminated online to the broader nanomaterials education
community. Module development will also broaden participation by providing
opportunities for undergraduates from underrepresented groups to contribute to
the project’s research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.