* 2044778
* CAREER: Understanding Metal-Micelle Cooperativity for Selective Catalysis in Water
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Sachin Handa, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 02/28/2026
* USD 484,572.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program within the Division of
Chemistry, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), Dr. Sachin Handa of the University of Louisville is developing
catalysts that promote organic reactions in water - a green, safe, and abundant
medium for performing chemical synthesis. Despite its desirable features,
organic reactions are not usually performed in water because the compounds and
catalysts used to build the molecules usually cannot dissolve in water. Micelles
provide a solution by creating small pockets where the components of organic
reactions can dissolve. The Handa group is studying the interaction of metal
nanoparticle catalysts (high surface area metal particles) with a specific type
of micelle to better understand how this environment alters, and in some cases
improves, catalyst performance. Simultaneously, new reactions are being
investigated with these systems. To complement these activities, Dr. Handa is
also leading an initiative called “Better Society, Greener Planet” that targets
the training of high school students from underrepresented groups, the
reintegration of discontinued students into studies in STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) disciplines, and community STEM
engagement activities at local churches, temples, and
mosques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Sachin Handa and his research group are
working to better understand the fundamental properties of nanocatalyst-micelle
interactions that support, control, and improve organic reactions in water. They
are using systematic structural changes to the amphiphile to interrogate
optimization and gain insight into how micellular nanocatalysts support longer
lifetimes of unstable intermediates in water. These structure-activity
relationship studies rely on the combined use of several analytical techniques,
including dynamic light-scattering, cryo-TEM (Transmission Electron Microscopy),
IR (Infra-red) spectroscopy, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy. In addition, mixed metal nanoparticle catalysts will
be developed to investigate metal-cooperativity in these systems and new
transformations are to be explored for deracemization and trifluoromethylation
reactions. This work is simultaneously serving to train a diverse group of
students in the development of catalysts for sustainable
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.