* 2044633
* CAREER: Fast, Energy Efficient Irregular Kernels via Neural Accerlation
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Joshua Booth, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 03/31/2026
* USD 283,488.00

High-performance computing suffers from a performance bottleneck that wastes
computation time, money, and energy, as processing cores on multicore systems
sit idle waiting for memory accesses from irregular kernels. These irregular
kernels normally accomplish little computational work despite the high cost of
accessing memory. These costly bottlenecks must be remedied by a new approach to
high-performance computing. But, at the same time, computing is evolving and is
becoming less dependent on the low-level programming languages that cause these
bottlenecks and more dependent on learning algorithms such as neural networks to
attain the necessary efficiency. This project builds the foundation for
accelerating irregular kernels by replacing them with neural networks that run
on accelerators optimized for neural networks. These neural networks offer
better performance and energy consumption. Additionally, these networks are
tuned in high-level programming languages (e.g., Python) that are easier for
novice users to learn. This allows more computer scientists to aid the
scientific and high-performance computing communities. This project also builds
a new curriculum such as adding neural accelerators and expanding neural network
algorithm materials into traditional undergraduate courses. This project, in
both its research and educational aspects, significantly reduces the development
time and costs of high-performance computing while simultaneously reducing
performance bottlenecks. Furthermore, this project will support graduate and
undergraduate students as they engage in cross-disciplinary involvement to match
accuracy and performance constraints from the scientific-modeling and big-data-
analysis communities that currently depend on irregular kernels for areas such
as climate modeling, large scale circuit design, and drug analysis on infectious
diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals and scope of this project are to build
a framework that allows irregular kernels to be optimized in terms of both their
performance and energy usage using the technique of neural acceleration, i.e.,
being represented and executed as a neural network. The methods used to meet the
project’s goals and scope include the following: 1) The development of an
approximation-bound characteristic that quantifies and qualifies acceptable
error bars on the developed neural networks along with performance and energy
requirements; 2) The development of initial neural networks for commonly used
irregular kernels that can be used as starting networks for more complex
irregular kernels and be used by individuals tuning their irregular kernels
(which will be made available by a public database that is created and
maintained by the investigator to support research in this area); and 3) The
construction of a toolchain to aid in identifying irregular kernels in code,
constructing neural networks based on user input, and deciding how the neural
networks should be scheduled. The deliverable toolchain has support for popular
libraries like TensorFlow and will be disseminated via an open-source
repository. The transformative impact of this project’s effort generates a
completely new optimization option for irregular kernels and a base set of tools
(i.e., a public database and scheduling toolchain) that will foster future
advances into using neural acceleration for various codes and lead to
significant advancements in science and engineering. As such, this new
optimization option may inspire a new computational model in a post-Moore era
that provides timely scientific data for urgent government policy, such as
climate change and foreign affairs.&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
CAREER Software and Hardware Foundations HPC program and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.