* 2044705
* CAREER: Auxetic Lattice Reinforcing Metamaterial Architectures for a New Class of Concrete Metastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Symeon Gerasimidis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 01/31/2026
* USD 547,870.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program will exploit unique
mechanical properties of architected metamaterials to create a new class of
reinforced concrete structures (i.e., metastructures) with mechanical properties
(i.e., strength, ductility and energy absorption) superior to those available
today. Reinforced concrete is among the most commonly used structural materials
in the world and therefore significant improvements in its properties have
transformative societal implications such as reducing costs, as well as
increasing the quality and capabilities of structures. Reinforced concrete
metastructures, either designed directly from or influenced by architected
metamaterials, combine material and architecture in unique ways to achieve
previously unattainable properties. The education and outreach plan of this
program will enhance the scientific literacy of underserved bilingual students
at all levels by developing educational strategies with effective scientific
content. It will engage elementary students through the “Engineering is
Elementary” program of the Boston Museum of Science and will also facilitate
transfer of knowledge to the industry by linking educational activities to
industrial work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research relies on a novel concrete
confinement technique which can be achieved through a unique mechanical property
found in architected metamaterials. The research approach is to employ auxetic
(negative Poisson’s ratio) metamaterial lattice architectures as reinforcement
and demonstrate the utility of this new auxetically confined concrete for
improving the performance of members within a building structural system.
Through material synthesis of the concrete matrix and the auxetic lattice, a new
composite will be created and a new auxetic confinement model will be developed
in the inelastic range. To achieve this, an integrated computational and
experimental research program will be pursued. Finally, to upscale the
auxetically confined concrete for building structures, the research program will
employ digital fabrication and automated manufacturing techniques to efficiently
manufacture auxetically confined concrete structural members. Columns and shear
wall coupling beams will be designed and experimentally tested to demonstrate
the capabilities of the new auxetically confined reinforced concrete, aiming at
improved strength and ductility as well as increased shear strength and energy
absorption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.