* 2044179
* Advancing the Computational Thinking of Undergraduate Students in Intermediate Computer Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Adrienne Decker, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by defining critical concepts
students must understand to become computational thinkers and by identifying
misconceptions that stand in the way of learning these concepts. In today’s
data- and computing-driven society, people need computational thinking abilities
to be successful, contributing members of society. The ability to think
computationally is as fundamentally important as basic fluency in reading,
writing, and arithmetic. A well-known and troubling problem is the low retention
of students in computing courses and programs, where computational thinking is
typically taught. Although considerable work has been done to identify critical
concepts and improve student performance in introductory computing courses,
little work has been done in intermediate courses. This project seeks to
understand the conceptual barriers that students face while learning basic
computational skills in their second and third year of study. This understanding
may lead to new approaches to improve teaching and learning of computational
thinking. The results of this project have important implications for building
and maintaining a skilled national workforce, especially in fields that are
highly focused on computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study
computational thinking through the lens of threshold concepts and threshold
capability frameworks. Students often struggle to learn threshold concepts
because these concepts require learners to shift their thinking in new and often
counter-intuitive ways. Object-oriented programming is an example of a threshold
concept. Once learned, threshold concepts are transformational because they
enable learning of more advanced concepts and build the learners’ professional
identities in computing. By identifying threshold concepts in intermediate
computer science, the project aims to help students navigate more successfully
through the conceptual work needed to develop computational thinking
capabilities. This project will integrate issues of threshold concepts,
liminality, and transformative learning to produce a framework through which
computational thinking can be probed and students’ progression can be better
assessed. Computational thinking is, itself, a threshold capability that lays
the groundwork for professional success in STEM and non-STEM careers. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.