* 2044055
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Jitney+: Redesign of a Legacy Mobility Service for Lower-income Communities in the Post-COVID Digital Age
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Farnoush Banaei-Kashani, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 49,938.00

Low income communities in urban environments chronically struggle with access to
mobility and the correlated low quality of life metrics. In principle, on-demand
ride-sharing services can address these issues by creating an efficient, real-
time market—matching drivers with requests. However, the reality for these
communities is far different, as the tendency in these services, primarily run
by external business owners, is to avoid pickups in low income communities due
to safety perception, and lack of trust among users to name a few. This project
focuses on ways to empower the residents within these communities to offer
connected mobility solution, and investigate their specific needs and
operational constraints that are not currently understood enough. The
overarching objective of this work is to create an effective collaboration
platform for community partners to communicate their mobility challenges and
opportunities with researchers (from engineering, social sciences and computer
science), industry partners and policy makers, and to steer these engagements
towards a concrete plan for a one-year multi-sided pilot project on customized
peer-to-peer mobility solutions for low income communities. The holistic nature
of this work includes studies on the societal aspects of connected mobility, and
how coherent sociotechnical solutions can be created and how their success can
be measured by accompanying social studies. If successful, this planning work
and its following pilot project will enable transformation in the mobility of
many low income communities in the country, and contribute to a more equitable,
more efficient, and eventually more prosperous nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
overcome the mobility challenges in low-come communities, an empowering approach
to on-demand services rooted in these communities is needed. To this end, this
project creates a cyberinfrastructure that help the capital and labor arise from
within these low-income communities, and mobility demands and resources are
linked in a way that is compatible with community resources and needs. In
particular, this project will plan an innovative community-focused ride-sharing
service—Jitney+. This service effectively connects the community social graph
with the resources graph, and the location graph, and addresses (1) the issue of
trust among the drivers and passengers, (2) the digital divide and (3) safety
concerns related the location and time of access and also to COVID-19 infection.
This is done by facilitating effective collaboration among community partners,
university researchers, industry partners, and city officials, with the focus on
communities in the south side of Chicago and in Champaign County in Illinois.
This project is supported by the CIVIC Innovation Challenge program Track A -
Communities and Mobility: Offering Better Mobility Options to Solve the Spatial
Mismatch Between Housing Affordability and Jobs through a collaboration between
NSF and the Department of Energy Vehicle Transportation
Office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.