* 2044973
* CAREER: Certifiable Perception for Autonomous Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Luca Carlone, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 02/28/2026
* USD 338,496.00

Perception systems are a key component of modern autonomous cyber-physical
systems (CPS), from self-driving vehicles to autonomous robots and drones. For
instance, for a self-driving vehicle, perception systems provide functionalities
such as estimating the state of the vehicle, building a map of obstacles in its
surroundings, and detecting and tracking external objects and pedestrians. As
exemplified by recent self-driving car accidents, perception failures can
cascade to catastrophic system failures and compromise human safety. Therefore,
the development of trustworthy perception systems is paramount to ensure safety
and enable adoption of high-integrity and safety-critical CPS applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project lays the foundations of certifiable
perception by developing a toolkit of theory, algorithms, and implementations to
monitor and drastically reduce subsystem and system-level failures of
perception. In particular, this project will (i) develop a new class of
certifiable perception algorithms that operate reliably in challenging
conditions, are equipped with input-output contracts describing their
functionalities, and can formally assert contract satisfaction; (ii) show how to
use certifiable algorithms to design contracts for and enable self-supervision
of learning-based subsystems; (iii) design system monitors that assert the
satisfaction of safety requirements or trigger fail-safe procedures in case of
failure; (iv) develop a testbed and real demonstrations of certifiable
perception on self-driving car data, focusing on key perception functionalities,
such as vehicle localization, environment mapping, and object tracking. This
research advances the state of the art in CPS and creates a new research field
at the boundary between CPS, robotics and autonomous vehicles, computer vision,
machine learning, system-level design and runtime
verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Certifiable perception will have a
transformative impact on a broad range of autonomous CPS where safety,
reliability, security, and accountability are key requirements. These include
intelligent transportation, supply chain logistics (e.g., last-mile delivery),
new aerospace concepts (e.g., autonomous spacecraft, flying taxis, and drones
for national security), service and domestic robotics, and collaborative
manufacturing. This impact will be enhanced through the release and
dissemination of open-source implementations and teaching material, and via
demonstrations on real testbeds. The project also boosts K-12, undergraduate,
and graduate education, by supporting and actively engaging students in research
activities, and through outreach efforts targeting high school students from
underrepresented and underserved communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is in response to the NSF CAREER 20-525 solicitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.