* 2044760
* PFI-TT: Automating Soil Organic Matter Separation to Monitor Soil Carbon Sequestration
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,11/30/2022
* Mandana Ashouri, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 11/30/2022
* USD 249,989.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to facilitate and enhance the
throughput of soil analyses, consisting of the separation of the light from the
heavy components of soil. These two soil components have different capacities to
sequester carbon, are differently vulnerable to disturbance, and have different
impacts on plant fertility. Therefore, their separation is key to inform soil
management with regard to mitigating climate change and sustaining food
production. New soil analysis products are needed to facilitate low cost, fast,
and accurate testing. The team proposes to prototype an instrument able to turn
a time intensive, manual laboratory method into a high-throughput automatic
process that minimizes operator time, increases laboratory consistency, and
reduces consumables. This proposed instrument will make this analysis possible
on a high number of samples, supporting the adoption at scale of management
practices to sequester carbon in soil and increase soil health, with the
potential for broad societal and commercial impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops an innovative laboratory instrument to automatically perform
the separation of soil into light and heavy components. Soils are recognized as
a valuable resource to sustain food production, because they store vast amounts
of carbon and recycled nutrients. However not all soil is equal, with the light
component recycling faster than the heavy. Thus, component separation is key to
advancing understanding of soil function and to informing regenerative soil
management. The separation of soils into these two components has been limited
by the lack of a fast, reliable, and reproducible method. The team will
prototype and test an innovative instrument to perform this separation across a
broad number of soils spanning the different US ecosystems. This instrument will
enable scientists to study soils focusing on two distinct fractions rather than
bulk soil only, accelerating the advancement of the scientific understanding of
soil processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.