* 2044384
* Integrating Content and Skills from the Humanities into Data Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Eric Vance, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving data science
education using a human-centered approach to teaching the foundations of data
science. The purpose of this project is to understand the impact of efforts
dedicated to broaden recruitment and retention in data science. This effort is
particularly important for students coming from demographic groups that are
currently underrepresented in data science. These future data scientists will
need to analyze not just numbers, but their human contexts and consequences, to
prevent intentional or unintentional misuse of data science, and to communicate
results effectively. This project has been designed to test if these goals might
be achieved by integrating content and skills from the humanities into data
science education. A team-taught interdisciplinary approach will be used to
create and deliver an introductory data science course for undergraduate
students. The course will use real-world social issues to teach important
statistics and coding skills alongside ways of thinking from the humanities.
Examples of such thinking include analysis of the source of data and the harms
and benefits of data collection and analysis. It also includes the rhetorical
aims and strategies of those who use data in politics and policymaking. The
effectiveness of the course in improving student learning will be assessed to
determine how this education model can be improved, adapted, and ultimately
implemented at other colleges and universities. This project has potential to
craft a more inclusive and human-centered approach to teaching the foundations
of data science. By developing a new collaborative model of data science
education that can be adapted nationwide, this project aims to positively impact
STEM education, leading to a more diverse, creative, and innovative national
workforce and a more STEM-literate public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project’s
goal is to develop and assess new pedagogical approaches to collaboratively
teaching data science that effectively incorporate perspectives of both STEM and
humanities disciplines. The resulting introductory data science course will
provide future data science and STEM majors with qualitative reasoning skills
that are traditionally taught in the humanities, provide future humanities
majors with an on-ramp to further study of data science, and provide all
students with statistical and computational skills they can apply in future
courses and in the workforce. This project will collect evidence to answer four
research questions: (1) In what ways and to what degree does the humanities-
focused introductory data science course change attitudes about STEM, data
science, and the humanities? (2) How effective is the course in helping students
achieve student learning outcomes in both data science and the humanities? (3)
How effective is the proposed peer assessment system? (4) To what extent does
the project increase the recruitment and retention of diverse students in data
science, STEM, and the humanities? These questions will be addressed using
surveys of students’ attitudes toward STEM and the humanities, assessments of
student learning outcomes from an interdisciplinary data science course, the
development and evaluation of a peer assessment program, multiple assessments of
teaching effectiveness, and a longitudinal study of student pathways and
performance. Ultimately, the answers to these questions will provide insights on
how to educate more data scientists, improve student learning, and provide non-
scientists with the ability to understand and interpret foundational concepts in
data science. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.