* 2044846
* CAREER: Quantifying Radiation Belt Precipitation and Atmospheric Impacts through D-region Ionosphere Imaging
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Robert Marshall, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 01/31/2026
* USD 450,014.00

High energy particles from the Sun constantly bombard the Earth. Many are
trapped by the Earthâ€™s magnetic field in a region called radiation belt, which
extends from an altitude of about 640 to 58,000 km. These trapped high energy
particles can come down to the upper atmosphere at polar region (a process
called particle precipitation), interacting with atmospheric molecules to create
the colorful aurora. Some very high energy particles can come further down,
depositing energy into the atmosphere and altering the chemistry, and affecting
global energy balance and circulation. The effects of these high energy
particles are not well understood because of lack of measurements of the
particles lost from the radiation belt into the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project outlines an integrated
research and education initiative to quantify particle losses from the radiation
belts and their effects in the upper atmosphere, using an affordable, large-
scale imaging technique. Radiation belt precipitation forms a critical link
between the magnetosphere, ionosphere, and atmosphere. The Principal
Investigator (PI)'s research goal is to quantify the flux, spectra, spatial and
temporal scales of energetic particle precipitation (EPP) events, their chemical
effects in the upper atmosphere, and their effects on radiation belt
populations. In pursuit of these research goals, the PI will: i) establish a
low-cost, autonomous very-low-frequency observation network across Canada to
observe variations due to EPP in the mid- to high-latitude D-region ionosphere;
ii) refine and improve our understanding of EPP signatures and processes and
their relationship to radiation belt losses using an ensemble Kalman Filter-
based inversion technique; and iii) validate results using operational
spacecraft data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's education goal is to build a
robust undergraduate and graduate education and training program in space
physics and engineering at CU Boulder by: i) advising PhD and undergraduate
students while maintaining the PI's track record for recruiting and supporting
female and underrepresented students; ii) incorporating research outcomes into
the graduate space physics curriculum through a new upper-level graduate course;
iii) providing research experience opportunities to high school students; and
iv) promoting broader understanding of space physics in the non-technical
community through a new campus-wide undergraduate course on the space
environment and its effects and a new textbook covering this course
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying precipitating fluxes will also lead
to improved Space Weather nowcasting and forecasting and has implications for
spacecraft design and operations in the radiation belts; orbital dynamics and
drag in Low Earth Orbit; and radiation safety for high-altitude
aircraft.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.