* 2044192
* Environmental Computing and Community Engagement in Undergraduate STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Timothy Glaude, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 01/31/2024
* USD 297,672.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high quality undergraduate
STEM education by introducing a computational, community-oriented component into
STEM programs at Xavier University. Specifically, undergraduate students will
develop microcontroller-based systems for collecting airborne particulate data.
They will work with public school teachers and students to deploy the sensors at
locations around New Orleans and to analyze the resulting data. Airborne
particulates are often the pollutant of greatest concern in minority and other
underserved communities. This project will provide undergraduates and the
students they mentor with learning experiences that are relevant to the students
and their communities. Research has shown positive effects from student
involvement in such real-world, personally relevant STEM projects, including
increases in student interest in STEM-related careers after graduation. As a
result, the project has the potential to broaden student interest in STEM and
increase pursuit of STEM-related majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
two specific aims: 1) to develop microcontroller-based systems for collecting
environmental data (primarily airborne particulates) and deploy the systems at
locations around New Orleans; and (2) to engage Xavier undergraduates in working
with public school teachers and students, and government agencies to apply STEM
methods to address environmental problems. The project will help to address
insufficient spatiotemporal air quality sampling in and around Xavier
University. The project uses a tiered mentoring system in which the project team
members mentor undergraduates, who in turn work with public school teachers and
mentor their students. Utilization-focused evaluation strategies will
accommodate student and teacher feedback to ensure that project activities meet
local interests and needs. The project will make use of internal and external
program tracking and benchmarking metrics to measure student recruitment,
retention, and persistence. Analysis and biannual reporting of quantitative and
qualitative data collected via surveys, interviews, and student tracking will be
used to assess project performance, inform project direction, and evaluate the
effects of program elements on the performance, motivation, and aspirations of
teachers and students. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.