* 2044221
* CAREER: Kinship, Community, and Alternative Networks of Care in Contexts of Precarity
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Kathryn Mariner, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2026
* USD 483,051.00

In times of social isolation, the importance of social relations comes into
sharp relief, particularly for marginalized communities who experience
biomedical, environmental, and public upheaval. As communities adapt to
uncertainty amid a global pandemic and societal unrest, it is imperative to ask
what new cultural forms will arise in the wake of social rupture. This project
will examine how alternative networks of care are forged within marginalized
communities, and whether they are transformed when stressed by heightened social
isolation, precarity, and unrest. The project provides funding for the training
of both graduate and undergraduate students in methods of empirical, scientific
data collection and analysis, and contributes significantly to broadening the
participation of groups historically underrepresented in science. It also builds
scientific infrastructure and capacity through the fostering of research
collaboration between universities and local communities, and increases public
literacy of science and the scientific method by making findings accessible
within a range of public settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of a
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Award, the researcher will conduct a
multi-phase, longitudinal project that explores how African Americans create and
navigate space within rapidly changing social, physical, and political
landscapes. Research questions addressed will include: What is the relationship
between kinship, race, and physical space? How do marginalized individuals build
physical spaces of interpersonal connection, sociality, and kinship within a
context of marginalization? How might physical spaces produce or transform
kinship? The research will unfold in three-phased design that includes archival
methods, photography, and community mapping. This project will advance
scientific knowledge about human social difference and connection, contemporary
urban life, structures of inequality and cooperation, and kinship formation in
times of crisis and precarity. The project contributes to theories of
racialization, social organization, spatial analysis, and urban social
inequality. The research will be paired with a three-year community-based
undergraduate curriculum, which will cultivate intergenerational mentorship
through collaborative research and skill-sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.