* 2044895
* Biophysics of Nuclear Condensates
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Richard Young, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 02/28/2026
* USD 4,000,000.00

Organisms are composed of cells with distinct identities defined by the specific
set of genes that are active in each cell, and the functions of the RNA and
protein molecules that are produced by those genes. A cellâ€™s identity determines
how it interacts with other cells to enable complex physiological functions. The
central goal of this project is to advance discovery of the principles that
control cell state. These principles could also shed new light on how mis-
regulation of gene expression causes cells to malfunction and become diseased.
This knowledge could lay the foundation for future novel interventions in
disorders afflicting millions of people. The project aims to achieve its goal by
collaborative research, education, and outreach activities carried out by a team
of molecular biologists and physical scientists with complementary expertise.
The students and postdoctoral fellows working on the project will learn how to
integrate the life and physical sciences fruitfully and develop as leaders in an
exciting frontier of science. Notably, in partnership with North Carolina
Central University (a historically black college), the project aims to inspire
diverse young students to pursue careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of the proposed work is to deduce general principles that
describe how stochastic non-equilibrium collective processes determine the
spatiotemporal patterns of activity in the nucleus that control gene regulation
and genome architecture, and thus the emergence of cell state. Phase-separated
condensates of proteins and RNA form at particular genomic loci, and this
project aims to determine how non-equilibrium processes regulate their formation
and function. DNA loops encompass active genes and their regulatory elements,
and active and silent regions of the genome are segregated. The project aims to
advance understanding of how interactions among DNA, RNA and proteins underpin
genome architecture, dynamics and function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Genetic Mechanisms program of the Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences Directorate and the Physics of
Living Systems program of the Physics Division in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.