* 2044366
* Using Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality to Enhance Learning in Electromagnetics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* David Ricketts, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2025
* USD 296,865.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving students'
understanding of electricity and magnetism, which are key concepts in physics
and engineering. Electromagnetics (or electromagnetism) (EM), the study of
electrical and magnetic phenomena, is central to scientific research and modern
technologies, such as quantum computing, cellular phones, electric cars, hydro
and wind generators, and the electric power grid. EM is a fundamental topic in
physics and electrical engineering curricula, where it usually constitutes a
required course for all students. However, EM presents several challenges for
students. First, it involves forces and dynamics that are not seen in classical
mechanics or encountered in everyday life. Second, it relies heavily on vector
analysis, and students often spend up to 20 percent of the semester just
learning vector analysis (curl, divergence, etc.) and spherical and cylindrical
coordinates (and calculus in those coordinates). The unintuitive nature of the
topic, along with the focus on unfamiliar mathematical analysis, can hinder
students from developing self-efficacy after a foundational course in EM. In
this project, the project team will develop a curated series of augmented
reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) educational modules (studios) designed to
significantly enhance the learning and application of conceptual knowledge for
students in EM courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By creating an augmented and
virtual environment in which students can interact in a natural manner,
integrated with a curriculum based around learning outcomes, the investigator
intends to transform the educational experience of students in EM. The AR/VR
simulations to be developed will place students in an augmented or virtual
environment, allow them to interact by moving (walking or moving arms/hands) in
the environment, and allow them to see the effects through visualization on a
smartphone or tablet. By using the ability to visualize while at the same time
physically move in an augmented or virtual space, students can more naturally
explore phenomena and relationships in 3D. The studios will cover topics that
align with most EM curricula and build from basic concepts such as "What is a
field?" to advanced topics such as defining and understanding the boundary
conditions and their effect on fields in different materials. The project team
will field-test the AR/VR studios in courses and measure their efficacy through
cognitive labs and assessments. They will also offer workshops and create an
online portal to disseminate the application software and a guide for
integrating the studios into EM courses. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.