* 2044223
* Collaborative Research: RUI: "CSI Devonian" - testing Late Devonian ocean anoxia proxies across different paleoenvironments
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Phoebe Cohen, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 10/31/2024
* USD 76,162.00

How do scientists determine the cause of a mass extinction? Long before the
dinosaurs, marine animals that lived during the Late Devonian time period
(383-359 million years ago) were affected by a series of catastrophic events,
including some of the most severe and widespread die-offs in Earth’s history.
Unlike all of the other major mass extinctions in Earth's history, the reasons
for this series of biological crises still remain unclear. Most scientists think
that these extinction events were due to loss of oxygen from the oceans, but the
severity of oxygen loss can be hard to decipher in the rock record. The tools we
typically use to recognize oxygen loss in marine environments (trace fossils,
microfossils, sediment type, and chemical signatures) were developed for rock
types where oxygen loss is both easy to preserve and to recognize. But do these
tools also work in places where oxygen loss is not as easy to preserve or
recognize in the rock record? This project seeks to determine if the most
commonly used methods for determining ancient ocean oxygen levels work across
all marine environments, or only a subset of them. Through this process, the
investigators will develop a comprehensive set of best practices for assessing
oxygen loss in marine sediments (regardless of geologic setting), which in turn
will help fine-tune the causes of the Late Devonian extinction pulses. This
project will involve faculty and undergraduate researchers across three
undergraduate institutions and will create online learning modules (primarily
videos with accompanying data sets and teacher training materials) aligned with
Next Generation Science Standards for both in-person and remote learning for
grades 6-12. This online dissemination model (called “CSI: Devonian”) not only
expands the geographic reach of this project, but can be used in flipped
classroom teaching environments, homeschooling, and periods of remote learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Late Devonian extinction events at the 372 Ma Frasnian-
Famennian (F-F) boundary and 359 Ma Devonian-Carboniferous (D-C) boundary are
some of the most severe mass extinctions in Earth's history. Despite &gt;150
studies of ocean anoxia across the Kellwasser Events and Hangenberg Black Shale
Event using a variety of geochemical and trace fossil proxies, Late Devonian
ocean anoxia is still a mystery and considerable sample bias, both in terms of
paleogeography and paleoenvironment, hinders this work. We seek funding to form
an internally consistent dataset for rocks that span disparate paleoenvironments
and paleogeographic locations, in order to both calibrate and validate the
utility of the most commonly used ocean anoxia proxies. We propose to develop a
comprehensive set of best practices for evaluating oxygen loss in ancient marine
environments using the same anoxia proxy methodology (total organic carbon,
organic walled microfossils, δ34SPY, δ34SCAS, δ13Ccarb, δ13Corg, trace element
geochemistry, pyrite framboid distributions, and ichnofabrics) across a variety
of sites and existing sample sets so that proxy utility can be assessed in
different paleoenvironments and sedimentary regimes. The sample range will
include baseline pre-anoxic conditions, anoxic conditions, and post-
anoxic/extinction rebound conditions. In addition to determining the best
practices for proxy application (regardless of time period, anoxic event, or
depositional environment), our resulting dataset will help inform
reconstructions of Late Devonian ocean currents, climate, tectonics, ecosystems,
and extinctions. The proposed research is a cooperative effort by three
universities involving multiple international and domestic collaborators and
focuses heavily on undergraduate training and mentorship. The proposal also
seeks to develop an interactive “CSI: Devonian” online learning module geared
towards students in grades 6-12 that is aligned with the Next Generation Science
Standards (NGSS), which focuses on how scientists a) collaborate on research in
real life and b) use empirical evidence to derive scientific explanations of
different phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.