* 2044632
* CAREER: Few-Body Physics in Finite Volume
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Sebastian Koenig, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2026
* USD 255,000.00

Understanding how subatomic matter organizes itself and gives rise to both our
own existence as well as to phenomena observed in the universe is a central goal
of nuclear science that is relevant across many areas of physics. With this
project, the PI and his collaborators will develop novel theoretical techniques
and numerical simulations of quantum systems that will help understand how they
are governed by the underlying fundamental forces. This will in particular
address exotic corners in the landscape of atomic nuclei, where an effective
cluster structure emerges out of the interaction of many constituents. The new
methods will be based on the fascinating observation that real-world properties
of a physical system can be inferred from studying how it changes with the size
of a finite geometry that it is simulated in. They will be relevant not only for
nuclear physics, but also for other areas which exhibit very similar structures.
The project will support and train both graduate and undergraduate students, and
together with the "Computational Modeling in Physics First with Bootstrap"
program it will furthermore enhance high-school physics education. This
collaboration will broaden participation in STEM topics through activities that
integrate physics and programming skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
strengthen the connection of nuclear physics to Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD),
the fundamental theory of the strong interaction. It will achieve this by
studying the connection of different nuclear effective field theories (EFTs),
exploiting their overlapping regimes of applicability to leverage predictive
power towards exotic rare isotopes with few-body halo or cluster structure. It
will furthermore address important questions in the construction of nuclear EFTs
by analyzing how precise and accurate nuclear spectra emerge out of systematic
expansions of the nuclear force. Finally, it will study nuclear continuum
observables (resonances and response functions), covering the richness of
nuclear phenomena and addressing the interplay of nuclear states with
electromagnetic probes that are used to gather experimental information about
nuclei. Finite-volume techniques enable the treatment of all of these aspects in
an elegant and unified way, and they furthermore render insights from the
project relevant for lattice simulations of QCD or cold atomic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.