* 2044815
* CAREER: Extensibility in Theory and Practice
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* John Garrett Morris, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 03/31/2026
* USD 289,709.00

Modern software engineering relies on large ecosystems of independent software
components and libraries. This poses two challenges for the design of
programming languages and language tooling, both of which are addressed by this
project. First, languages must support developing independent components,
including identifying and abstracting reusable components from existing
applications. Second, languages must provide expressive specification mechanisms
to ensure that components are used correctly and that components do not have
unintended interactions. The project's novelties are new programming language
features for modular specification and implementation of program data and
behavior, at all level of the software stack from user-facing applications to
operating system components and hardware support. The project's impacts are
improvements in both software reliability and programmer productivity, as the
project enables language tooling to automatically help programmers identify and
correctly use software components and libraries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has two primary themes. The first is modularity and reuse in high-level
functional programs. The project develops extensible types for data and
computational effects, supporting high-level abstractions including overloading,
generic programming, and extensible effect handlers. The second is modularity
and reuse in low-level and systems programs. The project develops extensible
bit-level specifications of data structures and their layout, targeting
applications including operating system kernels and hardware interfaces. Each of
these themes will only have impact if the resulting language features have
comparable performance with existing approaches. The project uses linear typing
and compile-type specialization to offset runtime costs traditionally associated
with generic and extensible programming techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.