* 2044465
* PFI-RP: Developing Cost Effective, Safe, and Sustainable Batteries for Grid Energy Storage
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Ying Meng, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2023
* USD 546,758.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to develop a cost effective, safe, and
sustainable technology for large scale grid energy storage in the U.S. If
successful, the project will dramatically improve the grid’s resilience toward
electricity demand/supply fluctuations as well as against natural disasters such
as fires and hurricanes that can cripple today’s infrastructure. The project
will accelerate the technological understanding of next generation battery
energy storage devices, through university-industry joint research and
development. Commercialization of affordable and safe energy storage will place
power directly into people’s lives, with storage in every home, community, city
and locations far from the grid, reducing transmission losses and lowering costs
for ratepayers. Positive economic impact will be created from increased small-
business partnerships. Due to skilled labor requirements in product
manufacturing, commercialization will generate new energy-related job
opportunities. Workers trained in this field will gain lasting skills relevant
to the rapidly growing energy industry. In line with the U.S. goal to expand
energy infrastructure over the next few decades, continued expansion and
deployment of distributed energy storage systems would ensure sustained economic
opportunities and employment for communities facing employment uncertainties in
traditional industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to develop and
commercialize a sodium-based all solid-state battery. While today’s stationary
electrical storage is dominated by lithium ion batteries, they can be unsafe,
costly and unsustainable for continued ubiquitous adoption. In this project,
sodium all solid-state batteries may be an alternative, matching today’s
batteries in volumetric energy and power density, with improved safety. Sodium-
based batters may be able to operate over wide temperature ranges, owing to
their use of inorganic non-flammable solid electrolytes alleviating fire hazards
risks. Moreover, sodium all solid-state batteries offer much lower costs from
the use of highly abundant sodium, eliminating expensive elements. This project
will explore fundamental strategies to build a &gt;1 Ah prototype battery with
high volumetric energy densities of &gt; 600 Wh/L and achieve 80% capacity
retention over 1000 cycles. Fabrication costs will be modelled with a target of
&lt;$80/kWh. These goals are achieved through four major tasks: 1) Design new
materials and structures that meet key performance metrics; 2) Develop scalable
manufacturing of materials needed to support future large volume fabrication; 3)
Modelling production workflow to optimize economic viability of designs; and 4)
Evaluation and testing of prototypes that meet target metrics set in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.