* 2044259
* CAREER: Parasitic orchids as models for evolutionary genomics and STEM engagement in Appalachia
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Craig Barrett, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 05/31/2026
* USD 561,538.00

Orchids are well-known as one of the most species-rich plant families and have
tremendous horticultural importance, but their dependence on species-specific
fungal partners for acquiring nutrition at key life stages is less appreciated,
despite the fact that a poor understanding of this partnership can serve as a
significant barrier to cultivation. While most orchids parasitize specific types
of fungi at some stage of their life cycle, over 200 species of these plants
have taken this dependence on fungi to an extreme by completely losing the
ability to photosynthesize. This project will investigate the genomic
consequences of abandoning photosynthesis and the evolution of extreme fungal
host specificity in a comparative context, enabling a better understanding of
how this partnership varies at a genetic level. It will bring together research
and education by creating lesson plans in high school Biology, through a
collaboration among researchers, teachers, and students. This educational
program will focus on rural schools in Appalachia, from which recruitment into
STEM careers remains low, engaging the next generation of STEM researchers in a
region where employment opportunities are changing. The project will result in
sustainable and accessible educational resources for teachers and students that
will be disseminated broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on: 1)
sequencing and evolutionary analysis of plastid genomes for all parasitic
orchids and close relatives; 2) molecular identification and phylogenetic
analyses of fungal hosts in several focal orchid species complexes; 3) densely
sampling the genomes of focal orchid taxa to identify the genomic basis of
adaptation in host preference; and 4) creating an integrated model of genomic
modification and fungal host specificity. The project will further advance the
application of novel, economical, straightforward methods for generating genome-
scale polymorphism data using ISSR amplicon sequencing, for use in the
developing world, at undergraduate institutions, and in K-12 education. The
research program will be integrated with the educational program, in which high
school Biology students will design testable hypotheses based on a set of
‘guided’ questions on a parasitic orchid species native to Appalachia. The PI,
students at West Virginia University, and high school Biology teachers in West
Virginia will collaborate to design and implement lesson plans that will include
web-based tutorials, analysis of genomic data, and scientific communication of
findings. The project will recruit students underrepresented in STEM careers,
including first-generation college students. This award was co-funded by the
Systematics and Biodiversity Science and Evolutionary Processes Clusters in the
Division of Environmental Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.