* 2044660
* CAREER: Knowledge-Rich Neural Text Comprehension and Reasoning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Hanna Hajishirzi, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 549,843.00

Enormous amounts of ever-changing knowledge are available online in diverse
textual styles (e.g., news vs. science text) and diverse formats (knowledge
bases vs. web pages vs. textual documents). This proposal addresses the question
of textual comprehension and reasoning given this diversity: how can artificial
intelligence (AI) help applications comprehend and combine evidence from
variable, evolving sources of textual knowledge to make complex inferences and
draw logical conclusions? Recent advances in deep learning algorithms, large-
scale datasets, and industry-scale computational resources are spurring progress
in many Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, including question answering.
Nevertheless, current models lack the ability to answer complex questions that
require them to reason intelligently across diverse sources and explain their
decisions. Further, these models cannot scale up when task-annotated training
data are scarce and computational resources are limited. Our results will give
rise to the next generation of question answering and fact checking algorithms
that offer rich natural language comprehension using multi-hop and interpretable
reasoning even when annotated training data is scarce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a focus on textual comprehension and reasoning, this
research will integrate capabilities of symbolic AI approaches into current deep
learning algorithms. It will devise hybrid, interpretable algorithms that
understand and reason about textual knowledge across varied formats and styles,
generalize to emerging domains with scarce training data (are robust), and
operate efficiently under resource limitations (are scalable). Toward this end,
this research will focus on four transformative research initiatives: (1)
defining a general-purpose formalism to promote data comprehension through
knowledge-rich neural representations, (2) devising an interpretable, multi-hop
inference and reasoning engine, (3) developing robust and scalable algorithms to
demonstrate generalizable domain and device adaptation, and (4) building
applications and datasets in question answering and fact checking tasks that
will have lasting general-purpose utility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.