* 2044629
* CAREER: Towards Enhanced Grid Robustness: Augmenting Grid-Regulating Capabilities Through Discrete Controls on Emerging Power Technologies
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Hector Pulgar, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This NSF CAREER project aims to improve power system performance and its ability
to uptake increased penetration of renewable energy. This project will bring
transformative change by enhancing grid robustness through activating a large
number of control actuators that would otherwise offer very limited control
capabilities. This will be achieved by designing innovative discrete control
mechanisms in emerging technologies such as energy storage systems, solar power
generation, and wind turbines. The intellectual merits of the project include
advancing knowledge in the field of system dynamics, and a holistic approach
that can handle the constraints and characteristics of very large-scale systems
such as the electric power grid. As broader impacts, this project will provide
insights into related problems from other fields where discrete control is
applicable. In addition, this project will benefit society with a more reliable
power grid with fewer blackouts, and facilitate environmentally friendly power
production leading to fewer public health problems caused by local pollution
from fossil fuel power plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a
framework that extends knowledge of continuous and discrete power grid controls.
Actuation design on emerging power technologies to achieve a fast response, and
tests on both hardware and simulation-based testbeds are considered. Discrete
logics have been explored before for power grid control, but using several
simplifying assumptions such as single inter-area oscillation mode, system
aggregation on both of the oscillation ends, and a unique controllable component
located right on the oscillation path. This project will reexamine this problem
from a new perspective and will develop a new theory that connects power system
oscillatory behavior with momentary shifting of equilibrium points when discrete
power changes are enforced at controllable components. Topics of study will
include large-scale dynamic systems, multiple oscillation modes, multiple
controllable components, and adaptation to disturbances, all geared towards
enhancing power system stability for increased penetration of renewable energy.
An integrated educational plan will leverage the research through specific
projects for undergraduate and pre-college students and through mentoring
programs for Hispanic Americans to support their pursuit for professional or
academic careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.