* 2044397
* Enhanced Teaching and Learning Through Problem-Based Pedagogy in Undergraduate Physics and Environmental Science Courses for Non-Science Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Barbara Balestra, American University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 11/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving physics and
environmental science teaching and learning through evidence-based curriculum
and pedagogy with undergraduate, non-science majors, including undergraduate
elementary teacher candidates. The American University general education program
includes five Habits of Mind course requirements in which Natural-Scientific
Inquiry is one of the areas. This project will revise two science courses that
meet this requirement. Through this IUSE Level 1 Engaged Student Learning
project, these two courses will be revised to include problem-based learning, as
well as to align course content with the Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS). A key feature of this project is the faculty development dimension
associated with implementing the research-based pedagogical strategies in the
revised courses. Thus, this project intends to create and test a replicable
model of physics and environmental science instruction at a medium-sized, urban,
private research university to improve the quality and effectiveness of
undergraduate teaching in physics and environmental science, as well as to
improve undergraduate STEM teaching and learning for non-STEM majors including
preservice teacher candidates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three project
goals. One is to revise existing introductory, non-majors’ physics and
environmental science coursework to include NGSSs-aligned interdisciplinary,
problem-based learning opportunities. The courses will be revised with the
support of the University’s Center on Research, Teaching, &amp; Learning and the
project leadership team. The redesign of the courses will begin in the spring
and summer of 2022. Participating faculty will receive support and guidance in
backward design and research on learning sciences to enhance their course
content and build problem-based instruction into the identified courses. Another
goal is to support faculty to enact the revised coursework through summer
professional development that includes participating faculty and the teaching
assistants of each course. Finally, the project aims to assess and analyze the
outcomes of the work through syllabus analysis, observations of instruction,
interviews with faculty, and assessment of student outcomes through surveys and
focus groups. The project’s research questions focus on students’ science
subject matter knowledge, motivation to learn science, and perceptions and
preparedness to teach science to elementary students. The research plan uses
publicly available, published instruments. The project has the potential to add
to the knowledge of how interdisciplinary, problem-based teaching and learning
in physics and environmental science could support the science learning of non-
STEM majors, including preservice teacher candidates. By enhancing science
literacy with students who are not majoring in a STEM discipline, this project
can benefit society at large. Moreover, improving the subject area knowledge of
future elementary teachers should support improved science instruction in
elementary classrooms. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports
creating, exploring, and implementing promising practices and tools. The Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship (Noyce) Program is providing co-funding for this IUSE:
EHR project to support the project's pre-service teacher preparation goals,
which are well-aligned with Noyce Program goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.