* 2044900
* Collaborative Research: Closed-loop Optimization and Control of Physical Networks Subject to Dynamic Costs, Constraints, and Disturbances
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Jorge Cortes, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project will advance a fundamentally new control framework, utilizing
streams of heterogeneous data to optimize the behavior of complex and dynamic
networked systems with pervasive sensing and computing capabilities, operating
in uncertain and changing environments. Existing workhorse control and
optimization methodologies assume a large separation of time scales, sufficient
to justify complete decoupling of the optimization and control tasks. However,
this assumption is increasingly invalid for modern critical infrastructure and
social platforms. This project represents a new approach for optimal and
reliable decision-making on time scales comparable to the dynamics of the
underlying physical and logistic systems, by using new mathematical principles
of analysis and synthesis to control the collective behavior of agents and the
underlying physical dynamics. The key concept is to continuously drive the
dynamical system towards solution trajectories of optimization problems that
have costs, constraints, and inputs which change over time. In the context of
future transportation networks, the approach is well-aligned with the objective
of moving people and cargo efficiently and sustainably, and with the integration
of connected and autonomous vehicles. Similar application opportunities occur in
areas such as energy, robotics, and autonomous systems, with the common feature
of interconnected cooperative and non-cooperative agents interacting via
multiple heterogeneous physical and virtual networks. The project will also
impact undergraduate and graduate engineering students, and K-12 students
through a comprehensive outreach and educational plan that includes STEM camps,
engaging activities to promote the recruitment of female students and students
from under-served communities and minority schools into the STEM pipeline, and
curriculum enhancement initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional decision-
making architectures in networked systems and critical infrastructures are
grounded on explicit spatio-temporal boundaries between model-based network-
level optimization (producing setpoints in a feed-forward fashion) and local
closed-loop control (regulating the dynamical system to the setpoints while
rejecting disturbances). The modus operandi of these traditional architectures
has worked well in settings where the underlying dynamics of the physical
systems are slower than the solution time required by network-level optimization
tasks, network models and data structures are available, and problem inputs can
be pervasively collected in a timely and reliable manner. Such assumptions,
however, are becoming increasingly inadequate in dynamic settings where batch
approaches fail to solve the underlying optimization problems on a time scale
that matches the dynamics of the networked physical systems, physical models
(embedded into the optimization task) are difficult to estimate accurately, and
(unknown) disturbances evolve rapidly and unpredictably. This project will
generate new mathematical principles for the synthesis and analysis of online
data-based algorithms that drive the collective behavior of agents and physical
dynamics to desired operational points. In particular, the desired equilibrium
points coincide with solution trajectories of time-varying optimization problems
formalizing performance metrics and operational constraints associated with the
dynamical system. The interconnected-system framework under study compresses the
time scales between control and optimization tasks to continuously drive the
dynamic behavior of physical systems to network-optimal and stable points. The
research seeks to expand the class of problems to which this project vision can
be applied, develop predictive controllers with information streams, and
synthesize novel distributed algorithmic solutions for interconnected systems.
The technical approach focuses on networked transportation systems as the arena
to materialize the theoretical and algorithmic advances and provide innovative
control and optimization strategies. Beyond transportation, benefits are
expected to propagate in the broader optimization and control communities, with
applications in multiple domains including control of epidemics, robotic
networks, social networks, and energy infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.