* 2044434
* Building Capacity to Improve Transfer Success in Undergraduate Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Antonio Garcia, Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 02/28/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the two-year to
four-year transfer process for students who aim to earn a bachelor of
engineering degree. Recent research indicates that it is becoming atypical for
students to complete a four year baccalaureate STEM degree directly from high
school. For example, nearly half of all STEM bachelor’s degree recipients attend
a community college at some point in their college career. After they transfer
to a four-year degree program, these students are often required to repeat
courses they successfully completed at community college. Such challenges can be
amplified by complex university admission requirements that may be difficult for
transfer students to navigate. This project seeks to build capacity to address
four goals: 1) Improve transfer efficiency in engineering disciplines; 2)
Improve curricula that result in improved student retention; 3) Improve
participation and persistence among students of color and students from low-
income backgrounds in STEM; and 4) Increase the numbers of engineering graduates
to contribute to the economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Western Interstate
Commission for Higher Education (WICHE) and New Mexico State University (NMSU),
in collaboration with NMSU’s four community colleges, plan to address the goals
by testing the feasibility of using sets of lower-division student learning
outcomes (SLOs) as the basis for block transfer into engineering programs. This
approach contrasts with most institutions’ practice of accepting transfer credit
based on specific courses completed. Project partners hope to demonstrate that
students who transfer can complete an engineering degree without substantially
extending their time to graduation. SLO-based block transfer is the foundation
of the project’s long-term goal of supporting institutions in reforming and
generalizing their transfer practices within the STEM disciplines. These changes
are intended to have direct benefits for students from underrepresented groups
and students from low-income backgrounds. To accomplish this work, NMSU will
identify the student learning outcomes that are critical for students to
complete a four-year electrical engineering degree and map those SLOs to
visually depict their prerequisite course relationships and preferable course
sequencing. The resulting SLO map will inform identification of a lower-division
SLO block to simplify curricula, potentially improving degree progress and
persistence for all students, not just transfer students. WICHE will conduct a
literature review to further identify factors that inhibit transfers within STEM
and engineering disciplines; articulate a theory of change; and recruit leaders
of national organizations and two-year and four-year institutions representing
at least four states to analyze and refine NMSU’s proof of concept and assess
the feasibility of scaling NMSU’s work to additional institutions. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.