* 2044293
* NEON LTAR Workshop:  Identifying Continent Scale Questions and Approaches for Advancing the Sustainable Intensification of US Agriculture
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2022
* G. Philip Robertson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Charlotte Roehm
* 02/28/2022
* USD 98,666.00

New networks of agricultural and wild/natural research sites – including the
National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON), the Long-term Agroecosystem
Network (LTAR), and the Long-term Ecological Research Network (LTER), among
others – have the potential to inform best ways to approach large-scale
problems. This workshop will bring together researchers working in these
networks to identify opportunities and barriers for understanding linkages
across scales, and to explore ways that sites within networks could better
optimize data products, measurements, and new sensor technology to address
emerging national-scale problems. The results of this workshop have implications
for US agriculture as it faces increasing pressures to meet emerging demands for
food and other agricultural products while better conserving natural resources
and protecting the environment. These challenges, faced by agriculture, are
expressed at the farm and ranch scale, but the effect of individual decisions by
individual farmers and ranchers scale rapidly to create regional to national
effects. The proposed exploration of intersectionality across natural/wild and
agricultural systems allows for the identification of sustainable solutions that
convey global benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Michigan -Kellogg
Biological Station is funded to implement a workshop intended to identify ways
to advance continent-scale agricultural science by leveraging resources of the
National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON), the Long-term Agroecosystem
Research Network (LTAR), the Long-term Ecological Research Network (LTER), and
other U.S. agricultural and ecological research sites. Through a series of
facilitated virtual meetings, workshop participants will discuss and identify a)
synthesis activities that can be undertaken now by focused technical working
groups via follow-on workshops and data analysis, and b) prioritized
measurements that could be initiated soon in order to contribute to future
opportunities for addressing important continental-scale questions informed by
data from these networks, yielding broader societal benefits, i.e., the
sustainable intensification of agriculture. Participants will explore scientific
questions reliant on scaling (spatial or temporal), and questions related to
interoperability among network nodes, data harmonization, measurement
technologies, training, and organizational needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.