* 2044818
* CAREER: Plant traits link disturbance history to carbon uptake across spatiotemporal scales
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Kyla Dahlin, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 05/31/2026
* USD 770,894.00

When more carbon dioxide is released than can be absorbed by Earth’s land and
water, the extra carbon dioxide builds up in the atmosphere and absorbs energy.
This extra energy warms the atmosphere and lets it hold more water vapor,
causing global climate change. Changes in climate and weather, in turn, impact
ecosystems and the people who rely on them. To understand and predict the
impacts of climate change, a key first step is to understand how much carbon
dioxide is absorbed by the Earth’s land and water. On land, most carbon dioxide
is taken up by plants, but this uptake is especially difficult to predict
because plants differ in their abilities to absorb carbon and to respond to
changes in the environment. This CAREER award takes a new approach to this
challenge by combining historical data from satellites, new data from airborne
sensors, and computer modeling to map forest carbon uptake in eastern U.S.
forests. This award will be integrated with education and outreach activities,
including a field course, teaching modules, digital outreach materials, and
public writing, that invite students of all ages to learn about macrosystems
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current estimates of carbon uptake are limited by
a lack of mechanistic understanding of the connections between disturbance,
plant physiological and structural traits (‘plant traits’), and gross primary
production (GPP). This CAREER award develops the concept of ‘disturbance
syndromes’ in forest ecosystems, which posits that temporal patterns of response
to disturbances may be similar even among diverse ecosystems. The project
targets three key questions: (1) How much does disturbance syndrome explain
current distributions of plant traits?; (2) Which plant traits are most
important to predicting GPP?; and (3) Where will disturbance syndromes improve
scaled up estimates of GPP? Using nearly 40 years of Landsat satellite data, the
project will map disturbance syndromes across eastern U.S. forests. These maps
of disturbance syndromes, along with mapped environmental gradients, will inform
a predictive model of GPP mediated by plant trait distributions estimated using
the National Ecological Observatory Network’s Airborne Observation Platform.
Through the integration of research and education objectives, this project aims
to cultivate a more inclusive, diverse, and technically skilled community to
understand terrestrial ecosystem patterns and processes and to accelerate the
pace of innovation in macrosystems ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.