* 2044107
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A:CaReDeX: Enabling Disaster Resilience in Aging Communities via a  Secure Data Exchange
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Nikil Dutt, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,999.00

Disasters over the years have shown that a disproportionate number of older
adults suffer fatalities and injuries during extreme events. A large number of
older adults live in age-friendly communities and senior health facilities
(SHFs) that promote independent living. During a crisis, older adults are often
unable to shelter safely in place or evacuate on their own due to a range of
physical conditions (need for life-sustaining equipment, impaired mobility) and
cognitive afflictions (e.g. dementia, Alzheimer’s). Seamless access to
information about the living facilities (e.g., floor plans, operational status,
number of residents) and about the residents (e.g.,health conditions such as
need for dialysis, oxygen, personal objects to reduce anxiety) can empower first
responders to improve response outcomes during disasters. Such information,
typically held by caregivers and in the logs maintained by the organizations, is
inaccessible and/or unavailable at the time of response. This proposal seeks to
create a novel community contributed data-exchange platform, entitled CareDEX,
that will empower organizations to readily assimilate, ingest, store and
exchange information, both apriori and in real-time, with response agencies to
protect and care for the elderly in extreme events. Using CareDEX, SHFs will be
able to share information about an individual’s changing health conditions,
their personalized needs and identify those in need of specialized triage and
critical care. Given the sensitive nature of personal information, e.g. health
profiles, ability status, CareDEX will incorporate techniques to balance the
need for individual privacy with authorized release of information to responders
when needed. The pilot 4-month planning effort will involve 2 workshops and a
demonstration pilot study that will focus on bringing stakeholders from the
emergency response and senior living communities to identify specific
information needs, design protocols for collection and sharing of such data, and
explore privacy/security concerns. The workshops and pilot will address
simulated emergency scenarios, e.g a wildfire event requiring evacuation of
seniors and a complex event when the fire occurs during a pandemic such as
Covid19. The goal of the workshops would be to help identify the requirements
which will guide the research, design, and development of CareDEX. The planning
workshops will engage a diverse group of students and postdoctoral researchers
and thereby contribute to the education of the next generation of citizens in
interdisciplinary topics that are relevant to communities
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to Track B - CIVIC
Innovation Challenge - Resilience to Natural Disasters a collaboration with NSF
and the Department of Homeland Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.