* 2044558
* Deciphering and engineering an unprecedented fungal biosynthetic pathway for expanded chemical diversity in flavonoids
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Jixun Zhan, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/29/2024
* USD 390,665.00

Flavonoids are a large family of natural products that provide a variety of
human health benefits. How fungi generate flavonoids remains unknown, making it
challenging to engineer structurally diverse flavonoids. This project will
investigate the biosynthetic pathway for production of a novel flavonoid,
chlorflavonin in the fungus Aspergillus candidus. The insight gained will be
used to engineer the pathway to create new flavonoids. Graduate, undergraduate
and high school students will receive training. A research mentoring program
will be established to target underrepresented high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to answer two fundamental
scientific questions. How do fungi make flavonoids? Can fungal flavonoid
biosynthetic pathways be engineered to yield novel analogs with unnatural
structural features? The chlorflavonin biosynthetic enzymes will be
characterized and the sequence of reactions will be investigated. The potential
of the halogenase to catalyze the formation of halogenated flavonoids will be
evaluated. Other tailoring enzymes will further expand the toolbox of
biocatalysts for flavonoid modification. The fundamental knowledge to be gained
will facilitate the understanding of the rules of natural product assembly in
fungi. Searching for new structures from nature is time-consuming and resource-
intensive. This research may provide an effective way to expand the chemical
diversity in flavonoids. The novel flavonoids may yield new-generation
antimicrobials with applications in agriculture, human health, cosmetics, and
the pharmaceutical industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.