* 2044557
* CAREER: Higher Algebra and Symplectic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2027
* Hiro Tanaka, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2027
* USD 239,370.00

Symplectic geometry is a geometry that efficiently encodes laws of motion
dictating classical problems in physics. The last few decades have seen a burst
of activity in the field thanks to the emergence of powerful algebraic tools
called Fukaya categories. At the same time, the development of a new language
for “spectral algebra”—an algebra that mixes traditional notions of adding and
multiplying with more contemporary tools for studying shapes of arbitrarily high
dimensions—has allowed us to organize sophisticated structures using algebraic
intuitions. These two storylines have been highly fruitful, but have yet to
cross-pollinate. This project aims to construct a long-sought-after bridge, to
not only produce spectral methods for studying symplectic geometry, but to
establish symplectic tools for studying spectral algebra. The project will also
support numerous educational initiatives aimed at enriching and diversifying the
mathematics community. These include the creation of a math podcast for and by
students, a workshop for students to learn contemporary mathematical techniques
of interest, and various co-curricular activities aimed at fostering communities
of emerging mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The technical and
collaborative heart of the project is the formalization of factorizable
structures on moduli stacks of broken holomorphic objects. By showing that the
usual moduli of holomorphic objects appearing in the Floer theory of Liouville
sectors give rise to deformation problems encoded in factorizable sheaves on the
moduli stacks, the project aims to construct spectral wrapped Fukaya categories
for Liouville sectors as solutions to these deformation
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.