* 2044713
* CAREER: Tailoring Thermal Conductivity of Soft Magnetic Nanomaterials for Wireless Neuromodulation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2026
* Gabriela Romero Uribe, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2026
* USD 483,205.00

The treatment of neurological disorders and psychiatric conditions requires
precise control of neural cell signaling; however, existing technologies to
control neural activity lack specificity or are damaging to brain tissues,
causing undesirable side effects. This NSF CAREER project aims to develop a new
nanotechnology to selectively control neural activity for the next generation of
brain malfunction therapies, e.g., the treatment of epilepsy. The project will
(1) lead to a completely new paradigm for the precise control of neural
activity, (2) provide the research community with a new platform for mapping
brain circuits to improve our understanding of complex neural networks, (3)
enable the on-demand localized release of drugs required for the next generation
of therapies, and (4) accelerate the development of wireless technologies for
the treatment of brain malfunctions. As part of an education objective to
integrate this research into an educational program designed to increase student
interest and improve performance in STEM fields, the investigator will (1)
develop new student-centered learning activities to promote metacognition
(“learning to learn”) in undergraduate Biotransport Phenomena education, (2)
provide research access and training in nanoscale heat and mass transport to
local high school teachers, (3) create developmentally appropriate standards-
based high school activities and lessons reaching to approximately 2,000 local
high school students in San Antonio and (4) continue to recruit and mentor
underrepresented minority students in engineering by serving as a Latina role
model in academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s long-term research
goal is to build an innovative and productive research program to investigate
nanoscale transport phenomena principles for the development of novel
neuromodulation and new nanotechnological platforms to revolutionize the precise
control of neural networks. Toward this goal, this CAREER project will develop a
soft magnetic nanomaterials platform to enable a stable pharmacological, non-
toxic, targetable strategy for neuromodulation by transducing alternating
magnetic fields into chemical stimulus. The project addresses the need for a
technique for evoking and inhibiting neural activity on demand to understand the
basic biology of neural circuit dynamics that considers cell-type specificity
but does not require pharmacological agents, delivery of transgenes, or
implantable devices that are damaging to biological tissue. This will be
accomplished by surface engineering magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) with
biocompatible temperature responsive polymer brushes loaded with neuromodulatory
compounds. The heat generated by the MNPs under alternating magnetic fields
(AMFs) will trigger conformational changes in their polymer coating releasing
loaded neuromodulators. The local release of neuromodulatory compounds will
enhance or inhibit specific cell membrane receptors inducing neural
depolarization. The system will be investigated for the possible management of
epileptic seizures by modulating hippocampal neural activity on-demand through
the local release of verapamil and bay-K8644 from MNPs targeted to the cell
membrane. The research plan is organized under three aims: (1) Investigate the
synthesis and characterization of biocompatible temperature-responsive polymer
brushes, (2) Investigate polymer brushes coatings on magnetic nanoparticles
surface for the entrapment of neuromodulatory compounds and its on-demand
release, and (3) Design a magnetothermal pharmacological paradigm for precise
modulation of neural activity,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.