* 2044096
* Developing a Bioinformatics Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience for Online Students
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Sara Brownell, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 02/29/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing and evaluating
opportunities for students in online degree programs to participate in authentic
STEM research experiences. Participation in research has been shown to increase
student retention and performance STEM. This project intends to expand research
experiences to online students. Specifically, the project team aims to develop a
course-based undergraduate research experience (CURE) for students in online
biology degree programs, which typically do not include a research component.
The CURE will use bioinformatics as the research methodology. Bioinformatics is
the collection and analysis of biological data. Thus, a bioinformatics CURE will
enable students to conduct authentic research with only a computer and an
internet connection. The project intends to increase opportunities for inquiry-
based computational research that can be easily adopted by other institutions,
potentially increasing access to research for thousands of students. Students in
online degree programs are more likely to be women, first generation students,
low income, rural, working full-time, and/or primary caregivers. Thus, an online
CURE experience has the potential to diversify who participates in science. As a
result, this online CURE has the potential to broaden the diversity of
individuals who engage in computational life sciences
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to: 1) develop an online
computational life sciences CURE focused on training in computer programming,
genetics, statistics, and reproducibility; and 2) assess the impact of the
online computational life sciences CURE on students’ scientific research goals
and learning goals. Students will learn basic computational command line skills,
read primary literature, develop hypotheses, use software to produce results,
and interpret those results. The research aim of this project is rooted in
biological questions relevant to datasets that change annually. Students will be
asked to assess how changing bioinformatics parameters affect the biological
interpretations of their results. This project is intended to yield scientific
research findings regarding the effects of different parameters on biological
inference in next generation sequencing data. Students will be engaging in
scientific research and it is hoped that the research that they conduct will be
compiled into a publishable manuscript. Further, through the assessment of this
online CURE, the project team anticipates defining the impacts of an online CURE
on undergraduate students, thus contributing to understanding the impact of
CUREs in undergraduate biology education. The project team will assess students’
bioinformatics skills, as well as how the CURE affects their self-identity as a
scientist and their likelihood to pursue a career in science. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.