* 2044668
* PFI-TT: Noninvasive, compact, internal body thermometer
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Zoya Popovic, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 04/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project addresses the need for a sensor that can
measure temperature inside the body several centimeters under the skin, for
example the temperature of the heart or the brain. Internal body temperature is
synchronized with sleep, and if body temperature is out of phase with the
circadian cycle, relatively simple external stimuli can be applied to improve
sleep. Similar arguments can be made for other diseases of contemporary society,
such as obesity, fertility, and depression, and can be expanded beyond wellness
to clinical applications such as neo-natal care and heat treatment of cancers.
The value proposition is in enabling non-invasive, wearable, internal body
temperature measurements with the highest accuracy and reliability on the
market. The commercial potential of the proposed device is very large: 60
million US adults report frequent difficulty sleeping, with estimated indirect
costs from insomnia due to loss of productivity as high as $60 billion annually.
Once wearable sensor prototypes are developed, potential customers include
medical device manufacturers and clinics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will produce a prototype of a low-cost, portable, internal body
thermometer for personal wellness applications. The thermometer is based on the
fundamental principle of passive electromagnetic measurements made by a device
placed on the skin and operating in the microwave frequency range. The major
challenge is detecting very small power levels radiated from deep tissue layers
as opposed to measurements on the skin. The engineering challenge and
intellectual merit lie in further developing the proof-of-principle hardware and
algorithms to achieve a commercially viable device ready for marketing.
Overcoming this challenge will result in specifications in terms of prototype
temperature sensitivity, spatial resolution, battery life, robustness, and ease
of use. Engineering challenges include designing an ultra-low noise receiver,
implementing radio-frequency interference mitigation techniques, and designing
flexible probe antennas conformal to the skin on different parts of the body,
all with a focus on low-power compact implementations. After leveraging off-the-
shelf components in the first phase, specialized chips will later be designed.
The goal is to demonstrate an inexpensive device that can ultimately be
disposable. The device is intended for mobile and long-term monitoring
applications, with a proven market potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.