* 2044822
* CAREER: Supporting Interaction with Dynamic Virtual Reality Experiences for People with Visual Impairments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Kyle Rector, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2022
* USD 6,360.00

Virtual reality (VR) is a computer-generated simulation that inserts a person
into a 3D environment. VR has applications in education, training,
rehabilitation, tourism, and other domains. However, because many VR experiences
rely on vision, making them inaccessible to people with visual impairments,
research is needed in how to make these experiences more widely available. One
key barrier to accessibility is that people using VR frequently interact with
objects in the simulation that move. This project will develop methods for
incorporating sound, vibration, and other cues to help people with visual
impairments locate and interact with virtual objects more effectively. Based on
this work, the project team will create guidelines and tools software developers
can use to create more accessible VR experiences, allowing people with visual
impairments to reap their educational, immersive, and social benefits. The team
will work closely with people with visual impairments as both participants and
collaborators, including providing opportunities for youth with visual
impairments to participate in computing through an annual computing
camp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to help people with
visual impairments understand and act on virtual reality environments that have
moving targets. To meet these goals, the team will focus on three key components
of VR interaction: 1) helping people accurately select nearby targets on a
vertical plane, 2) accurately depicting the time-to-contact of approaching
targets, and 3) using positional metaphors to indicate the location of multiple
virtual targets simultaneously. Addressing each objective requires innovation in
how to provide information to users with visual impairments, how to process
input from users with visual impairments, and how to model a user's intent. The
team will develop the virtual reality experiences using user-centered design
approaches and conduct both lab and longitudinal evaluations of the solutions to
each challenge. The project's education plan includes teaching computing
concepts to youth with visual impairments, disseminating the research to less
technology-centric fields, and integrating accessibility topics into computing
coursework. This research will address unsolved problems in making virtual
reality accessible to people with visual impairments, set guidelines for
accessible virtual reality experiences based on empirical evidence, and develop
an open-source toolkit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.