* 2044932
* CAREER: Analytical Investigation of the Spatiotemporal Heterogeneities in Particulate Porous Electrodes toward Precision Electrochemical Kinetics
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Peng Bai, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 01/31/2026
* USD 503,025.00

Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have revolutionized the way people live by enabling
transformative electronic devices, portable power, and electric vehicles. They
are popular choices of energy storage technologies, wherever high energy
density, high power density and system simplicity are required. However, elusive
safety accidents, such as thermal runaways, have become an urgent concern.
Failures of LIBs and other high-energy batteries always originate from
microscopic heterogeneities, which are difficult to be monitored, analyzed, and
predicted by existing methods. Investigations of these heterogeneities at the
mesoscale by connecting the single-particle level materials behaviors with the
device-level responses, will enable more accurate understanding and more
effective management of batteries. The insights and knowledge generated from
this study will help to design safer batteries, in which severe early
degradation and accidents can be avoided. This project will generate new
understanding of electrochemical energy systems that can benefit the education
of graduate, undergraduate and K-12 students. As part of the project, a summer
program will be established that will target underrepresented high school age
students and high school teachers using engineering concepts of equilibrium and
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fundamental engineering science research
project focuses on the less understood spatiotemporal heterogeneities in battery
electrodes, which are hypothesized to be responsible for the large discrepancies
between the theoretical and the experimental kinetic parameters that control the
electrode processes. The project will utilize operando experiments using visible
light and laser Raman microscopes allow the dynamic quantification of
heterogeneities among hundreds of particles in realistic electrodes to evaluate
the true local current densities via direct derivative image analysis. Physics-
based models without presumptions on the rate-limiting step allow consistent
determination of the true local kinetic parameters and the rate-limiting step of
the electrode processes, which will resolve the long-standing discrepancies and
change the prevailing understandings in this field. The deeply integrated
experimental and theoretical approaches allow multiple-point calibrations to
warrant a reliable framework, which can provide more effective guidance for the
holistic design of battery materials and electrodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.