* 2044279
* Improving the Quality of Teaching Assistant Feedback to Undergraduate Students in Introductory Computer Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Vinhthuy Phan, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,333.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating the
integration of existing submission and feedback delivery systems with teaching
assistant (TA) training. Specifically, this work will explore the use of natural
language processing techniques to provide feedback to TAs as they provide
written feedback about students’ work in introductory computer science courses.
The project will investigate different ways to train TAs with direct instruction
on effective feedback practices and culturally responsive teaching methods. This
work has the potential to address the growing need for TAs to provide high-
quality feedback, as computing class sizes are growing faster than faculty
hiring. Low-quality feedback has been shown to negatively impact student success
and willingness to continue in the discipline. Thus, improving the quality of TA
feedback in computing courses could help more students to successfully enter the
computing workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated submission and TA
training system will consist of a server that communicates with an Integrated
Development Environment via custom-built plug-ins to facilitate in-class
communication between students, instructors, and TAs. Human-computer-interaction
techniques will be used to design unobtrusive dashboards that will enable
instructors to efficiently monitor TA feedback. The project’s research plan will
investigate how the new training system changes TA perspectives, alters feedback
practices, and affects undergraduate learning. The project will also investigate
strategies for data visualization that enable efficient monitoring of TA
performance. The deliverables will include a series of TA training modules, a
dataset of TA feedback samples together with student ratings, a natural language
processing classifier that recognizes helpful or unhelpful feedback, and a
dashboard that shows TA feedback performance to instructors. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.