* 2044020
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Feedback between training and practice in conceptualizations of phenotypic variation among medical trainees
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Andrea Ballestero, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 08/31/2023
* USD 25,200.00

How humans make sense of the world around them depends on a combination of
experience and instruction. Medical education often relies on typologies and
thresholds to inform medical practice. What happens when experiences of more
graded variation in human phenotypes contradicts typological medical
instruction? How do traineesâ€™ experiences in care delivery feedback on
instruction centered on typologies? How do emergent technologies shape
understandings of phenotypic variation and the effects of such understandings on
practice? This project merges theory from medical anthropology, science and
technology studies, and the anthropology of education to inform an understanding
of how characterization of human variation takes shape in reaction to education
and experience. Project findings will be broadly disseminated to academic and
non-academic audiences and the project will train a graduate student in
anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection, and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation project will leverage
15 months of ethnographic research among medical trainees, including participant
observation, semi-structured interviews, oral history interviews, and textual
analysis of pedagogical materials, to: 1) capture how trainees are taught to
understand human variation, 2) investigate how scientific technologies and
instruments reflect and affect understanding of human variation in care
delivery, and 3) clarify how personal experience interacting with and providing
care for varied subjects feeds back on concepts and typologies of human
variation. By paying explicit attention to the dynamics of how concepts of
variability are shaped and reshaped in reaction to education, experience, and
technology, this project will advance a synthetic understanding of how humans
mobilize concepts of variation in everyday practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.