* 2044642
* PFI-TT: Using Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Natural Language Processing (NLP) to Enhance Writing for Publication
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Stephanie Link, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 04/30/2024
* USD 265,955.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is greater access for novice research
writers (e.g., early-career researchers and students) to high-level, responsive
training in scientific writing and, as a result, a more diverse, equitable and
inclusive playing field for acceptance of grant applications and publication of
peer-reviewed journal articles. Research institutions often struggle to provide
meaningful support for their novice writers. Such support typically requires
prohibitively expensive human resources to provide training on the technical
expectations of scientific writing and, crucially, to evaluate and provide
feedback on writing. However, research institutions frequently have open budgets
for new educational technologies that address major pain points within their
community, creating a strong product-market fit for a software that includes a
linguistically-grounded instructional curriculum for scientific writing. The
proposed technology is trained to recognize and provide argument-level feedback.
As such, the technology is expected to increase the capacity to advance writing,
offset training burden, and enhance access to resources for underrepresented
populations, all in one tool, by providing responsive, on-demand instruction and
feedback on writing for publication.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
two main research opportunities: the implementation of advanced automated
writing feedback and the use of neural networks for text classification and
feedback generation. To date, existing writing support tools that provide
automated feedback address only surface-level grammar and mechanics. From a
theoretical perspective, neural networks are underexplored for text
classification and feedback generation, especially for scholarly writing. This
project is expected to advance knowledge in two primary ways: (1) by
demonstrating how automated feedback can be generated beyond feedback on
surface-level grammar and mechanics through a focus on language specific to
scientific argumentation and description and (2) by highlighting how pattern
markup and a deep neural network approach to machine learning can be used to
produce feedback specific to peer-reviewed journal articles and grant
applications. These aims will be achieved by developing an automated writing
feedback engine that will be integrated into the technology and then validated
using an argument-based framework to evaluate and enhance the engineâ€™s accuracy
and usability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.