* 2044888
* CAREER: An AI Empowered Architecture-Centric Framework for Systematic Software-Performance Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Lu xiao, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 298,311.00

Software performance is a critical quality attribute measured by the timeliness,
responsiveness, and resource consumption of a system at run-time. Performance
issues can lead to severe consequences, including budget overrun, project delay,
and market loss. In past decades, Mooreâ€™s Law greatly benefited software
performance by offering exponentially more powerful hardware resources.
Unfortunately, in recent years, advancement on the hardware side is reaching
physical limitations. Therefore, the need for transforming performance-
engineering techniques on the software side becomes more critical and urgent.
This research aims to develop a framework composed of cutting-edge techniques
that can transform how practitioners manage, identify, and address real-life
software performance issues.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on three
gaps in the current research and practice of software performance engineering.
First, there is a lack of a large-scale database and comprehensive understanding
of common performance issues in real-world projects. Second, despite the
ubiquity of software architecture, there is inadequate understanding of how
complicated architectural connections contribute to performance issues and of
how fixing harmful connections leads to rewarding optimization. Finally, there
is a lack of a systematic understanding of different levels of optimization
tactics -- reusable resolution patterns -- for addressing real-life performance
issues with different concerning scopes. This project bridges these gaps through
three progressive research thrusts. Thrust 1 will construct and maintain an open
database of common types of real-life performance issues, leveraging natural-
language-processing techniques. Thrust 2 will contribute an architecture-centric
approach that identifies architecturally connected performance-optimization
opportunities, based on novel graph-embedding techniques. The proposed approach
will seamlessly integrate architecture modeling and performance analysis. Thrust
3 will provide developers with actionable guidance in mitigating performance
issues. This thrust will first curate multi-level performance optimization
tactics from extensive empirical studies, and then build a recommender system to
suggest the proper tactics to developers in performance
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.