* 2044611
* PFI-RP: Automatic detection of buried explosives using a multi-sensor smart aerial vehicle
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Daniel Lathrop, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 12/31/2023
* USD 599,835.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project aims to assist in humanitarian,
scientific, and defense endeavors by automatically detecting buried explosives
using a sensor-fused smart unmanned aircraft. Inconsistent buried explosives
detection techniques have made remediation slow and stymied agricultural
development in countries most impacted by minefields. The proposed technology
offers an opportunity to decrease the cost of buried explosives detection by
employing multiple sensors on a single platform and reducing the number of
operators needed to conduct the automated aerial survey. Educational impacts of
this project include the entrepreneurial training of the project’s PhD student,
and local scientific outreach to underrepresented communities through hands-on
demonstrations of the project’s technology prototype to inspire interest in
geophysics, machine learning, and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will further the geophysical understanding of the near-surface (0-2 meters) by
providing a method for quickly evaluating which set of instruments will yield
the highest buried target identification accuracy. The unmanned aircraft will
produce a composite inversion of a field area using machine learning. Optimally
combining data from several geophysical instruments through machine learning can
increase the confidence of inferences. Insights from this project may help
improve inferences based on multiple, complementary geophysical datasets across
the geosciences. Using multiple machine learning algorithms in the research and
development portion of this project will help inform future applications. This
project will help bridge the gap of geophysical data collection and inversions
in a real-time and environment-adaptable way. Beyond the scope of buried
explosives detection, this project’s technology platform and deep learning
package will enable end-users to better differentiate what geologic and man-made
materials are present in the subsurface using geophysical data, especially in
environments where ground-based fieldwork is costly or
hazardous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.