* 2044870
* CAREER: A New Science of Skeletal and Physiological Systems: using integrated approaches to elucidate mineralized tissue properties and behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2025
* Alix Deymier, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2025
* USD 336,743.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This career program seeks to
integrate materials science, biology, and chemistry to elucidate the role of
hydrogen phosphate on the dissolution of bone, an important prototypical and
ubiquitous biomaterial. This program applies multi-scale multi-model techniques
to understand how hydrogen phosphate affects bone structure, composition, and
function during dissolution. Bone provides structural support, but it also
provides buffering ions like carbonate and hydrogen phosphate that are necessary
to regulate changes in environmental acidity. Despite being essential for
acid/base regulation, the mechanism by which bone mineral is dissolved remains
unclear. This research program will establish the scientific foundation
necessary to manipulate and produce complex buffering materials that can be used
for environmental remediation as well as new treatments of acid/base diseases,
like acidosis, improving the quality of life of millions of individuals. In
addition, the investigator’s self-efficacy education program uses the psychology
concept of self-efficacy to integrate research and education. By facilitating
access to STEM environments, increasing participation through role modelling,
and supporting students via mentoring the investigator will maximize the factors
that build confidence through self-efficacy and promote involvement in STEM.
STEM access will involve positive research experiences in the investigator’s lab
for undergraduate, graduate, medical and dental students. “Biomaterials” and
“Dance &amp; Physics” classes will further engage these students in STEM
didactic activities. The Society of Women Engineers will offer a platform for
role modeling at K-12 and undergraduate levels. A scaffolded mentoring program
will provide students with the support needed to successfully meet future
professional challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bone is an extraordinarily complex biomaterial
that fulfills biological, chemical, and mechanical roles. It provides obvious
structural support but also regulates important biochemical and physiological
processes including acid/base equilibrium. Dissolution of the ceramic phase of
bone is essential for pH regulation via release of buffering ions like the well-
studied carbonate and the mostly overlooked hydrogen phosphate. The mechanism of
bone mineral dissolution, which controls the kinetics and extent of the ionic
release, remains elusive due to lack of transdisciplinary vocabulary, knowledge,
and technical approaches. The PI’s career vision is to integrate materials
science, biology, and chemistry into a new science of skeletal &amp;
physiological systems (SaPS) to achieve a revolutionary understanding of the
interplay between the physiological environment and bone composition, structure,
and function. Bone mineral, a calcium apatite, is rich in hydrogen phosphate,
suggesting that this ion plays a key role. The PIs research goal is to fully
elucidate the relationship between skeletal composition, especially in terms of
hydrogen phosphate ionic content, structure, and physiological acid/base
regulation by developing a laboratory that can apply advanced transdisciplinary
materials characterization tools and investigative methods. In vitro, ex vivo,
and in vivo skeletal models will be used to examine how hydrogen phosphate
affects the (1) buffering response, (2) crystal structure, and (3) functional
mechanics of bone and bone mineral to unravel hydrogen phosphate--mediated
dissolution and its relationship to bone structure property relations and
function. Exposure of biomimetic bone apatite and individual bones to simulated
body fluid with varying pHs will be employed to measure the effect of bone
mineral composition on pH regulation as well as its capacity for ion exchange.
These models as well as an in vivo murine model of decreased physiological pH
will be examined via X-ray tomography and high-energy X-ray diffraction (XRD) to
elucidate the effects of depressed physiological pH and hydrogen phosphate
content on the macro-, micro-, and nano-structure of bone. Finally, mechanics of
bone and bone mineral will be probed using a multi-scale approach combining XRD,
digital image correlation, and whole bone bending to investigate functional
changes induced by acid dissolution of bone mineral. Hierarchical data obtained
across all three models will be integrated into a unified model describing the
relationship between bone mineral composition, structure, and bone functionality
in acidic environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.