* 2044729
* PFI-TT: Storage stable, biopolymer-modified, recycled tire rubber asphalt additives for resilient and sustainable asphalt pavements
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Eric Cochran, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 04/30/2024
* USD 281,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop a pelletized biopolymer-
modified product suitable for replacing the synthetic rubbers used in polymer
modified asphalt pavements. Each year, about 80 million tons of asphalt pavement
is constructed in the U. S. Hight traffic volume requires the resiliency
provided by polymer modification. Approximately 400,000,000 pounds of synthetic
rubbers are used for this purpose. At the same time, 250,000,000 end-of-life
tires are generated each year, rich in both natural and synthetic rubbers. This
project will develop an engineered, recycled tire product that replaces polymers
in asphalt, reducing energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. This
technology will be achieved by solving a long-standing storage stability
challenge in tire rubber-modified asphalts by compounding with biopolymers to
match the density of the rubber with the asphalt. The commercial opportunity is
estimated to be $0.3 - 1 billion across the construction, automotive, and
consumer markets. The project will broaden participation of underrepresented
groups and provide valuable practical training in applied research, technology
transfer, and entrepreneurship to the students assigned to the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a pelletized ground tire
rubber product engineered to maintain storage stability in molten asphalt under
quiescent conditions while enhancing the asphalt binder properties to meet
polymer modified asphalt specifications. The primary challenge in state-of-the-
art ground tire rubber asphalt modification is the settling of rubber particles
over time due to the density mismatch. The intellectual merit of this project is
to generate foundational knowledge connecting thermoset rubbers to their density
modification though the use of polymer additives and processing represents. The
key innovation of this project is the recognition that both tires and asphalt
are heterogeneous materials that contain both polar and non-polar domains.
Accordingly, a ground tire rubber (GTR)-modification framework based upon both
polar and non-polar polymer modifiers may enable polymer compounding technology
to function with any GTR/asphalt binder combination by adjusting the polymer
formulation. Storage stability of prototype modified GTRs will be evaluated in
asphalt through both legacy ring-and-ball testing as well as new scanning
methods. This technology will establish the framework of how the polymer
additive characteristics impact the GTR properties with respect to their use as
asphalt modifiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.