* 2044449
* Just-in-Time, Online, Intelligent Tutoring for Automated System Integration: Developing a Problem-Solving Environment that Enhances Student Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Susan Pedersen, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating technology-based
tools that help undergraduate students and new engineers learn to integrate
automated systems. Automated system integration involves designing and building
systems to automate industrial processes in areas such as manufacturing,
agriculture, energy, and transportation. For example, to build a robotic welding
system, engineers need to integrate components such as a robot, conveyor,
fixture, sensors, and actuators for loading and unloading parts. Learning to
integrate components and devices to form an automated system can take many
years. To maintain the nation’s economic competitiveness in an increasingly
automated world, the U.S. needs many more engineers and technicians with system
integration skills. This project will make it possible for students and new
engineers to access instructional support as they need it, thus potentially
shortening the time needed to develop system integration expertise and better
preparing students for success in industrial automation-related
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create and evaluate an
integrated, adaptive, and web-based problem-solving environment (I-PSE) to
alleviate challenges in learning about automated system integration, enhance
students’ learning experience, and generate knowledge to bridge the gaps in
problem-solving environment and intelligent tutoring system design and
implementation. The I-PSE will integrate three modules: (1) an intelligent
tutoring system, (2) virtual/remote labs, and (3) interactive simulations. These
modules will be inter-connected and designed to support one another to increase
user interaction and engagement. During I-PSE development and testing, data will
be collected for formative and summative evaluation. Analysis of these data will
also generate new knowledge about: how learners acquire system integration
problem solving skills; when and how much just-in-time instructional support
should be provided to enable learning to occur; and how to accommodate
individual differences in using tools and performing system integration tasks
such as interfacing. I-PSE will be implemented and evaluated in automation,
robotics, and mechatronics-related undergraduate courses at Texas A&amp;M
University and at colleges and universities with a high enrollment of students
from groups that are not yet equitably represented in STEM. As a result, the
I-PSE has the potential to directly impact the learning of at least 500
students. The ability to rapidly design or reconfigure automated systems to
accommodate change is critical to maintaining our national economic
competitiveness and security. To the extent that this effort can improve the
quantity and quality of engineers, open doors for those who might need more time
to master such complex material, and increase awareness of the importance of
automated manufacturing systems, this project can benefit our entire society.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.