* 2044719
* PFI-RP: Development of a SMART (Sustainable Materials and Recovery Technology) Process for the Recovery of High-Value Metals from Electronic Waste
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Joshua Werner, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 565,986.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to develop a novel, environmentally
friendly, profitable recycling process utilizing advanced chemistry and
equipment design for the recovery of valuable and critical metals from waste
printed circuit boards. Currently, the most common methods used to recycle waste
electronics are through combustion in a smelting process or through low cost,
off-shore labor. If successful, the project will enable a simple, efficient, and
low-cost option for recyclers to develop vertically-integrated, domestic supply
chains for the recovery of critical and valuable metals from electronic wastes.
This process will be a direct replacement to the combustion of E-Wastes with
significant reduction in environmental impact. Success will enhance the economic
viability of the domestic recycling supply chain and further contribute to
environmental justice by lowering exploitation of vulnerable communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to develop an integrated, low-
cost, near closed loop system for the recovery of metals using liquid systems
without the use of harsh acids or cyanide. To achieve this objective the
multidisciplinary team seeks to 1) develop control methodologies for the
integrated leaching of base metals with the use of a regenerated oxidizer, 2)
design and validate a small zero-emission and scalable metal plating reactor for
recovering copper, 3) develop electrolyte purification strategies to minimize
waste streams, and 4) demonstrate gold leaching and recovery. The anticipated
output will be an integrated flowsheet for the recycling of E-Wastes, economic
value stream maps, and a technical/economic assessment of the viability of the
technology. Successful completion of the project will enhance the circular
economy and preserve scarce global resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.