* 2044853
* CAREER: Multidisciplinary and Life Cycle Holistic Sustainable Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Steven Hoffenson, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2026
* USD 561,323.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant investigates a new
way to address sustainability in product design. By designing products with
multiple perspectives and a longer time horizon in mind, companies can be more
profitable, consumers can get better products, and environmental and social
wellbeing will improve. Current sustainable design methods focus on individual
phases of the product life cycle (e.g., production, use, disposal), decisions of
particular stakeholders (e.g., manufacturers, consumers, policy makers), or
specific sustainability metrics (e.g., carbon footprint, water consumption,
particulate emissions). This project goes beyond these focused methods by
developing a holistic approach to sustainable design that accounts for all life
cycle phases, stakeholders, and sustainability outcomes, using tools and
techniques from the systems engineering and engineering design research
communities. This holistic approach is expected to lead to more comprehensive
and ubiquitous sustainable design practices, as well as business strategies and
policies that influence long-term environmental, social, and economic
sustainability from a systems perspective. Additionally, by enhancing the
quality and availability of related educational materials at various levels, and
by better understanding how people think about sustainability, the pipeline of
students and professionals will be better prepared to address complex
sustainability challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research
is to enable simultaneous consideration of a productâ€™s relevant life cycle
stages, sustainability metrics, stakeholder needs, and subsystem analyses in
Design for Sustainability (DfS) by leveraging systems modeling and coordination
techniques from the Design for Market Systems (DMS) and Concurrent Engineering
(CE) fields. The research approach will: (1) assess coordination and modeling
strategies from CE and DMS to connect sustainability-related design parameters
and stakeholder decision-making across the product life cycle; (2) investigate
the application of CE approaches to measure coupling strength across these
decision parameters, life cycle phases, metrics, and models; and (3) survey
practitioners to elicit and validate real-world sustainable design needs. This
will lead to a new holistic approach that facilitates the design of more
sustainable and successful products and systems. To improve knowledge transfer
and accessibility of sustainable design concepts with a broad audience of
students and professionals, this project includes three interconnected education
and outreach activities: (1) raise awareness of sustainable design and systems
thinking among pre-college students through a new GK-12 partnership program; (2)
disseminate and iteratively update the Holistic Sustainable Design approach
through a project-based graduate course; and (3) assess sustainable design
thinking across diverse groups of individuals. These education and outreach
activities will lead to new validated techniques for teaching sustainable design
at various levels, student-generated case studies to support the research
framework, and a foundational understanding of how people approach
sustainability-related decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.