* 2044426
* PFIâ€“TT: Intelligent Software Refactoring Bot for Continuous Integration
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Sami Ben Romdhane, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 04/30/2022
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project focuses on issues of economic impact:
improvement of the software and systems that underpin our national
infrastructure. By adopting the proposed technology, software development teams
may avoid critical quality and security issues. This intelligent refactoring
technology enables organizations to better maintain their software as it ages
and better align their maintenance efforts with their priorities. This
innovation seeks to deliver continuous will also provide training opportunities
for students in technological innovation and entrepreneurship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing scalable methods to
determine when and how to integrate developer feedback to semi-automate code
refactoring for continuous integration environments while adhering to industry
standards to align the effort with their commercialization objectives. Software
refactoring is recognized as the key component for maintaining high quality
software by restructuring existing code and reducing technical debt. Refactoring
requires programmers to review, detect, and fix quality issues to improve
software performance. However, refactoring is difficult to achieve and often
neglected not only due to a pressure to meet release deadlines, but also due to
the constraints imposed by manual refactoring as well as lack of technical skill
in restructuring complex systems. The traditional root-canal refactoring process
is not practical since it is time consuming and hard to integrate in the
development pipelines. Hence, new refactoring tool must deliver timely support
for code repair. The goal of this technology is to clearly exhibit the
feasibility of combining interactive, semi-automated, refactoring technology
with continuous integration via an artificial intelligence-based bot and
demonstrate the implemented concept at large-scale. The effort will also support
multiple programming languages including quantitative (such as accuracy,
relevance, and performance) and qualitative (such as programmers' comments)
aspects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.