* 2044785
* CAREER: Adaptive Actuation and Control in Embodied Biohybrid Robots
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Victoria Webster-Wood, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 03/31/2026
* USD 616,000.00

Animals are often a source of inspiration in robotic design. By designing from
animal blueprints, engineers can create robotic systems capable of walking,
running, crawling, swimming, and even flying. However, even with the advances in
robotics over the past decades, robotic systems still fall short of many of the
capabilities seen in biological animals. One key difference between existing
robots and their animal counterparts is that biological systems are made up of
soft, adaptable materials, including muscles for actuation and neurons for
control. This CAREER award investigates how to fabricate robust, adaptable
actuators for biohybrid robots using living muscle, how these actuators adapt to
exercise, and how to control biohybrid robots with living neurons. Additionally,
this CAREER award supports educational and outreach initiatives to improve
recruitment and retention of diverse students and faculty in robotics and STEM.
Accessible age-appropriate educational materials based on the research outcomes
will be developed, made available to middle and high school teachers, and
integrated into a graduate course on Bioinspired Robotics. The research team
will host virtual and in-person outreach events to introduce students to
bioinspired and biohybrid robotics. Underrepresented undergraduate students will
be recruited for summer research experiences in biohybrid robotics and modeling.
Finally, the investigator will promote tools for recruitment and retention of
women faculty in robotics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 5-year CAREER project will
result in bioactuators capable of interfacing with a range of robotic structures
via tendon-like interfaces, bioinspired neural networks for bioactuator control,
and the ability to perform basic ‘programming’ of biohybrid robots. Biohybrid
robotics directly harnesses living tissues as renewable engineering materials.
In particular, muscle-based bioactuators are self-healing, compliant, and adapt
to loading. Whereas most biohybrid research to date has focused on biological
materials as individual components of the system, approaches for the integrated
design, fabrication, and ‘programming’ of robust bioactuators and biological
control networks are needed to improve biohybrid robot performance and broaden
applicability. To meet this need, this CAREER project will (1) enable adaptive
bioactuation of a wide range of robotic peripheries through the creation of
embedded biocompatible interfaces, (2) model and fabricate simple biological
neural networks to control bioactuators, and (3) train integrated bioactuators
and biological neural networks. Not only will the proposed research approach
lead to advances in bioactuation and control, but it will also specifically
focus on integrated biohybrid robot development. ‘Programmable’ biohybrid robots
have applications in medicine where small-scale biocompatible systems could be
used as self-actuating stents or medical implants, or as functional components
of neuromuscular tissues-on-a-chip for drug-screening and neuroscience. The
proposed research lays the foundation for addressing future challenges in
biohybrid robotics, including integrating diverse sensing modalities into
biohybrid robot systems, understanding the effect of embodiment on neuromuscular
control circuits, and studying emergent dynamics in distributed biohybrid
actuation systems. The research approach in this CAREER proposal will be
integrated with an educational and outreach plan to (1) incorporate
neuromuscular modeling in biohybrid robotics curriculum, (2) improve retention
of diverse students in robotics through biohybrid robot experiences, and (3)
build tools to improve visibility of women faculty in robotics towards improving
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.