* 2044386
* Engineering All-Solid Metal-Sulfur Batteries: Transport, Speciation, and Kinetics in Sulfur Copolymer Composite Cathodes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Jennifer Schaefer, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2024
* USD 371,439.00

Metal-sulfur rechargeable batteries are a potentially cost-effective solution
for replacement of Li-ion batteries for use in electric transportation. The
energy density of lithium-sulfur and magnesium-sulfur batteries can exceed that
of Li-ion, but only at low electrolyte-to-sulfur ratios. However, it is
difficult to engineer sulfur batteries for high performance with low levels of
liquid electrolyte. In addition, elimination of volatile battery components to
improve safety is preferred. In this project, the investigator will investigate
solid-state metal-sulfur batteries based on copolymerized sulfur cathodes. The
influence of the chemistry and morphology of the sulfur copolymer cathode on the
ion transport, sulfur speciation, and reaction rates will be investigated. The
use of a solid copolymer interlayer to prevent the dissolution of sulfur species
into the bulk polymer electrolyte will also be explored. This research will
engage graduate and undergraduate Notre Dame students and visiting
undergraduates from the Xavier University of Louisiana to promote the training
and retention of researchers in the field of electrochemical engineering.
Additionally, the number, diversity, and training of the next generation of
researchers in the chemical sciences and engineering will be enhanced by
development of afterschool enrichment programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
fundamental engineering science research will be transformative for its
contributions to the understanding of the effects of local environment on sulfur
and poly(sulfide) electrochemical properties in the solid-state.
Copolymerization of elemental sulfur and organic monomers will be leveraged to
facilely tune the sulfur cathode environment, including the size and morphology
of sulfur-rich and ion-rich domains, the interactions of ion-solvating
components with poly(sulfide)s, and charge-transfer kinetics.
Spectroelectrochemical techniques will be used to investigate
sulfur/(poly)sulfide speciation and reaction pathways. Separately, copolymer
interlayers for active cation transport and polysulfide rejection in the solid-
state will be investigated. Ion transport in both the cathode and interlayer
nanostructured solid-state environments will be
probed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.