* 2044288
* Transforming Undergraduate Learning to Enhance Innovation for a Changing World
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Todd Kelley, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 12/31/2023
* USD 295,816.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a new model for
designing and delivering innovation-focused undergraduate STEM education.
Undergraduate education today is typically fractured into multiple different
colleges and departments. As a result, students often have limited opportunities
to develop important skills, such as innovating in multidisciplinary teams,
considering human elements in problem-solving, and transforming ideas into
reliable investments of time and resources. To make such opportunities more
available, this Level 1 Institutional and Community Transformation project aims
to build a transdisciplinary, scalable model for innovation-focused
undergraduate learning that crosses academic units and student majors. This
model will include a student-centered, cross college/department community of
practice to design and co-teach innovation-focused undergraduate courses. A key
feature of the project is collaboration among academic units to develop courses
that include engineering/technology/design issues, the human and cultural
interface of liberal arts/social sciences, and the economic perspectives of
business management. This context is expected to focus student learning on real
problems in ways that span courses and course levels. The project will
simultaneously study institutional barriers to this change in undergraduate
education. Taken as a whole, the project may yield insights and suggest next
steps for other institutions that seek to engage in large-scale educational
transformations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to leverage
strengths of Purdue University’s Polytechnic Institute, College of Liberal Arts,
and Krannert School of Management to create leading-edge, innovation-focused
undergraduate learning experiences. First, the project will implement a design-
based research approach to create, test, and refine an educational model for
transforming traditional siloed undergraduate learning experiences into
experiences that span across disciplines and academic departments/individual
courses. This model is expected to provide the institutional structure for
achieving transformative undergraduate learning through the implementation of
evidence-based practices. Synergistically, the community of practice, which
includes faculty, administrators, and community partners, is intended to provide
an environment that will nourish student learning and support their innovative
ideas. The project will use ethnographic methods to examine university change
processes, identify best practices to guide institutional transformation,
develop methods for co-teaching courses across units, and examine ways to reach
larger audiences and sustain learning over time. The project centers on the
hypothesis that a cross-college approach to transformation that focuses on
expanding the practice of innovation across campus boundaries will better
prepare next generation STEM innovators. The project also seeks to address the
current need for rapid and profound changes in higher education, which makes
conditions more favorable for institutional transformation. The data collected
through this project will help provide a better understanding of the enablers
and obstacles for different academic units to jointly develop new undergraduate
educational models. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the program
supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across institutions of
higher education and disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.