* 2044472
* Improving the Conceptual Mastery of Engineering Students in High Enrollment Engineering Courses through Oral Exams
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Curt Schurgers, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2023
* USD 298,659.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the conceptual
understanding of students in the lower division engineering courses that build
the foundation for future success. Mastery of basic concepts is essential for
student success and perseverance in engineering programs. To gain this mastery
and prepare for life-long learning as engineers, students need to develop
effective learning strategies. Since assessments drive students’ learning
strategies, this project will implement and evaluate oral exams in high
enrollment introductory engineering courses. The oral exams will be used to
assess students’ understanding of fundamental concepts, which is difficult to
measure using traditional exams and quizzes. A new training program will be
created to prepare faculty and teaching assistants to administer oral exams. The
project will also provide guidelines to help engineering educators implement
oral exams in other courses. It is expected that the oral exams will guide
students to use learning strategies that enhance conceptual mastery and critical
thinking. By strengthening students’ verbal communication skills, oral exams can
also help prepare them for the engineering workforce. This project will add to
research on oral exams by contributing new knowledge about the effectiveness of
oral exams in undergraduate engineering core courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the project is to improve undergraduate students’ conceptual mastery and
critical thinking skills in engineering. Critical thinking has been identified
as an essential skill for engineering graduates and conceptual mastery is a
prerequisite. It has been shown that students adopt learning strategies based on
how they will be assessed. For example, if an exam is procedural in nature,
students will pursue procedural knowledge over deep conceptual understanding.
Thus, assessment plays an important role in measuring the level of students'
conceptual understanding and in guiding students' selection of learning
strategies toward achieving greater concept mastery and critical thinking
skills. The adaptive dialogic nature of oral exams holds promise for improving
both assessment of conceptual mastery and students’ learning strategies.
However, the issues of the reliability, validity, and scalability to high
enrollment courses of oral exams have not been fully addressed. This project
will create a framework to integrate oral exams in core undergraduate
engineering courses, complementing existing assessment strategies. Key elements
of the project are the involvement of the entire instructional team (instructors
and teaching assistants) and the emphasis on training that includes
considerations of issues such as bias and students with disabilities. The
project will implement an iterative design strategy using an evidence-based
approach of evaluation. The effectiveness of the oral exams will be evaluated by
tracking student improvements on conceptual questions across consecutive oral
exams in a single course, as well as across other courses. The training program
will be made freely available online to faculty at other institutions who are
interested in using oral exams for assessment. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.