* 2044513
* PFI-TT: High-Volume Manufacturing of Next Generation Carbon Reinforced Pre-Impregnated Polymer Composites
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Kuang-Ting Hsiao, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 09/30/2024
* USD 349,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to make next generation, high-
performance carbon fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP) composites available to broad
commercial segments such as the sporting goods, automotive, and aerospace
industries. Conventional CFRP materials, usually used in laminate form, give
excellent engineering performance thanks to low weight and the superior strength
provided by advanced carbon fibers. However, mechanical, electrical, and thermal
weaknesses inherited from the polymer matrix substantially limit their potential
compared with metals in many applications. The next generation CFRP materials
demonstrate multiple notable improvements in in those properties, giving
significantly better multifunctional performance that can be better tailored to
the applications, compared to current CFRP and film adhesive products. Hence,
the general quality of living (e.g., recreation, transportation, safety,
comfort, energy efficiency, and environmental-sustainability) will be enhanced.
These new materials may also contribute to expanding the envelope of the
nation’s space exploration and defense missions. The volume-manufacturing
development and associated industrial collaboration will increase the usage and
market size of CFRP in replacing additional metallic parts and enabling novel
applications and technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to develop
roll-to-roll manufacturing of novel nanofibers z-threaded CFRP products (prepreg
and film adhesive). The researchers will launch commercialization activities to
realize the nanomaterial's full potential in CFRP components. In this new
composite, carbon nanofibers zigzag thread between the conventional carbon
fibers. The resulting interlocking network strongly reinforces the material,
distributing the mechanical, electrical, and thermal loads in all directions
inside the composite. As a result, z-threaded CFRP is stronger and more
comprehensively capable with tailorable multifunctional properties than
conventional CFRP. Nano-resin film adhesive, an intermediate product and
precursor of the z-threaded CFRP prepreg, allows customers to create their own
prepreg using any fabric of their own proprietary design, or simply to bond two
objects together with improved heat and electricity transfer. Thermal-fluidic
principles and electric-field induced nanofiber orientation dynamics will be
utilized in the innovative manufacturing process. The physical characteristics
associated with the products will be exploited for quality control. Interaction
with industrial collaborators will allow the team to understand each market’s
engineering needs and ecosystems and assist the industries to realize more
innovative products using the significantly advantageous next generation CFRP
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.