* 2044302
* Improving Undergraduate Student Persistence, Performance, and Perspectives in Online STEM Courses via a Community of Inquiry and Decreasing Students' Cognitive Load
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Emily Faulconer, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 237,298.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high-quality undergraduate
STEM education by designing and studying a pilot program to improve online
discussion forums in STEM courses. The overall goal of the project is to improve
students’ performance and persistence in online STEM courses, while
simultaneously improving their attitudes toward STEM itself. To achieve this
goal, the project focuses on introducing practices that reduce extraneous
cognitive load, while also improving educators’ instructional and social
presence, and students’ social and cognitive presence. The project will study a
specific practice: a faculty-student learning community that uses discussion
forums and other online components to minimize non-relevant technical
complexity. The project intends to produce guidelines for creating a productive
online learning community that does not require additional effort that is
unrelated to the intended learning. The project will provide professional
development to support instructors’ implementation of the guidelines. It is
anticipated that the guidelines may be transferable to other online STEM
courses. The projects’ data about student retention, persistence, and attitudes
toward STEM will provide a base for additional research on online STEM learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to positively impact student
persistence, performance, and perspectives in asynchronous online STEM courses.
It expects to do to by supporting learning communities in ways that mitigate the
impacts of extraneous cognitive load. To this end, the project will design and
test a pilot program for infusing the components of the Community of Inquiry
framework into asynchronous course discussions, including a best practices
redesign of the discussion prompts, rubrics, and instructions by subject matter
experts and instructional designers. The pilot program will use existing
institutional structures to support the redesign and to provide faculty with the
related professional development. In a mixed-methods research study, information
will be collected about students’ academic success (course grades, discussion
transcript analysis), persistence (withdrawal rate), and perspectives (surveys
on STEM attitudes, cognitive load, and community of inquiry). These data will be
complemented by results from focus group interviews. The project intends to
generate a Community of Inquiry – Cognitive Load framework for asynchronous
online STEM courses that supports student outcomes by promoting social,
teaching, and cognitive presences via the Community of Inquiry, while mitigating
cognitive load that is disconnected from disciplinary learning. The framework
may be transferrable and scalable to other asynchronous online STEM courses. By
identifying reasons for persistence and retention in online STEM courses, the
project expects to lay the foundation for further research on interventions that
improve student outcomes in online STEM courses. The NSF IUSE:EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.