* 2044399
* SBIR Phase I: Blockchain architecture for improved, cost-effective, secure transactions
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2022
* James Taylor, ONCLAVE NETWORKS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2022
* USD 275,663.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to facilitate secure transactions. The proposed
project allows business transactions without the fear of cybercrime. The
expected cost reductions will enable a company to safely engage with individuals
and families who cannot afford commonly available cybersecurity solutions. The
proposed blockchain process will improve security and resilience of critical
infrastructure including energy, transportation, finance, telecommunications,
and manufacturing, as well as enabling true smart cities and installations of
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIRâ€¯Phase I project proposes a multi-
segment and multipath design for substantial transactional improvement and
reduction in required computing resources. Computing resources required in
blockchain usage primarily involve the searching of the complete blockchain for
the appropriate record. The proposed solution eliminates the required search of
the complete blockchain by segmenting the blockchain to search smaller segments.
This project will research, develop and implement a method for improving the
current state of knowledge with resulting performance improvement of blockchain
transactions without compromising the fidelity of the transaction, thereby
eliminating the need for a blockchain Proof of Work Consensus Model. The project
will research several blockchains as well as the consensus and non-consensus
models for final implementation. Validation includes a baseline transaction
measurement for each of the chosen blockchains identified before any
modifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.