* 2044648
* CAREER: Efficient and Reliable Electronic Structure Theories for Spectroscopic Properties of Strongly Correlated Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Alexander Sokolov, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2026
* USD 650,000.00

Dr. Alexander Sokolov of the Ohio State University is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop theoretical methods that efficiently and
accurately simulate spectroscopic properties of strongly correlated systems,
such as conjugated organic molecules, transition metal compounds, and active
sites of biological enzymes. Reliable simulations of how strongly correlated
systems interact with light are crucial for understanding light-harvesting in
photosynthesis, advancing technologies for solar energy conversion, and
developing new photoactive materials with desired properties. However, available
theoretical methods are unsatisfactory for simulating spectroscopic properties
of strongly correlated systems due to limitations in their computational
efficiency or accuracy. Dr. Sokolov and his group will fill this gap by
developing a new framework of theoretical methods that combine efficient and
accurate description of strongly correlated systems in many electronic states
and provide access to a wide range of spectroscopic properties. All methods
being developed by the Sokolov group will be implemented in a freely available
and open-source computer program. The Sokolov group also develops hands-on,
free, and publicly available computational lecture materials for use in
undergraduate physical chemistry courses. Under this award, Dr. Sokolov will
participate in local outreach activities to support middle school education in
STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) and increase public
awareness of scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the
CTMC program, Dr. Sokolov and his team aim to develop robust, widely applicable,
and computationally affordable multi-reference methods for simulations of
spectroscopic properties of strongly correlated systems based on a framework of
multireference algebraic diagrammatic construction theory. These new and
systematically improvable methods have the potential to enable simulations of
many (10’s or even 100’s) electronic transitions in a single computation, to
allow for straightforward and efficient calculations of transition properties,
and to be used to describe a variety of spectroscopic processes (e.g., optical
or core excitations, two-photon absorption, etc.). More specifically, Dr.
Sokolov and his group will work to develop new multi-reference methods for
simulations of UV/Vis, near-edge X-ray absorption, and X-ray photoelectron
spectra, as well as their efficient implementation for application to systems
with a large number of strongly correlated orbitals and electrons. The Sokolov
group research is integrated with an educational plan that aims (a) to
strengthen undergraduate teaching of physical and computational quantum
chemistry by developing hands-on computational lecture materials and designing a
new computational chemistry course that incorporates training in scientific
programming, and (b) to support middle school STEM education and public
awareness of scientific research by participating in local outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.