* 2044199
* Developing a National Framework for Recognition of Engineering and Engineering Technology Faculty Instructional Excellence
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Jacqueline El-Sayed, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 05/31/2024
* USD 149,992.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by recognizing and highlighting
undergraduate teaching excellence in the fields of engineering and engineering
technology (EET). There have been calls for more than 100 years for faculty
members in these fields to receive ongoing training in how best to teach their
students. However, for a variety of reasons, there have been relatively few
attempts to answer this call within the US. There are isolated opportunities for
training through a variety of organizations or through campus-level efforts, but
none is close to rising to a national-level response. When students are not
taught and do not learn in an effective and efficient manner, some choose to
leave EET altogether during college, while others may be less well-prepared for
their initial employment. What is needed, therefore, is a national effort to
create a framework that helps EET faculty in the US identify and receive
recognition for training that helps them continually improve their teaching.
Through this project, the American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) will
undertake the development of a framework for national recognition of faculty
professional development within EET in the US. This effort to establish a cadre
of effective EET faculty across the nation seeks a long-term outcome to increase
the retention rate of students within EET and to provide better-prepared
technical workers for industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work focuses on the
development of a framework for national peer-recognition of training and
continuing professional development of EET instructors. The goal is to increase
the value of these efforts by extending the definition of professionalism to
include EET education faculty activities. The current effort will be informed by
the literature and utilize a theory of action proposed by Kotter and co-workers.
The main efforts within this proposal will be to develop a national framework
for EET faculty recognition of teaching that will focus on levels of attainment
and proposed activities to meet these levels. Input from a variety of
constituencies (administrators, faculty and content developers) within ASEE will
be sought via focus groups and surveys to inform the proposed framework and
associated activities. The results of this proposal will help to formulate the
next steps to engage with constituencies outside of ASEE. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.