* 2044013
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Community Resilience Micro-Bonds to Balance Cost and Social Equity among Stakeholders
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2021
* John van de Lindt, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The US government invests $1 billion annually in hazard mitigation, but the
resilience investment gap for the US is estimated to exceed $520 billion. The
resilience gap across different communities and population groups is widening
due to growing economic inequality in the US, which is further exacerbated by
hazard events which turn into disasters. Therefore, finding innovative
strategies and methods to fund socially equitable resilience improvements is
essential for communities to thrive and survive. Catastrophe Bonds and Disaster
Resilience Bonds are fairly mainstream topics and are used as a mechanism to
raise money from investors for infrastructure improvement, but less attention is
paid to social equity, a factor that underpins community resilience. A community
is made up of more than the physical parts of the infrastructure and involves
people, relationships, networks, all working as part of social institutions such
as schools, hospitals, and service entities. Therefore, in this project, a new
type of bonds, termed herein as a Coastal Community Resilience Micro-Bonds
(CCRMB), will be implemented. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, innovative
strategies and methods to fund socially equitable resilience improvements, which
are essential for communities to thrive and survive, will be developed and
implemented. Infrastructure-focused bonds are helpful for communities, but still
leave a substantial gap in the disaster resilience bond paradigm, because repair
of physical infrastructure is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for
community resilience. The goal of this CIVIC Innovation Challenge grant is to
promote the contributions of various sectors and financial agents of a community
to invest in resilience initiatives and provide innovative mechanisms for them
to do so. By leveraging the CCRMB, equitable recovery of both physical and
social services and institutions can be achieved through staged and
comprehensive planning and investment prior to disasters. To accomplish this
requires interdisciplinary modeling of the multiple hazards experienced by
coastal communities, and the city of Charleston, SC will be the focus community
for implementation of the proposed CCRMB. This project is in response to the
Civic Innovation Challenge program, Track B—Resilience to Natural Disasters—and
is a collaboration between NSF and the Department of Homeland
Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.