* 2044794
* CAREER: A New Paradigm for Creating Silica Membranes from Polymer Hollow Fiber Templates
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Chen Zhang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2026
* USD 431,090.00

Hydrocarbons are important precursors in the production of fuels and chemicals,
but the molecular form of the hydrocarbon determines its value as a chemical
feedstock. Hydrocarbons exist as isomers, which are compounds that have
identical chemical formulas but different atomic arrangements and chemical
properties. Hydrocarbon isomers must often be separated prior to their use as
fuels or chemical feedstocks. However, the molecular similarity of isomers
complicates their separation, which is traditionally accomplished by energy-
intensive distillation. The sustainability of these types of separations can be
improved upon by including a membrane separation step in the process. Silica
membranes can potentially provide rapid and selective transport of similarly
sized hydrocarbon isomers. Silica tube or film membranes, however, are brittle
and challenging to use at large scale. Inspired by the excellent flexibility of
optical glass fine fibers, this project will develop silica hollow fine fiber
membranes to provide both separation performance and scalability. The research
will push the limits of high-performance silica and other inorganic membranes
for hydrocarbon isomer separations and beyond. The ability to separate
hydrocarbon isomers using a membrane-based approach will substantially reduce
greenhouse gas emissions produced by the chemical and energy industries.
Leveraging the lab’s unique accessibility to advanced membrane manufacturing,
the education activities will broaden the participation of high school students
from underrepresented groups in membrane and sustainable separations research.
At the core of the educational activities is a distance outreach program that
provides hands-on science experiences to local high school students with limited
school access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to create scalable silica
membranes with tunable butane isomer transport properties using novel polymer-
templated inorganic hollow fine fiber substrates inexpensively made at moderate
temperatures. Ultramicroporous silica films will be made for structural and
transport characterizations. Inorganic hollow fine fiber substrates will be
derived from polymer hollow fiber templates. Silica hollow fine fiber membranes
will be formed by a novel sacrificial layer approach. Kinetic adsorption
measurements will complement membrane permeation studies to link membrane
transport properties with silica ultramicropore structures. The research
activities will advance the understanding of (i) the structure-property
relationships between organoalkoxysilane chemistry and ultramicroporous silica
transport properties; (ii) the role of entropic diffusion selectivities in
molecular differentiation by ultramicroporous silica; (iii) the formation
mechanism of scalable polymer-templated inorganic hollow fine fiber substrates;
(iv) the key components required to fabricate silica hollow fine fiber membranes
by the sacrificial layer approach. The obtained new knowledge will enable the
manipulation of silica membrane properties at both molecular and device levels
to provide attractive and tunable transport properties for efficient chemical
separations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.