* 2044879
* Advancing Understanding of Student Learning in Virtual Undergraduate Engineering Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Saundra Tomlinson-Clarke, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,945.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in undergraduate STEM education
by investigating the learning and experiences of undergraduate students in
virtual mechanical and aerospace engineering laboratories. The COVID-19 pandemic
has ignited multiple crises in student lives, including sudden changes in living
situations, decrease in study hours, lower academic performance, lost
internships/jobs, and lowered income expectation. At the same time, the COVID-19
pandemic places new emphasis on the potential benefits of remote learning
arrangements including online virtual labs in engineering. However, although
these virtual engineering labs may be intended to increase student access to
learning, these labs may also perpetuate climates and cultures of inequality.
The project will investigate the design of a virtual lab framework intended to
promote equity and inclusion for all students, in particular those who are
underrepresented in engineering. The project team will examine how students
engage with, learn from, and adapt to new virtual lab tools and how these tools
affect students’ motivation to learn and their self-identification with
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on three aims: (i) the
design of a validated educational instrument for assessment of learning in
virtual labs; (ii) the investigation of online-learning technologies and the
conditions that lead to improved teaching and learning; and (iii) faculty
professional development. The research component of the project will examine how
the language, gender, race, and class of people appearing in a virtual lab
affect the level of student comfort and participation in virtual lab activities
in senior capstone labs. The research design includes a sequential exploratory
mixed method approach, undergirded by appropriate theoretical models (Technology
Acceptance Model and Inputs-Environment-Outcome Conceptual Model). It is
expected that results of this work will inform virtual lab designers about
environmental inputs that resonate across genders and diverse student
populations. Findings will be disseminated via publications, presentations, and
learning modules to engineering, engineering education, and educational research
audiences. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.