* 2044920
* CAREER: Characterization of quantum dot qubits by scannable mechanical resonator
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Yoichi Miyahara, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 01/31/2026
* USD 304,711.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In order to speed up the realization of the
quantum technology for novel applications such as quantum computing, it is
critical to carefully study new types of materials that can be used as quantum
bits. This CAREER project pursues experimental techniques to study diverse
nanometer-scale materials such as nanoparticles, nanowires and molecules for
their potential use in making quantum bits at their individual level. The
research adopts a scanning probe microscopy technique which employs a mechanical
resonator to detect the motion of a single electron in these materials. The
project lays the foundation of a new way of studying nanomaterials as quantum
bits. The research activities are closely integrated with educational activities
that include: 1) training graduate and undergraduate students at Texas State
University and collaborating universities in applying state­-of-the art scanning
probe microscopy based measurement techniques for material characterization and
create a network of researchers, and 2) engaging a diverse student body at
various levels including middle and high school in nano- and quantum-science
through workshops with hands-on activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project aims to investigate how a mechanical
resonator can be used to characterize quantum mechanical properties of qubits
realized in a double quantum dot such as tunnel coupling, relaxation and
coherence, by adopting a mechanical charge sensing technique based on atomic
force microscopy. The use of scannable probes makes it possible to characterize
double quantum dots by positioning the probe above the target quantum dot,
without integrating a resonator or sensing electrodes nearby. The outcome of
this project will broaden the fundamental understanding of the coupling between
mechanical resonators and qubits based on double quantum dots and will open the
path for the study of a broad range of nanomaterials – nanoparticle complexes,
nanowires, self­-assembled quantum dots and engineered molecules– that have not
been investigated as qubits. These qubits could operate at much higher
temperatures due to their higher confinement energy, enabling wider spread use
of quantum technology. The project will support the training of graduate and
undergraduate students in advanced cryogenic scanning probe microscopy
instrumentation and nanofabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.