* 2044165
* CAREER: Learning to learn - Artificial Intelligence Augmented Chemistry for Molecular Simulations and Beyond
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Pratyush Tiwary, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2026
* USD 650,000.00

Dr. Pratyush Tiwary of University of Maryland, College Park, is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop simulation algorithms at the interface of
statistical mechanics and artificial intelligence (AI) for the study of rare
events. The synergistic use of statistical mechanics and AI enables the
automatic, human bias-free modeling of very slow processes in chemistry and
biochemistry that unfold across many time and length scales. The tools Dr.
Tiwary and his team are developing are to be incorporated into efficient open-
source computational platforms for widespread use by the scientific community.
One of many applications he is pursuing is the quantification of time spent by
small molecules inside biological hosts, a property fundamental to the chemistry
of life processes, yet very hard to calculate through experiments or
simulations. The results of Tiwary’s modeling will be compared against
experimental investigations by his partners at Stony Brook University and the
National Cancer Institute. Under this award, Dr. Tiwary will also be developing
platforms to introduce coding and AI to high school/college students and
educators in physical sciences through workshops and online tutorials, providing
the workforce of the next generation with transferable skills for today's job
markets. These efforts are being carried out through collaborations with Prince
George’s Community College, Bowie State University and through virtual means
with other partners across the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pratyush Tiwary’s
research seeks to develop the next generation of ultra-long timescale molecular
dynamics (MD) simulation methods by integrating AI with statistical mechanics
through a “learning to learn” framework. This framework uses AI to learn the
reaction coordinate (RC) characterizing a generic molecular system, interpreting
it as a past-future information bottleneck. The knowledge of the RC is used
through biased sampling methods to systematically sample more of the
configuration space and thereby generate more relevant data to train AI.
Furthermore, the use of statistical mechanics helps AI in different ways, by (i)
making “black box” AI techniques more transparent, and (ii) dealing with the
problem of poor training data from which AI can produce misleading results. The
iteration between AI and MD continues till the RC converges, leading to
estimates of thermodynamic constants, rates and rate-limiting steps in one shot.
These methods will be applied to the study of protein-ligand and riboswitch-
ligand interactions, both of which are central to life processes, yet poorly
understood. These long timescale all-atom simulation methods are designed to
unravel the complexity and richness that arises from the interplay between
different degrees of freedom in these and other generic molecular systems.
Finally, this research program also strives to demonstrate how mixing
statistical mechanics and AI can lead to interpretable and trustworthy use of
AI, thereby increasing confidence in large-scale deployments of AI across
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.