* 2044258
* CAREER: Theory and Pedagogy within University Makerspaces
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Audrey Boklage, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2026
* USD 401,015.00

Makerspaces continue to become more common as equipment capabilities increase
while cost decreases, and within universities in particular makerspaces provide
opportunities for hands-on training and creative project-based experiences for
students. However, the operational culture, including staffing practices and
policies, sometimes results in makerspaces that are not welcoming to certain
populations, specifically women and people of color. This is a serious problem
because all learners need access to modern tools, problem-based pedagogies, and
real-world training so that the future STEM workforce fully engages the US
population in the modern economy. This CAREER project, across three diverse
settings, is situated in the opportunity to dig deeper into research on
pedagogies within makerspaces as well as student-staff interactions. This
understanding can inform the development of pedagogical and instructional tools
to support an inclusive makerspace environment, specifically best practices for
student engagement in the makerspace, hiring and training practices for
makerspace staff, policies to promote equity and inclusion, and professional
development practices. The proposed work will broaden participation in
engineering through the creation of more inclusive practices in makerspace
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER research will use grounded
theory to develop and propose a critical lens focused on interactions and
pedagogy within university makerspaces. This purposeful and explicit focus on
inclusion in university makerspaces is central to future US competitiveness;
otherwise, the structural inequities that exist in higher education,
specifically within engineering, will continue to be reproduced in educational
environments and the future workforce. Research points to the importance of
interactions between individuals in these spaces and suggests these could be
linked to an inclusive/exclusive environment. Since most students enter the
space for coursework, the pedagogy matters as well. This project will be guided
by the following research questions: &lt;br/&gt;• How do majority and
marginalized engineering students interact with makerspace staff within
university makerspaces? &lt;br/&gt;• What does pedagogy look like in university
makerspaces?&lt;br/&gt;• How do interactions and pedagogy impact who is and is
not participating in university makerspaces? &lt;br/&gt;Findings from this study
will begin to fill the void of knowledge about how pedagogical moves and
interactions within university makerspaces can contribute to an inclusive
environment. Specifically, the theoretical lens created in this study can
synergistically inform instructional tools and practices that will be informed
by best practices in curriculum, pedagogy and
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.