* 2044022
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Connecting Underrepresented Youths with Employment Opportunities
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,07/31/2021
* Alexandra Kondyli, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

Participation in out-of-school-time (OST) opportunities has been shown to
improve access to internships as well as help youth develop workforce readiness
and cultivate occupational identities. However, in sprawling low-density metro
areas like Kansas City, unreliable and inefficient transportation services
combined with the physical disconnect between residential areas, jobs, and OST
opportunities makes these opportunities less accessible to low-income Black and
Latinx students. This project’s goal is to increase OST accessibility and
awareness and improve system efficiency (e.g., minimize energy consumption) by
integrating shared-mobility and mobility-as-a-service options into existing
strategic and operational planning tools.

The project entails development, piloting, and evaluation of an Optimized
Unified Transportation (OUT) framework that increases awareness of OST
opportunities; decreases access disparity through innovative and efficient
shared-mobility services, policies, and governance; and incentivizes energy-
efficient travel choices. Principal advances include: (i) innovative analysis of
student mobility needs and preferences that considers incentives to encourage
participation and energy-efficient travel behaviors, (ii) first-of-their-kind
travel-demand models that consider social-welfare outcomes, (iii) development
and testing of a community-driven OST-opportunity-accessibility framework that
includes shared mobility, business models, policies, and governance, and (iv)
development and testing of a youth-friendly mobile-application-based technology
that incorporates the developed framework. This planning grant will be used to
convene a Collaborative Engagement Stakeholder Group (CESG) of community
stakeholders, community members, researchers, and civic organizations from the
Kansas City metro area. The CESG will engage students (ages 14-18), parents,
mobility providers, school and city officials, and employers to identify
acceptable shared-mobility solutions, policies, and governance. The CESG will
collaboratively develop novel models to understand the impacts of these
solutions and incentive strategies on students’ travel choices. These solutions
and models will be integrated in the OUT framework, optimized through simulation
for societal benefit and system efficiency, and implemented in a mobile
application for real-world piloting and evaluation. Through these activities,
this planning grant will bring together the community partners, identify
solutions, and determine the requisite data and tools for pilot implementation
and assessment. The planning activities will also engage underrepresented
students and undergraduate students to provide them exposure to research
activities.

This project is in response to Track A – CIVIC Innovation Challenge -
Communities and Mobility a collaboration with NSF and the Department of Energy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.