* 2044762
* PFI-TT: Energy-Efficient Smart-Privacy Windows made of Dynamic Crystals
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Ivan Smalyukh, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 05/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation
- Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project includes the development of
inexpensive, energy-efficient window technologies and devices. Optical light
transmission of such windows will be switchable by low-voltage electric fields
within a fraction of a second. Beyond windows, other potential applications
include coverings of greenhouses, skylights, and a large variety of electro-
optic applications. The societal outcomes include reduction of energy
consumption, improved comfort of building inhabitants, reduced energy demand,
and creation of new jobs associated with manufacturing of these new breeds of
energy-efficient windows. The team will utilize demonstrations based on the
project’s outcomes to contribute to the general public's appreciation of the
importance of the energy efficient technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project develops energy efficient windows capable of dynamically
controlling transmitted light by applying low voltages (~1 Volt). Commercial and
residential windows are the source of loss of about 40% of heating/cooling
energy. The nanostructured liquid crystal technology promises to improve dynamic
windows by controlling light transmission in the visible and near-infrared. This
control will be achieved using a thin layer of a liquid crystal with ordered
metal nanoparticles dispersed within it, which can be continuously rotated or
switched using low-voltage fields. The main goal of this project is to develop
and test prototypes of inexpensive. electrically-switchable windows while
solving technological hurdles related to the speed of switching and scaling
their dimensions. Skylights are the initial target market. The team will explore
how these switchable devices can be engineered using nanoparticle-doped liquid
crystals for applications in buildings within different climate zones. This
application may lay the groundwork for a number of other technologies that rely
on electrically-controlled molecular and nanoparticle organization at the
mesoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.