* 2044995
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Co-Creating Context-Sensitive Mobility Strategies for Advancing the Social and Economic Goals of Low-Income Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2021
* Susan Shaheen, E4THEFUTURE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 49,932.00

E4TheFuture and UC Berkeley’s Transportation Sustainability Research Center are
partnering to develop a mobility hub strategy to overcome spatial mismatch
between low-to-moderate income (LMI) housing/jobs in Providence, Rhode Island
and Blackstone River Valley. Limited public transit presents challenges in
securing/maintaining meaningful employment for marginalized community members
lacking personal transportation. This multi-phase project advances NSF’s mission
to improve quality of life by enhancing LMI household mobility to jobs,
healthcare, etc. Employing groundbreaking research to better understand LMI
decision- making for transportation and job access, the project takes a non-
prescriptive approach to community engagement. It develops a replicable process
for co-creating mobility strategies through active community engagement, pairing
mobility strategies with human services (e.g., mobility training, workforce
development) to connect residents with jobs and/or apprenticeships. The project
develops strategies to scale/sustain the project beyond the pilot and a design
toolkit that documents engagement, research methods, and data analysis tools
that other communities can employ. The project team is multidisciplinary and
includes academic partners (Boston University, Brown University, and University
of California Berkeley) and community organizations (Mobility Development,
Building Futures RI, a workforce/apprenticeship development organization, and
local affordable housing community based organizations Preservation of
Affordable Housing, and NeighborWorks).

This project employs a community-based participatory mixed-method research
approach that responds to participant needs and reflects community desires,
demonstrates a pathway to sustainability (longer-term financial viability of
mobility business models) and develops a pilot evaluation model. The project
combines qualitative (focus groups, listening sessions) and quantitative
(survey, US Census) data to spatially analyze relationships among daily mobility
challenges and existing transport systems, create mobility strategies and
training materials, and develop a sustainable model and pilot evaluation. This
project also has a significant spatial component, integrating participatory
mapping procedures with qualitative data collection methods. Engagement
frameworks, methods, data, and analysis tools developed as part of this
initiative will inform future planning, pilot projects, mobility business
models, and research. All materials will be available in a toolkit for use by
other communities. This replicable strategy incorporates challenges impacting
employment, which are often omitted from typical mobility assessments.
Considering these daily struggles in the mobility hub design, the Stage 2 pilot
will foster broader societal outcomes including: 1) Advancement of
apprenticeships, employee attendance, job retention/creation (key metrics); 2)
Participation of underrepresented populations; 3) Changes in modes used; 4)
Vehicle miles traveled/air quality impacts; and, 5) Quality of life.

This project is supported by the CIVIC Innovation Challenge program Track A.
Communities and Mobility: Offering Better Mobility Options to Solve the Spatial
Mismatch Between Housing Affordability and Jobs through a collaboration between
NSF and the Department of Energy Vehicle Transportation Office.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.