* 2044711
* PFI-TT: Bridging the Information Gap in Supply Chain using Internet of Things (IoT)
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Fadel Adib, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 03/31/2024
* USD 315,921.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to address multi-billion dollar
challenges facing supply chain logistics. The complexity of today’s supply
chains makes it difficult to optimize micro-logistics processes such as quality
control, inventory tracking, re-stocking, traceability, deadline projections,
and indoor transport. This project will develop a novel system that can identify
and locate billions of items in a scalable, cost-effective, and reliable manner.
The resulting system may bridge the physical with the digital world, providing
significant visibility and analytics to improve processes and save costs. The
innovations in this research may advance scientific and technological
understanding of how to design and build practical, scalable, and robust micro-
location systems. The primary educational outcome of this program is to train
entrepreneurial leaders that are capable of building strong, diverse teams and
leading these teams toward societal impact through commercialization.
Furthermore, the program includes various activities to ensure broad
participation of students and researchers from under-represented
demographics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on designing and
building a practical, scalable system for tracking Radio Frequency
Identification (RFID) tags. RFIDs are passive, inexpensive (3-cent) tags that
have already been deployed in the hundreds of billions as barcode replacements
by many industries. Unfortunately, existing RFID solutions are too coarse and
inaccurate for high-precision tracking, especially in highly dynamic and harsh
environments such as warehouses, outlets, and factories. To address this
challenge, a new RFID sensor is proposed that is highly accurate (i.e., sub-
centimeter), robust (i.e., multipath resilient), and cost-effective. The new
sensor uses a novel radar-inspired RFID positioning module for time-of-flight
measurement and a split-computing framework for efficient and low-cost location
extraction. A distributed sensor network architecture will be used to scale
across large areas. The main goal of this project is to provide an easy to
deploy and scalable solution that is horizontal across various applications and
use cases in the supply chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.