* 2044842
* CAREER: EMERGENT BEHAVIOR OF VAN DER WAALS MAGNETIC MATERIALS: THE GENESIS OF MATERIALS INTELLIGENCE
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Trevor David Rhone, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2026
* USD 363,224.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies quantum
calculations and artificial intelligence to the understanding and discovery of
new van der Waals (vdW) materials, atomically thin sheets that can be stacked
with weak bonds between layers. Graphite is a familiar example. We now know how
to isolate and measure one, two, or any number of such sheets in controllable
combinations. Discovered only in 2017, magnetic vdW layers will become the
building blocks for novel quantum materials with numerous potential
technological applications, starting with data storage. In the near future,
these materials may give engineers control over the quantum of magnetism, called
spin, leading to additional applications in the nascent field of two-dimensional
spintronics. They may also exhibit "topological" order, which is robust against
impurities and imperfections, making them suitable for applications in quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The magnetic properties of vdW (i.e. two-
dimensional) materials are different from those of bulk (three-dimensional)
materials, creating new avenues for physics exploration. The chemical
composition of monolayers, multilayers and heterostructures (stacks of different
types of layers) of vdW magnets can be tuned to design novel materials with
desirable and potentially surprising properties. The resulting number of
candidate vdW monolayers, multilayers and their heterostructures is
combinatorially large, with estimates far exceeding trillions of vdW materials.
Consequently, inspecting the entire set of possible combinations using
experiments or direct computational simulations is impossible. Nevertheless, the
challenge of searching for new materials with desirable properties can be
mitigated with the help of artificial intelligence (AI). This project will
leverage AI to search for new vdW materials with novel spin and topological
properties. In addition, AI will be harnessed to provide physical insight into
the microscopic origins of spin order and topological order in these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary research will train
scientists at different stages of their careers to apply AI tools to their own
research. The educational component of the project will focus on teaching and
mentoring undergraduate and graduate students through carefully designed
coursework and hands-on research experiences. In addition, students will learn
effective science communication and share their research via public lectures and
webinars. The PI will also form an Equity and Inclusion Committee and create a
mentoring network to address social injustice in STEM and the needs of
underrepresented minorities (URMs). The activities will provide a supportive
environment that will empower URMs to
achieve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional (2D) materials with intrinsic
magnetic order are a platform for studying exotic spin degrees of freedom in
reduced dimensions. Novel spin phenomena in van der Waals (vdW) materials and
their heterostructures are at the forefront of condensed-matter-physics
research. In particular, new behavior may emerge from an interplay between
magnetic and topological order in vdW heterostructures. It is well known that
topological states emerge when electron spins are confined to two dimensions.
When two or more distinct monolayers are combined into a heterostructure,
surprising behavior may arise, such as enhanced topological order or the
formation of spin textures. An estimate for the total number of vdW materials,
multilayers and heterostructures is ~10^{21}. This vast search space is
overwhelming for first-principles calculations and experimental probes alone.
The project combines density-functional-theory calculations with new artificial-
intelligence (AI) tools to facilitate efficient navigation through this large
materials space. The goals are to discover novel materials and to gain physical
insight into spin properties and emerging phenomena of vdW materials at the
electronic level. This insight will pave the way to a fundamental understanding
of how crystal structure influences magnetic properties in 2D materials,
including monolayers, multilayers and heterostructures. The AI architectures the
research team develops will find use in other areas of condensed matter physics
and the broader scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is
interdisciplinary and will connect scientists and topics that span diverse
areas. Concepts from physics may enable advances in AI and vice versa.
Furthermore, the 2D materials discovered through this work will provide
experimentalists with a materials playground in which to study novel and
emergent spin properties. In addition, the proposed research will have potential
impact in industry - e.g., data storage and other spintronics applications,
facilitating future memory technologies. This research may also help create
advances in future computer architectures, such as those for quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will train scientists at different
stages of their careers to apply AI tools to their own research. The educational
component focuses on teaching and mentoring undergraduate and graduate students
through carefully designed coursework and hands-on research experiences. In
addition, students will learn effective science communication and share their
research via public lectures and webinars. The PI will form an Equity and
Inclusion Committee and create a mentor network to address social injustice in
STEM and the needs of underrepresented minorities (URMs). The activities will
provide a supportive environment that will empower URMs to
achieve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.