* 2044826
* RoL: NSFDEB-BSF: Studying the evolution of the antiviral pathway in a cnidarian model interacting with diverse viral communities
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Adam Reitzel, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 817,970.00

Viruses and the immune systems of animals evolve in response to each other.
Animals have various molecular mechanisms for detection and destruction of
diverse viruses. Despite viruses exerting tremendous costs to all animals, how
invertebrates, particularly marine species, respond and adapt to virus
communities has received more limited research. The limitations for
understanding the impact of viral communities on marine invertebrates results
from an incomplete understanding of how viruses vary over different populations
as well as the precise mechanisms of the immune system that the host utilizes in
controlling their viral community. The research team will utilize a sea anemone
(Nematostella vectensis) to study host immunity in the laboratory and the field
to characterize the ecological and evolutionary dynamics of this symbiosis. This
project will provide a synergistic international collaboration with Dr. Yehu
Moran (The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel) to connect the ecology and
symbioses of cnidarians with the molecular mechanisms of antiviral responses.
This research will provide mentoring and training for a postdoctoral fellow as
well as graduate and undergraduate students at the University of North Carolina
at Charlotte. Additional research and educational opportunities will be provided
through expansion of a SEA-PHAGES course-based undergraduate research experience
(CURE) and outreach through a new Center for Microbial Genomics at UNC
Charlotte. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of the environmental, genetic, and
molecular factors involved in modulating expression of antiviral pathways is
essential to understand and predict how any host species will respond to diverse
viral communities. The integrative research approach in this project will
determine how shifts in the biotic and abiotic features of habitats correlate
with changes in the expression of the antiviral response for a cnidarian host.
The research team will use comparative genomics to detect signatures of positive
selection by comparing the viromes and transcriptomes of populations of
Nematostella vectensis across its native and introduced geographic range in
North America. They will then use a combination of mesocosm and laboratory
studies to quantify the extent of local adaptation of the anemone to specific
viral communities through a combination of organismal and gene expression
studies. They will employ a combination of transgenic approaches combined with
laboratory and mesocosm studies to characterize how individual components of the
antiviral response respond and mediate exposure to a diverse viral community.
Nematostella vectensis has been utilized as a model for the ecological and
evolutionary genomics by the international research team to understand the
genetic diversity of this invertebrate, the role for nucleotide variation in
local adaptation, and the function of focal genes through transgenic approaches.
This project is expected to have a significant impact by identifying the
evolution of these antiviral mechanisms in populations with exposure to
different viruses and the mechanisms for viral detection and destruction in
heterogeneous habitats that are vulnerable to the ongoing climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.