* 2044552
* CAREER: Development and Application of First-Principles Dielectric Embedding Many-Body Perturbation Theory for Heterogeneous Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Zhenfei Liu, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 07/31/2026
* USD 293,536.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research
and education in computational and theoretical condensed matter and materials
physics. The research part of this project focuses on the development and
application of new computational tools to study the electronic properties of
heterogeneous interfaces formed between molecules and solid substrates. Such
interfaces find broad applications in energy conversion materials, such as
photovoltaics that convert solar energy into electric current and photocatalytic
materials that harvest solar light to drive chemical reactions. To understand
and control these complex processes at a fundamental level, it is essential to
accurately describe the electronic structure based on quantum mechanical
simulations of the materials. Given the large system size and the accuracy
needed to quantitatively understand the energy conversion mechanisms at
heterogeneous interfaces, most conventional simulation methods are unfortunately
either inefficient or inaccurate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
research part of this project is to develop a suite of new computational schemes
that are both accurate and efficient in the characterization of the electronic
structure at heterogeneous molecule-substrate interfaces. These methods will
significantly expand the scope of materials and interfaces that can be routinely
modeled as compared to the current state of the art. The basic idea is to divide
the interface into its smaller constituents or building blocks and then treat
each component with high-level theory while considering it embedded in the
environment of the others. Using this embedding approach, the team will
quantitatively investigate how the electronic structure of each component of the
interface is affected by the others, and how the electronic structure of the
entire interface is different from those of the individual constituents. The
team will apply the new computational approach to a few emerging systems of
experimental significance, especially interfaces involving multiple light
absorbers and interfaces featuring electronic and optical properties which
differ considerably when measured in different directions. The research will
lead to new insights into energy conversion mechanisms and the rational design
of new energy materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activity is closely
integrated with the education and outreach parts of this project. The PI will
organize a summer camp annually for local high school students in the
southeastern Michigan area, promoting the awareness of the importance of
computation and its power in scientific research. The summer camp also addresses
the diversity challenge in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics in
the metropolitan Detroit area. Additionally, the PI will provide summer intern
positions in his research group for local high school students and teachers,
broadening the impact of the PI’s undertaking in educating the next generation
of scientists beyond training graduate students. Furthermore, the PI will
continue the development of a Computational Chemistry course at Wayne State
University for both undergraduate and graduate students. The PI will
continuously add course content based on his research expertise in materials
chemistry and customize the topics to meet the research needs of the enrolled
students. Moreover, the PI plans to organize mini-workshops on the basic use of
mathematical software in the Chemistry Department at Wayne State University for
both undergraduate and graduate students, offered twice a year, as an endeavor
to mitigate the students’ common math anxiety in the learning of science
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award supports research and education in computational and theoretical condensed
matter and materials physics. The research part of this project focuses on the
development and application of new computational methods to study the
quasiparticle electronic structure and optical excitations at heterogeneous
interfaces formed between molecules and solid substrates. Such interfaces are
ubiquitous in nanoscale energy conversion applications, such as photovoltaics
and photocatalysis. Although many-body perturbation theory such as the GW-BSE
formalism (G is the Green’s function, W is the screened Coulomb interaction, and
BSE stands for Bethe-Salpeter equation) provides a rigorous theoretical
framework, first-principles calculations of large molecule-substrate interfaces
are computationally expensive. Lack of efficient yet reliable computational
schemes for large heterogeneous interfaces hinders fundamental understanding of
the molecule-substrate interactions and interfacial charge
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research part of this project aims to develop
a suite of new tools, termed as “dielectric embedding GW-BSE”, to make such
calculations practically affordable for large interfaces without sacrificing
accuracy. The essential idea is to confine explicit GW-BSE calculations within
each component of the interface while treating the effect of the others as a
dielectric environment. This project will leverage the newly developed methods
to study a few systems of experimental significance, including: (1) interfaces
formed between monolayer transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and
(metallo)phthalocyanines, where the gaps and excitons of both components as well
as the valley pseudospin of the TMD substrates within the interface will be
studied; (2) interfaces involving black phosphorus, where the anisotropy of the
dielectric screening at such interfaces will be scrutinized; and (3) charge-
transfer systems modulated by interfaces, such as molecular donor-acceptor pairs
adsorbed on metal or semiconductor substrates and large organic adsorbates on
bilayer TMDs featuring inter-layer charge-transfer
excitons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activity is closely integrated with
the education and outreach parts of this project. The PI will organize a summer
camp annually for local high school students in the southeastern Michigan area,
promoting the awareness of the importance of computation and its power in
scientific research. The summer camp also addresses the diversity challenge in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics in the metropolitan Detroit
area. Additionally, the PI will provide summer intern positions in his research
group for local high school students and teachers, broadening the impact of the
PI’s undertaking in educating the next generation of scientists beyond training
graduate students. Furthermore, the PI will continue the development of a
Computational Chemistry course at Wayne State University for both undergraduate
and graduate students. The PI will continuously add course content based on his
research expertise in materials chemistry and customize the topics to meet the
research needs of the enrolled students. Moreover, the PI plans to organize
mini-workshops on Mathematica and WolframAlpha in the Chemistry Department at
Wayne State University for both undergraduate and graduate students, offered
twice a year, as an endeavor to mitigate the students’ common math anxiety in
the learning of science courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.