* 2044960
* CAREER: Improving Access to STEM by Supporting Students’ Effective Use of Online Resources in Gateway Mathematics Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Ander Erickson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2026
* USD 130,220.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving student learning
in introductory mathematics courses. It will do so by researching how students
in introductory mathematics use online resources to support their learning. A
key focus area of the project is developing classroom interventions that support
access in STEM by helping all students develop productive strategies for online
study. Undergraduate students increasingly make use of online resources under
their own direction and out of view of their instructors. This study practice is
particularly notable in introductory mathematics classes where students often
see online resources as critical to their success. Unfortunately, introductory
mathematics classes play a gatekeeping role on the path to STEM fields for many
undergraduates. Thus, ineffective use of online resources to learn introductory
mathematics can decrease a student’s chances of persisting in STEM. This project
will use a nationwide survey to build a knowledge base about how students are
using online resources to navigate their introductory mathematics classes. Those
results will be used to develop classroom interventions that help mathematics
instructors and students gain a shared understanding of the most effective
practices for using online resources to promote student success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use an explanatory mixed methods study
to develop a theoretical model of how students work with online resources to
learn mathematics. That theory will form the basis for the iterative development
of classroom interventions that will help bridge the current divide between
student and instructor understandings of the role of these online resources.
These interventions will target introductory mathematics courses that often
serve as gatekeepers, particularly for first-generation students and students
from communities that are underrepresented in STEM. Evaluation of the
interventions' success will be based on how well they support students’
mathematical understanding and achievement in mathematics. This project will
contribute to the STEM education community by using a rigorous methodological
approach, which can be applied to other disciplines, to develop a theoretical
model of the strategies that students employ when working with online resources
to learn mathematics. In doing so, the project will contribute to educators’ and
researchers’ understanding of how to support equitable STEM instruction by
examining how the use of online resources in lower-division mathematics classes
differs according to student background. This work will bring together multiple
strands of education research including technology and education, mathematics
education, and information literacy, and contribute to pedagogical practice
through the collaborative development of formative interventions that will be
refined through iterative design-based research in multiple classroom settings.
The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program is a National Science
Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that supports early-career faculty who have the
potential to serve as academic role models in research and education. This
CAREER project is supported by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education:
Education and Human Resources Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.