* 2044535
* Collaborative Research: High temporal resolution paleomagnetism of speleothems
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Joshua Feinberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2024
* USD 384,001.00

Speleothems (stalagmites, stalactites, flowstone) are cave mineral deposits that
form by dripping, flowing, and seeping water containing dissolved elements from
the overlying bedrock. Speleothem growth may span tens of thousands of years and
provide a natural archive of climatic and environmental conditions during that
period. Usually, they also include minute concentrations of magnetic minerals
from overlying soils, which could ultimately provide a continuous record of
Earth’s magnetic field during that time interval. Precise dating of speleothems
has opened up the possibility of accessing invaluable information from those
magnetic records about past episodes of short-duration geomagnetic instability
(for example, rapid changes in the strength or direction of Earth’s magnetic
field). In turn, these instabilities may reveal critical information about the
mechanism by which Earth’s magnetic field is generated (known as the geodynamo),
advance investigations of possible links between geomagnetic and climatic
events, and provide important data about how fluctuations in the Earth’s
magnetic field strength may affect the performance of satellite communications.
Retrieval of high-resolution magnetic records from speleothems has been
challenging until now owing to the very weak magnetization they carry. However,
latest developments in state-of-the-art magnetometry technologies and dating
techniques have made it possible to conduct high-resolution analysis of past
magnetic fields in recent geological history. This research project will enable
outreach activities at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History,
support a postdoctoral researcher and part-time participation of a graduate
student, provide support for an undergraduate internship targeting
underrepresented minorities in STEM, facilitate undergraduate research projects,
and provide hands-on experience in speleothem magnetism for twenty beginning
graduate students from around the globe as part of a summer school on rock
magnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on using speleothems, which
lock in magnetizations on sub-annual timescales, to study the Laschamp
geomagnetic excursion (~41 ka), one of the most important geomagnetic
instabilities in the geologic record. Time-synchronous observations from the
mid-latitudes of the northern hemisphere (Missouri, US) and the low-latitudes of
the southern hemisphere (Bahia and Minas Gerais, Brazil) will provide well-
dated, high-resolution paleomagnetic records that fill critical gaps in the most
recent spherical harmonic models and allow examination of a time period thought
to display some of the fastest geomagnetic changes of the last 100,000 years.
High spatial and temporal resolutions (1-10 years) will be achieved by
leveraging the continuous paleomagnetic recordings preserved in speleothems
through a combination of techniques, including superconducting quantum
interference device (SQUID) microscopy, quantum diamond microscopy (QDM),
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) tomography, and transmission electron
microscopy (TEM). Specific goals include (1) studying short-term geomagnetic
behavior using oriented speleothems known to have grown across the Laschamp
excursion collected from Brazil and the United States; (2) investigating the
fine-scale processes controlling acquisition of remanence in speleothems and
assessing the robustness of the magnetic record obtained from such cave
formations; and (3) further developing the workflow for scanning magnetometry to
confidently recover full-vector records from speleothems that take maximum
advantage of their annual layering. These paleomagnetic data will represent some
of the highest resolution, most robustly dated records across the Laschamp
excursion. They will improve the geographic coverage and geochronological rigor
of future spherical harmonic models and contribute to a deeper understanding of
geodynamo instability. Additionally, advanced SEM tomography and TEM-based
mineralogic analyses will provide an in situ view of a subset of the magnetic
minerals that retain the paleomagnetic recording in these materials, helping
address unresolved questions related to the acquisition of
remanence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.