* 2044877
* CAREER: Bridging the Gaps Among Commodity Thermoplastics, Engineering Polymers and Thermosets via Thermally Reversible Crosslinking
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Muhammad Rabnawaz, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2026
* USD 401,112.00

Over 70 billion pounds of plastic materials are used each year in the US, but
less than 9% of them are recycled. This plastic waste is typically directed to
landfills where it poses a threat to the health of the environment. A major
reason for this low recycling rate is that these plastic materials are comprised
of a variety of chemically distinct polymers that are used for different
applications (e.g., commodity, thermosets, and engineering). These polymers are
challenging to separate and cost-effectively recycle. For example, 20% of these
plastic materials are thermosets, which cannot be recycled by
melt-(re)processing methods. This CAREER project aims to investigate a new class
of plastic materials (thermally reversible crosslinked polymers) that combines
the best qualities of commodity thermoplastics, engineering polymers, and
thermosets, while still maintaining their recyclability/melt-(re)processability.
The feedstocks for these thermally reversible crosslinked polymers will be
polyolefins. Polyolefins account for two-thirds of waste plastics, making them
the most abundant and inexpensive plastic found in landfills. This new class of
materials will divert discarded plastics from landfills into value-added
products (e.g., automotive, aerospace, buildings and infrastructure, utility
products, and transportation), thus reducing burdens on landfills and
diminishing the leakage of plastics into the environment. The outcome of this
proposal will strengthen the domestic (eco)-manufacturing, which will generate a
multitude of societal and economic benefits. The research components of this
project are integrated with several education and outreach activities that the
investigator has developed to prepare a skilled workforce for the US
manufacturing sector with a focus on enhancing the participation of women and
minority groups in STEM programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyolefins (e.g.,
polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (PP)) are the least-expensive plastics and
account for two-thirds of all polymers produced. However, they also account for
more than two-thirds of all plastic waste in landfills. This CAREER proposal
aims to investigate and develop novel chemical modification methodologies that
will transform discarded PE, PP, and their blends into thermally reversible
crosslinked (TRC) polymers. These TRC-polymers will exhibit the desirable
qualities of conventional thermosets (solvent resistance, dimensional stability)
and engineering polymers (mechanical properties and creep resistance), while
still offering comparable processability and recyclability to thermoplastics.
Industry-relevant reactive extrusion processes will be used to create TRC-
polyethylene (Objective 1), TRC-polypropylene (Objective 2), and TRC-polyolefins
(Objective 3) from PE and PP feedstocks. The effects of numerous variables
(e.g., melt-processing parameters, nature and amount of reversible crosslinkers,
additives, catalysts) on the chemistry and performance of TRC-polymers will be
investigated. Advanced spectroscopic, microscopic, and analytical methods will
be used to characterize the molecular level chemistry of the TRC-polymers. The
physico-mechanical properties such as thermal, solvent resistance, creep
resistance, and tensile properties will be validated by standard testing
protocols and are expected to be comparable or superior to those of commercial
thermosets and engineering polymers. The outcome of this proposed work has the
potential to transform the landscape of polymer science and eco-manufacturing by
pioneering innovative methods for TRC-polymers. The new knowledge generated
through this work will create novel avenues for research in advanced materials
and will transform the fields of additive manufacturing, sustainable
manufacturing, and offer unique feedstock materials for high-performance
composites, foams, and melt-(re)processable interpenetrating networks. In
addition, the development of a highly skilled future workforce is an integral
part of this research which will be accomplished via training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, industry-academia collaboration, and
creating an advanced curriculum. Outreach programs for K-12 students as well as
training opportunities for high school teachers are planned to inspire young
students towards STEM careers. A focus will be on the inclusion of programs that
foster the participation of women and minorities in STEM programs. During this
project, the future workforce will be educated and equipped to understand and
appreciate emerging technological advances, thus strengthening the US
sustainable manufacturing sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.