* 2044556
* Temporal coordination of transcription, translation, and protein degradation for meiotic termination
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2021,03/31/2023
* Soni Lacefield, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 03/31/2023
* USD 950,000.00

This project is focused on the cell division pathway of meiosis, which is
crucial for the production of gametes. During meiosis, the genetic material,
which is contained in chromosomes, is duplicated and then segregated twice,
resulting in gametes with half the genetic material as the progenitor cell. The
goal of this project is to determine how cells exit meiosis and prevent
additional rounds of chromosome segregation by irreversibly degrading proteins.
This project will have broader impacts by training Indiana University graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows to mentor undergraduate students from Moi
University in Kenya, who will come for a summer program to work in research
labs. The graduate students will also be trained in communication skills and
will record scientific development workshops that will be disseminated on a web
platform for undergraduates interested in STEM fields. This project has the
combined goals of revealing a complex cellular process, increasing the global
network of underrepresented STEM researchers, and training students in mentoring
and communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will identify the
molecular pathway that controls meiotic exit. In budding yeast, selective
autophagy prevents additional meiotic divisions by targeting proteins for
degradation in meiosis II. The first objective of this project is to determine
how autophagy shapes the meiotic transcriptome and proteome using RNAseq and
mass spectrometry experiments to compare mRNA and protein levels at different
stages of meiosis with and without autophagy inhibition. These experiments will
define the genetic network regulated by autophagy and will identify autophagy
substrates. The second objective is to determine how autophagy temporally
regulates the degradation of specific proteins for irreversible meiotic exit.
Finally, a combination of experiments and mathematical modeling will establish a
systems-level understanding of the meiotic termination network. Overall, these
experiments will likely uncover conserved mechanisms of meiotic
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This works is jointly funded by the Cellular
Dynamics and Function and Genetic Mechanisms Clusters of
MCB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.