* 2044991
* CAREER: Wireless InferNets: Enabling Collaborative Machine Learning Inference on the Network Path
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Jie Xu, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 02/28/2026
* USD 267,608.00

Machine learning is increasingly being integrated into wireless network
applications, such as video surveillance, smart healthcare and industrial
internet of things, to derive actionable intelligence from the rich data
collected or generated by wireless devices. To support real-time machine
learning and decision making in these applications, a large amount of data has
to be transferred from the data source to the destination and processed by an
inference algorithm in a timely manner. Traditionally, data transfer and machine
learning inference are treated as two separate optimization tasks, but such
approaches are inefficient as they ignored the interaction between data transfer
and machine learning inference, resulting in either a large data transfer delay
or a large inference delay. This CAREER project overcomes the limitations of
existing approaches by proposing wireless InferNets, a new wireless network
architecture that enables collaborative machine learning inference among network
nodes on the data transfer path. The successful completion of this CAREER
project will promote the understanding of the synergy between distributed
inference and networking, and catalyze a paradigm shift of future wireless
networks to support emerging applications and services in security, healthcare
and other technological domains. The project also contains a significant
educational component and provides abundant opportunities to nurture and attract
students, especially from underrepresented groups, to engage in computer science
and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project develops models,
algorithms and protocols to realize the core functions of wireless InferNets and
address challenges caused by network and device heterogeneity, dynamic and
imperfect network states, and multiple user contention for the limited resources
via three main research aims. Specifically, it aims at (i) developing practical
distributed inference routing algorithms and protocols and conducting
theoretical analysis to understand the performance limits; (ii) developing new
multi-armed bandit algorithms to perform inference routing with uncertain
network information; (iii) developing distributed multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning algorithms for inference routing in multi-user wireless
InferNets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.