* 2044444
* Mixed Reality for Engineering Design Interpretation in Construction Engineering Management
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Gady Agam, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,997.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by better preparing
construction engineering students to be project engineers. To do so, the project
aims to help students develop critical problem-solving skills relevant to real
construction projects. Among these skills is design interpretation. Job site
learning is vital to develop design interpretation abilities but providing such
learning opportunities remains a challenge in construction engineering
education. To increase access to job site learning, this project will explore
the used of mixed reality technologies and immersive experiences. Specifically,
the project will use mixed reality to enable construction engineering learners
to: (1) spatially locate and manipulate design components in a virtual job-site
environment; (2) view and operate a navigation system that enables indoor-
positioning and location awareness; and (3) observe job-site images and
spatially map an object’s surroundings from the 3D visualizations of designs.
The project will study how the immersive mixed reality environment affects
construction engineering students’ learning. Results of the study may help to
improve teaching and learning of engineering design thinking, specifically in
construction engineering management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by conceptual
research and empirical findings on spatial cognition and situated learning, this
project will address key aspects of mixed reality-assisted instructional design
and its application to construction engineering management problems, including
the users’ experiences. Three major needs in current construction engineering
management pedagogy will be targeted: (i) application, analysis, and synthesis
of design representation to situational and physical contexts; (ii)
incorporation of in-situ contexts in structured and generalized construction
engineering concepts; and (iii) integration and internalization of complex
spatial and temporal information when using traditional materials (e.g., 2D
drawings, videos, images). The design of a technology-based learning approach
will contribute to the development of flexible and adaptable knowledge related
to spatial and temporal information processing and may enhance students’ visual
perception, spatial ability, and internalization. This project expects to
advance research in learning for the future engineering workforce and to
contribute new knowledge about the effects of the human-technology frontier on
problem-solving practices. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.