* 2044886
* CAREER: Environmental Sustainability of Photovoltaics in the US
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* Annick Anctil, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2026
* USD 435,911.00

The overall thrust of this project is to develop an integrated simulation tool
to evaluate the combined effect of technology change, economics, and policy on
the environmental impact of solar photovoltaics (PVs) over time in the US. It
will provide outcomes including 1) a novel module database and classification
method for PV modules, 2) the identification of factors that contribute to
module selection, 3) the material inventory, toxicity, and recyclability of
current and future PV technologies, 4) the life cycle assessment of modules
manufactured, used and recycled in the US and 5) an integrated simulation tool
to calculate the cost and life cycle environmental impact of PV systems that
will be adapted for education and outreach activities. The simulation tool
developed in this work will be used for research, teaching, and outreach and
facilitate discussion of the tradeoffs associated with PV compared to other
energy technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on preliminary findings and
published work, the investigator hypothesizes that 1) the average lifetime of
modules has been overestimated since repowering due to technology improvement,
policy and economic incentives are not considered, 2) the environmental benefit
of PV has been overestimated since electricity generation is not estimated based
on the module’s electrical performances based on location, future grid carbon
footprint and material inventory from new modules designs, 3) early module
retirement can create a market for second-life PV modules, 4) the composition
and toxicity of PV modules has changed in the last decade, 5) the value of PV
modules over time decreases while complexity is increasing which will increase
the cost for recycling 100% of the modules, 6) an integrative simulation model
can help anticipate the combined effect of technology economic and policy
changes on the optimal PV system size based on location and its associated life
cycle cost and environmental impact and 7) an educative simulation tool for
sustainability education can help train skilled engineers to work in energy
sector. This proposal’s objectives represent important steps toward sustainable
solar technologies by proposing a comprehensive analysis of current and future
PV technologies. It seeks to provide insight on the combined impact of
technology, policy, use, recycling, and disposal of PV in the US. The
characterization of the material, toxicity, and value of the waste stream is
required to plan regulations and/or mandatory recycling to prevent toxic waste.
The research will address public concerns about PV that will be incorporated
into outreach and teaching tools to help increase trust in PV technology. Life
cycle inventory data collected from this work will be submitted for inclusion US
LCA Commons. Also, the investigator will (1) develop a new class on life cycle
assessment of energy for undergraduate that will incorporate the decision tool
for active learning; (2) mentor students who will work across disciplines to
understand all life-cycle stages and impact of photovoltaics deployment; (3)
organize presentations on sustainability and PV energy; and (4) support and
encourage diversity in PV and other energy sectors through organization of
various events with the Michigan energy businesses and at conferences for PV
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.