* 2044965
* Collaborative Research: Under what Climate Conditions does the West Antarctic Ice Sheet Collapse?
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Bette Otto-Bliesner, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 421,624.00

The collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) would raise sea level by
about three meters (10 feet). It is therefore critical to understand whether the
WAIS will collapse under future climate change, and, if so, how quickly. One way
to learn about how the ice sheet will respond to anthropogenic climate change is
to understand how it responded to past warm periods. It is very likely, for
example, that the WAIS collapsed during the last interglacial period (130,000 to
116,000 years ago). This collapse is thought to be explained by warming of the
Southern Ocean near the ice sheet edge, but the relationship between the climate
of the last interglacial period and the local ocean conditions that may have led
to WAIS collapse is not well understood. In addition, it is unknown how much
warmer the ocean must be to trigger widespread WAIS retreat. This project will
use new modeling capabilities to understand the combined climate and ice sheet
conditions necessary for WAIS collapse. The results will lead to improved
estimates of the likelihood of substantial sea-level rise in the next few
decades and the coming centuries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work aims to advance
our understanding of the climate and ice sheet conditions that probably led to
West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) collapse during the Last Interglacial (LIG), and
to determine whether conditions for collapse are likely to be met in the coming
centuries. Most simulations of the LIG Antarctic ice sheet have relied on a
limited set of prescribed ocean heat fluxes, and the relationship between LIG
climate conditions and the behavior of the WAIS has been explored almost
exclusively with limited or no ice sheet-climate coupling. This project will
probe WAIS collapse uncertainties through new transient paleoclimate simulations
with the Community Earth System Model (CESM2) coupled to the Community Ice Sheet
Model (CISM), along with large ensembles of past and future ice-sheet modeling
experiments. The experiments will include, for the first time in CESM, a dynamic
Antarctic ice sheet co-evolving with a transient climate, to account for
feedbacks associated with meltwater fluxes to the ocean, ocean warming under ice
shelves, and the influence of ice-sheet topography on the regional atmospheric
circulation. The team will also run large ensembles of CISM-only experiments to
explore the space of ice-sheet model parameters and climate boundary conditions
that lead to WAIS disintegration. In this way, the project will evaluate as
fully as possible the interacting climate and ice-sheet conditions that lead to
WAIS collapse. This work improves on previous work by using (1) a relatively
high-resolution ice-sheet model that better resolves grounding-line dynamics,
(2) more realistic ice-sheet-atmosphere and ice-sheet-ocean coupling, and (3) a
wider range of possible climate boundary conditions, sub-ice-shelf melting
parameters, and ice-sheet physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.