* 2044321
* CAREER: Networks for Risk Sharing, Information Diffusion, and On-the-Job Support
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Emily Breza, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2026
* USD 352,536.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In societies with high levels of
informality, social networks play a central role in both helping members cope
with unexpected changes in experiences and collecting and sharing information
among their members as well as those outside the networks. However, these
processes are not perfect – there are limits to the extent of mutual insurance,
and community members do not always learn effectively about new opportunities.
This CAREER research project seeks to investigate the sources of these
imperfections. Specifically, this research project will study the role of hidden
income on risk sharing, how networks and the characteristics of individuals in
the networks affect the transmission of productive information, as well as
develop an innovative method to collect economic network data when conventional
methods are too expensive to use. This project will achieve these objectives
through the use of experimental field research on each of these topics;
collection of a novel network economics data set that will also be made
available to other researchers; and generating educational opportunities for
graduates and undergraduates in network economics. The results of this research
project will provide information on how best to use network analyses to spread
economic information, hence speed up economic growth and improve the living
standards of Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research makes
contributions to the study of risk sharing, social learning, and link formation.
First, it proposes a direct experimental test to measure the extent to which
hidden income limits risk sharing. Prior work has relied on observational data
and model-based tests. Second, it takes a close look at how communities learn
and aggregate information about new agricultural technologies. It will subsidize
attendance at farmer expos for “seed” farmers, who will then bring information
back to their community. This project seeks to understand how new information is
passed and aggregated across individuals in a network. Third, the project asks
whether forming links between geographically-isolated workers using social media
can improve job performance and morale. The design explicitly explores how to
design these groups to avoid the pitfalls of social media. Fourth, the project
proposes to begin collecting a new network economics panel dataset to facilitate
empirical networks research. Exiting data sets typically contain detailed
network information or detailed information on consumption and income, but not
both. Finally, the educational component aims to improve access to empirical
networks research through creating research opportunities for undergraduates and
graduate students, making the new panel dataset as widely available as possible,
and organizing a workshop on empirical network economics targeted at graduate
students and early stage researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.