* 2044923
* CAREER: Near-term quantum computing: achieving quantum advantage, and next steps
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2025
* William Fefferman, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 11/30/2025
* USD 360,000.00

In the last few years quantum computation has steadily transitioned from
theoretical science to reality. Quantum experiments are improving at a dizzying
pace and we have arrived at an exciting era in which quantum computational
experiments are pushing the boundaries of what is possible on an efficient
classical computer. While these experiments are impressive, their power is still
fundamentally restricted due to both limited quantum resources (such as small
number of qubits and shallow circuit depth) and uncorrected noise that rapidly
overwhelms the quantum signal. The goal of this project is both to characterize
the computational power of these existing imperfect quantum experiments, and to
expedite the next major step for the field: moving from initial “proof of
principle” experiments to the ultimate goal of implementing a quantum speedup
that solves a useful computational problem. This is a project that straddles
quantum theory and experiment and will help narrow the gap between the two
fields. Results from this project will be disseminated to a wide variety of
scientific communities outside academia, including in government and industry.
Moreover, the project will contribute to sustaining and enhancing the recent
worldwide explosion of interest in quantum computation by developing new quantum
computing courses and creating new summer research opportunities for the next
generation of quantum scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
project will be achieved through work on two interrelated research goals. The
first is to understand the power of random quantum circuits in the presence of
experimentally realistic noise models. The focus will be both on proving new
classical hardness results that are robust to noise, as well as developing new
classical simulation algorithms tailored to noisy random quantum circuits. The
second goal will be to develop new quantum algorithms that can be run on near-
term quantum experiments which obtain speedups over similarly resource bounded
classical computations. This investigation will build upon prior work of the PI
which established new space bounded quantum algorithms for solving useful linear
algebraic problems such as inverting a matrix, computing a power of a matrix,
and solving the determinant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.