* 2044061
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: A tourism decision support system for Western gateway and natural amenity region communities
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2021,07/31/2021
* Derek Van Berkel, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 49,954.00

Gateway and natural amenity regions (GNAR) throughout the Western U.S. are
facing a number of unprecedented challenges that threaten their economies, the
wellbeing of their residents, and the health of tourists who flock to these
areas for recreation and rejuvenation. Most recently, the COVID-19 pandemic has
led to virulent concerns amongst gateway community leaders about tourists
spreading the virus, harming local residents, and overwhelming these
communities’ limited healthcare resources. With local economies that depend on
the flow of outdoor recreationists and tourists, the disruption of those flows
can have immediate and disastrous consequences for communities in GNARs. This
project's research team brings together expertise from the social and spatial
sciences capable of transforming the way GNAR communities across the Western
U.S. plan for and respond to interruptions in the flow of tourists brought about
by natural disasters and crisis events like the COVID-19 pandemic. The vision is
to develop predictive models of tourism flows and a respective decision support
system that GNAR communities can use to explore and inform local policy
decisions. This project will be integrating publicly available mobility data
into an interactive tourism planning and management tool, rapidly accelerating
the ability of these data to be used by GNAR communities in their efforts to
plan for and manage tourism during natural disasters and crisis events. By
leveraging an established research team with demonstrated experience integrating
disparate datasets to quantify the volume and spatial distribution of tourism
flows across large geographic scales, this project's data and models are ready
to be piloted with willing GNAR communities throughout San Juan County, Utah –
home to Navajo tribal lands and over a dozen small communities which are heavily
reliant on tourism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By utilizing an inclusive engagement
approach to develop a web-based decision support system, this project will bring
new insights into the efficacy of co-producing knowledge and understanding
through smart and connected technologies. The project will also advance our
understanding of effective data visualization using free and open source web
mapping approaches; and provide new knowledge on resilience indicators for GNARs
throughout the Western U.S. These insights can be used to improve approaches to
civic engagement in the context of complex feedbacks from natural hazards and
other crisis events on local economies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.