* 2044056
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Enhancing Communities Preparedness and Resilience to Post-Wildfire Hydrology in Mountainous Areas
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Jonathan Gourley, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 07/31/2022
* USD 41,287.00

Post-wildfire disasters such as flash floods, severe erosion, and debris flows
like the Montecito, CA event that killed 23 people in 2018 are becoming more
costly to lives and infrastructure. These disasters are anticipated to increase
following the record wildfire season just experienced across the western U.S.
Post-wildfire disasters cross multiple scientific disciplines and impact local
communities to government agencies. A lack of observations in mountainous
regions for weather, water, and land management has significantly limited the
progression of scientific knowledge to better monitor and forecast post-wildfire
disasters. Facing increased risk of damage to societal infrastructure and loss
of human life, communities have identified the benefits from gap-filling
observations of precipitation and surface water. This project proposes to unite
the scientific community, bridge with local entities, and coordinate
observations and research efforts targeting the common goal of enhancing
knowledge on post-wildfire hydrology and reducing the effects of post-wildfire
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address both civic priorities
and foster research by advancing monitoring technologies and forecasting tools
of risk related to post-wildfire hydrology, which are currently inadequate in
complex terrain. The University of Oklahoma and National Severe Storms
Laboratory researchers will reach out to and work with core civic partners to
refine the needs of communities and match expertise in hydrometeorology, social
science, radar field observations, and research-to-operations experience to
design a field deployment strategy in Colorado during the Stage 2 portion of the
project. The project will establish a “mobile observatory” on burn areas
comprised of mobile weather radars, stream sensors, disdrometers, and rain
gauges. Datasets collected will advance the scientific community by providing
unique, post-wildfire observations, while immediately enhancing the preparedness
and resiliency of local communities by providing real-time information and
capabilities to map the anticipated impacts. The project will explore the
benefits of “forecasting proximity” in terms of risk perception and engage
communities through local forecasting while improving their connections to the
operational forecast grid. The proposed pilot project will make several
substantial contributions to hydrologic, operational forecasting, and risk
assessment sciences, with direct benefit to local communities. Because post-
wildfire disasters impact basins and communities across the West, an advisory
board committee will be set up that will involve several government agencies and
local stakeholders from western states. It will foster the creation of
coalitions for mobile observations beyond this pilot project. The results will
shift flash-flooding prediction science and post-fire landscape management that
translates into increased societal resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.