* 2044704
* PFI-TT: Gravity Satellite Observation System for Water Resource Management
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,11/30/2023
* C. K. Shum, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 11/30/2023
* USD 420,942.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project aims at the commercialization of a novel
satellite observational technology, which would enable better management of
groundwater resources in the United States and other climate-stressed regions in
the world. The project focuses on the State of California as its agricultural
productions exceeded $50 billion in 2017 - the largest in the United States. The
technology translation would reduce the expenses of California’s Department of
Water Resources and 537 Special Water Districts by 10–20%, which could net a
savings of up to $10 million a year and positively impact its economic
development. The team will train a underrepresented students, enabling them to
realize their aspiration as entrepreneurs and enriching people’s lives with
their innovative inventions. The technology is likely to develop a range of
outputs to provide user-friendly local information for timely monitoring of
natural hazards, formulating sustainable programs, and protecting vulnerable
areas and populations in the United States and the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to capitalize on the market need to
efficiently and efficiently monitor increasingly scarce water resources in the
State of California and other climate-stressed regions in the United States and
the world. Sixty percent of California’s water supply is from groundwater, which
is the main irrigation source. Intensifying extreme weather exacerbates the
scarcity of water due to excessive pumping due to frequent droughts. The
intellectual merits of this project include the demonstration of a novel
technology, its prototyping, and commercialization, to enable all-weather and
timely quantification of groundwater storage in California using data from
NASA’s/GFZ’s Gravity Recovery And Climate Experiment Followon (GRACE-FO)
gravimetry satellites. The team will ameliorate large spatial data gap
limitations and improve temporal resolutions by employing machine learning-
enabled algorithms using an ensemble of additional datasets to effectively
downscale timely groundwater estimates. The technology may significantly reduce
the expense of water management and usage by closing the data gap and enabling
efficient compliance with laws pertaining to water
usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.