* 2044688
* CAREER: Conformable Piezoelectrics for Soft Tissue Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Canan Dagdeviren, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Medical ultrasound has many properties that make it suitable for widespread use
both as an imaging tool and as a ubiquitous biosensing technology. At present,
however, wide deployment of medical ultrasound for disease detection and
monitoring has been limited by rigid sensor geometries. On one hand, rigid
sensor geometries are generally considered desirable, as known geometries
facilitate coherent beamformation and image reconstruction. On the other hand,
however, rigid sensors do not accommodate body surface curvature, necessitating
the application of sensor pressure by a skilled operator during imaging. This
compression-based process of image acquisition, termed “sonography,” requires
considerable skill, in turn increasing interoperator variability. Moreover, the
need to have an operator apply pressure is incompatible with wearable
technology, greatly limiting the scope and utility of medical ultrasound
technology. The aim of this proposed research is to address the core unmet need
described above, which is the development of a novel class of conformable
ultrasound systems that would enable insights into soft tissue biology presently
not possible owing to a lack of suitable instrumentation. The system has the
potential to complement mammographic imaging by providing tissue
characterization data that would facilitate optimal use of scarce breast cancer
care resources. This work will be particularly relevant to developing nations,
where a shortage of qualified ultrasound operators and related infrastructure
greatly limits access to care. The proposed interdisciplinary project will be
integrated with educational and outreach activities, including development of
new courses geared towards disseminating new microfabrication techniques outside
of the traditional physics and material science communities to increase interest
and engagement in STEAM fields and to proliferate the study of piezoelectric
systems at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate education levels.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Obtaining sufficient contact over soft surfaces of large areas (i.e.,
shoulder, breast) or small joints (i.e., finger joints, wrist joints) is not
achievable, due to the rigid planar design of the ultrasound transducer versus
the typical curvilinear shape of body parts. The human breast presents a
particular challenge, as its geometry and deformability are highly variable not
only between subjects but also at different times and ages within a given
subject. At the same time, breast cancer is the most common cancer and such
cancers are typically located within the expected penetration depth of
sonography. As a result, there is an opportunity to develop technology for
longitudinal imaging of breast lesions both for cancer diagnostic and early
detection purposes and also serve as a new non-invasive window into the
biological behavior of breast tumors. The primary goal of the proposed research
is to develop conformable phased array ultrasound patches for soft tissue
imaging over large-area, curvilinear regions by introducing a novel system
design and microfabrication strategy, along with a framework and advanced
algorithms to reconstruct spatiotemporally-accurate images that could be applied
to any human body parts. The challenges that will be addressed during the course
of the project include: 1) Development of large-area, conformable phased array
transducer design, 2) Spatiotemporally-accurate 3-D image reconstruction from
highly curvilinear body parts, 3) In vivo, real-time actuation and sensing on
both in vitro on mock tissue phantoms and in vivo in a limited human trial
focused on the detection, localization, and characterization of breast lesions.
The proposed work will build upon the PI's interdisciplinary expertise and
experience in piezoelectric, microfabricated biomedical devices and conformable
systems. The proposed system will provide interfaces that enable next-generation
features of wearable technologies, such as accurate, real-time and autonomous
monitoring of any soft tissue for 3-D imaging, and machine learning strategies
to detect disease progression in an objective manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.