* 2044859
* CAREER: Developing solution-based thin-film chalcogenide perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Charles Hages, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 01/31/2026
* USD 379,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photovoltaics are a renewable and
clean source of energy which are rapidly becoming one of the cheapest forms of
energy available in the US. However, many key scientific advancements are still
needed to achieve widespread adoption of photovoltaic technology. This includes
discovering and developing new photovoltaic materials and better understanding
and controlling their properties. This NSF CAREER award project, supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, aims to develop a new class of materials – chalcogenide perovskites –
for low-cost, non-toxic, and stable photovoltaics which can replace existing
technologies due to their improved properties. Several challenges limit
experimental progress for this material. To overcome these, novel techniques
developed by Prof. Charles Hages’ research group at the University of Florida
are used to synthesize these new materials. This includes the use of extremely
small (nanoscale) building blocks to uniquely control material assembly.
Experimental work is guided by theoretical work to identify previously
unrealized promising materials whose properties are measured through advanced
characterization techniques. Integrated with this research is a cross-
generational STEM education and outreach plan targeting the underserved local
community. This includes (1) a tailored STEM education program in renewable
energy for the aging population at local independent- and assisted-living
communities, and (2) K-12 education and youth programs in climate change and
renewable energy education. The outcomes of this educational plan are: to
enhance the perception of the value of science &amp; technology to society, the
role of academia, and the value of public funding for these pursuits; to
increase public engagement with science and technology; and to enhance
scientific literacy, particularly among underrepresented
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
NSF CAREER award project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, establishes a new solution-based
synthesis for chalcogenide perovskites and experimentally realizes new
chalcogenide perovskite compounds with desirable optoelectronic properties for
photovoltaics. Chalcogenide perovskites are an emerging class of semiconductor
with the potential to replace the ubiquitous organic-inorganic hybrid metal
halide perovskites as a high-performance photovoltaic absorber. This is a result
of their predicted enhanced stability, favorable charge transport and absorption
properties, and non-toxic nature – while maintaining the defect tolerance and
high optoelectronic tunability typical of perovskites. However, minimal
experimental research is reported in this field, resulting in a significant
theory experiment knowledge gap. Furthermore, the reported high-temperature
syntheses with long reaction times significantly limits their amenability to
tunable materials chemistry for controlling their material properties and
synthesis into thin films. To address this, Prof. Charles Hages’ research group
at the University of Florida pursues research along three specific aims. Aim 1
establishes a new synthesis for thin-film chalcogenide perovskites by reactive
annealing of metastable solution-based nanoparticle precursors. Aim 2 proposes a
new phase stability analysis for this material space and rationalizes a focus in
several previously unrealized selenium-based chalcogenide perovskites. Aim 3
proposes an all-optical characterization strategy to map the synthesis-
structure-property relationship of these new compounds. This research is
integrated with cross-generational STEM education and outreach in renewable
energy, which includes developing and delivering tailored educational modules
for the underserved local aging community and K-12 students. Research is also
integrated with training and education for graduate and undergraduate students
in teaching, technical communication, and in emerging energy
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.