* 2044430
* CAREER: Scheduling Driving Sensing and Control Nodes in Nonlinear Networks with Applications to Fuel-Free Energy Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2021
* Ahmad Taha, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 10/31/2021
* USD 526,527.00

Power and water systems, the Internet, and other infrastructure are assembled
into intertwined networks. These networks evolve nonlinearly in time: small
changes in a system’s inputs result in disproportionate changes in the sensed
outputs (e.g., a minor car accident can disrupt traffic for hours). These
systems form nonlinear networks that rely on ubiquitous sensors and controllers.
Examples include water flow meters and pumps in water systems, ramp meters and
cameras on highways, and solar panels and smart meters in energy networks. As a
result, the scheduling of sensors and controllers embodies a major step in the
reliable operation of various systems and urban infrastructure. When and where
sensors and controllers are placed still present challenging questions for
experts in this field. These are not merely engineering questions---they are, by
and large, socio-economically imperative. To that end, this Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) award supports fundamental research to understand
this scheduling. This project presents an opportunity for scientific
advancements by creating innovative algorithms and educational tools for the
sensors and controllers scheduling problem in nonlinear systems. This is a shift
from existing literature that focuses instead on linear approximations of
nonlinear dynamics, which result in underwhelming performance for various
applications. Furthermore, motivated by the urgent environmental need to
decarbonize energy systems, applications to the placement of renewable energy
resources are explored. The project will also (a) create crowdsourced
educational material through open-source computing and (b) build on curriculum
development through engaging students from under-represented groups.

The project offers a novel framework for the exploration of the sensors and
controllers scheduling problem in nonlinear networks, offering theoretical
breakthroughs in dynamic network sciences. In particular, the project will
investigate new approaches to efficiently quantify observability and
controllability, while exploring parameterization of nonlinear dynamics, first
principles in control and network science, and efficient binary search methods.
The foundations will lead to generating subsets of driving control/sensing nodes
and have major implications in identifying vulnerabilities and network failures.
The research will also create scalable optimization methods that are endowed
with theoretical properties that make them suitable for offline/online placement
or scheduling of sensing and control nodes, for networks of varying sizes, for
systems modeled via differential algebraic or ordinary differential equations,
and under the presence or absence of benign or malicious uncertainty. The
project will apply the theoretical foundations in fuel-free power networks that
are characterized by the intermittent nature of renewables and consumer
behavior.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.