* 2044759
* PFI-TT: Virtual Physical Therapy Using Mobile Devices and Artificial Intelligence
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Pamela Cosman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project includes providing access to physical
therapy to large sections of society who cannot access clinic-based physical
therapy for economic, geographic or health mobility reasons. The new system will
focus initially on patients with stroke and various orthopedic conditions. By
providing accurate, automated movement guidance to patients at home, the project
aims to provide more timely, personalized physical therapy. Caregivers will have
the ability to track the compliance and effectiveness of physical therapy. More
effective patient engagement may lead to better health outcomes. Physical
therapy clinics will be enabled to expand and scale up their businesses to reach
a much larger customer base with innovative hybrid business models combining in-
person, remote, and virtual therapy sessions. This type of system can enable
other healthcare training applications and more meaningful video visits. The
broader impacts of this project also include offering training in market-driven
research, technology development, commercialization and entrepreneurship to the
project team as well as broadening participation of women and underrepresented
minority entrepreneurs in the commercialization effort. Thus, successful
development and deployment of the virtual physical therapy system will have
broad societal, commercial and educational benefits.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project creates a virtual physical therapy system by combining innovations in
machine vision, artificial intelligence and mobile video technologies to ensure
deep physical therapy expertise can be made available anywhere, with high
accuracy, and in a personalized and timely fashion. For many medical conditions,
ensuring proper exercise techniques throughout rehabilitation is very important,
and constitutes a significant portion of a treatment session. Exercise quality
performed by patients at home can vary. Some exercises can be harmful if
performed incorrectly, causing painful setbacks. The team seeks to develop an
advanced prototype of a virtual physical therapy system which can be used by
patients anywhere with just a mobile device - either for live sessions with a
remote therapist or for sessions with a machine-learning-based avatar which
emulates a therapist with important real-time guidance. Successful
implementation of the integrated solution will involve motion tracking and force
estimation algorithms using mobile device cameras and machine learning
algorithms for patient performance evaluation, with understanding of contextual
and human factors that may guide judgment of physical therapists. The avatar and
guidance rendering algorithms will minimize both human reaction and network
latency in ways that can be most effective for patient
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.