* 2044281
* CAREER: Atomically Manipulated Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Gabriele Grosso, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2026
* USD 316,343.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the increasing
demand for faster and more efficient ways to process and transfer information by
developing materials that use light instead of electrons. This will be realized
by controlling light-matter interactions down to the single-atom level, which
will result in more powerful and scalable devices for computation and
communication. Such atomic precision has long been an elusive goal, but now
there are methods to reach it by using focused beams of high-energy electrons.
The team will employ these tools to directly manipulate the atomic structure of
solids and create useful light emitting centers. In this project, the group will
establish a theoretical and experimental research program to investigate the new
properties resulting from altering the atomic structure of so-called two-
dimensional materials, namely materials that are only one atom thick. The PI’s
long-term research goal is to control light-matter interactions down to an
extremely small scale, the nanoscale, to develop new materials and devices for
faster computing and sensing. The research activity of this project will be
integrated with educational outreach to local, disadvantaged secondary schools
and the large underrepresented minority population at the City University of New
York. These educational activities will demystify and teach quantum technology
at multiple educational levels. Underrepresented students at different levels
will take part in cutting-edge research opportunities that will help them to
better prepare for college and careers in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM). The team will collaborate with science teachers at local
high schools to create a program based on quantum science that connects younger
generations and underrepresented groups with advanced research. The goal is to
increase these students’ participation in quantum research and STEM and equip
them to become active players in the future of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this research is to establish a theoretical and experimental research
activity to characterize and control with unprecedented precision solid-state
emitters, such as excitons and atom-like systems, in atomically-patterned two-
dimensional materials. The PI combines high resolution transmission electron
microscopy, advanced image analysis based on neural networks, high resolution
imaging and spectroscopy to create regular networks of active defects in two-
dimensional materials and study light-matter interactions in these new systems.
Two objectives drive this research: (i) Shape the exciton potential landscape in
two-dimensional semiconductors to design multifunctional atomic-scale excitonic
circuits. By engineering the dielectric function through atomic manipulation,
the PI is pioneering methods for controlling exciton confinement, interaction,
and emission with specifically designed atomic superlattices and traps that,
combined together, create functional atomic circuits for enhanced exciton
transport and coherence. (ii) Tailor the single-photon emission of
deterministically produced structural defects in 2D materials. Answering
fundamental questions about the nature of single-photon emitters may open
pathways to new quantum regimes arising from large-scale emitter arrays with
controlled interaction and integration with photonic resonators. The proposed
approach has the potential to change the landscape of solid-state quantum
technologies, providing a new level of scientific understanding of quantum
materials as well as the tools to produce and control them. By targeting the
building blocks of many optical devices, this project will establish quantum
photonics as a reliable and inherently powerful technology for metrology,
communication, and information processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.