* 2044462
* CAREER: CAS: Combining Main Group and Transition Metals to Tune the Electronic Structure, Photophysics, and Photocatalytic Activity of Spinel Oxide Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Kathryn Knowles, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2026
* USD 698,568.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Kathryn Knowles of the University of
Rochester will develop novel synthetic approaches to mixed-metal oxide
nanocrystals and investigate their properties. This research aims to generate a
comprehensive fundamental understanding of the structure-property relationship
in this class of nanocrystals that has the potential to facilitate rapid
degradation, using sunlight, of persistent organic pollutants in water sources.
These pollutants, such as dyes, pesticides, herbicides, and "forever chemicals"
(per- and polyfluoroalkyl compounds), in the environment can have negative
impacts on human health. The magnetic properties of the nanocrystals will allow
their easy recovery from solution after use. Dr. Knowles and her team also seek
to cultivate positive attitudes about scientific research in undergraduate and
elementary school students by engaging them in activities that capture the
creative and collaborative aspects of scientific research. These activities
include an open-ended, inquiry-based capstone project to be incorporated into an
upper-level undergraduate physical chemistry course and scientific activities
that will be disseminated to a large, diverse cohort of elementary school
students in a virtual format during National Chemistry
Week.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this research is to enable the
rational design of visible light-absorbing semiconductors with efficient
separation of photogenerated charges and slow carrier recombination kinetics for
used as photoactive components of light-harvesting technology. This research
will integrate nanocrystal synthesis, electronic structure calculations, and
spectroscopic measurements to generate a comprehensive fundamental understanding
of the relationships between composition, electronic structure, photophysical
properties, and excited state dynamics of colloidal spinel oxide nanocrystals of
general formula AB2O4. The Knowles group will establish a library of
heterobimetallic molecular cluster precursors that will provide access to a
broad range of spinel oxide compositions. Incorporating main group and
transition metal cations into the same metal oxide nanocrystals will enable
systematic examination of the synergistic effects of combining metal cations
containing empty s-orbitals and partially filled 3d orbitals on the optical,
electronic, and excited state properties of metal oxide nanocrystals. Density
functional theory calculations, transient absorption and electrochemical
impedance spectroscopies, and photocatalysis experiments will (i) predict and
confirm the dependence of electronic and photophysical properties of spinel
oxide nanocrystals on their composition and (ii) correlate the band-edge redox
potentials and excited-state dynamics of these nanocrystals with their ability
to photocatalyze the oxidative degradation of a broad range of organic
pollutants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.