* 2044232
* Cultivating Physics Identity and Belonging for Women in Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jessica Rosenberg, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2024
* USD 318,791.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating how a student-
led mentorship program supports undergraduate physics majors to succeed. The
nation needs well-prepared STEM professionals as growth of the STEM workforce
outpaces overall workforce growth. Despite this growth, women still make up only
29% of physical scientists and earn only 21% of the bachelor’s degrees in
physics. Increasing the fraction of women and people from underrepresented
groups in physics is important for the strength of physics as a discipline and
for the growth of the science and engineering workforce. The Pion Program is a
student-led mentorship and career conceptualization program designed to improve
the preparation of the next generation of physics students for graduate school
and the workforce. The program is being developed and launched by the Society of
Physics Students and Sigma Pi Sigma, professional organizations for students
under the umbrella of the American Institute of Physics. The project aims to
study the impact of this program on the development of physics identity and
sense of belonging among women and students from underrepresented groups.
Because they are connected to persistence, it is valuable to understand what
interventions can increase belonging and physics identity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on extensive literature that has shown
the importance of students’ sense of physics identity and belonging to
persistence in STEM. The results will expand on a well-established model of
physics students’ identity to better understand two key aspects of identity: (1)
how the ability to conceptualize physics careers beyond the academy impacts
women’s physics identity and belonging, particularly for students who do not
intend to follow an academic career trajectory and (2) how physics leadership
contributes to a student’s identity and sense of belonging. With mentorship as a
central component of the Pion Program and a best practice in helping students
develop a sense of identity and belonging, the project will explore the
contributions of mentorship to students’ understanding of the career
opportunities available to physics degree recipients and to the development of
leadership identity. For students who participate in the Pion Program as event
leaders and peer mentors, the project will explore the development of leadership
identity and the connection to physics identity and sense of belonging. These
explorations seek to broaden current models of physics identity and belonging.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.