* 2044111
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Developing Low Power Wide Area Sensor Networks to Improve Cold Region Disaster Prediction and Management in the Fairbanks North Star Borough
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2021
* Vladimir Alexeev, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,966.00

The Arctic and subarctic are experiencing significant environmental shifts from
rapid climate change induced warming. The goal of this project is to bring
together local organizations engaged in land management and protection and
disaster preparedness in the Fairbanks North Star Borough, Alaska, with
researchers from the University of Alaska, Fairbanks to develop place-based,
data-driven community resilience indicators and interventions that will better
enable Alaskans to predict and respond to weather and climate driven events such
as thaw-related flooding, subsidence of thawed soils, and wildfire. These
hazards are natural to the local ecosystem, but recent increases in the
frequency, intensity, and duration of these events have challenged the
resilience of mitigation or prevention strategies. Conventional sensor networks
require high energy consumption and large antenna systems to achieve the range
required for remote installations, which has resulted in sparse coverage,
especially in low population areas. Newer technologies like Low Power Wide Area
(LPWA) networks provide a solution to overcome both cost and range issues,
allowing for substantial improvements in observation networks. This project aims
to determine the feasibility of using LPWA, support the collection of data types
of greatest interest and utility to the community, and improve modeling,
planning, and decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providing consistent,
regular observations of crucial climate-related variables in areas of sparse
coverage allows for the ability to better inform disaster management, policy,
and decision-making mechanisms. Exploring LPWA networks of measurement sensors
will expand scientific and technical knowledge crucial for practical
applications in planning for climate-change-related threats in cold regions,
such as extreme snowfall and flooding and infrastructure damage due to frozen
ground thaw. Students and community members will be trained during the course of
the development of the network, and will learn to address climate challenges
common to cold regions. Long-term outcomes will be used as materials for STEM
education and shared with stakeholders who will directly benefit. The new LPWA
networks are expected to serve as an alternative method for rural and suburban
communities to collect data, leading to efficient resource consumption, disaster
management, and better land use in world-wide cold regions. Testing this
application in the Fairbanks North Star Borough, where data validation is
possible, will ultimately benefit many regions that are even more remote and
underserved. This project is in response to the Civic Innovation Challenge
program, Track B—Resilience to Natural Disasters—and is a collaboration between
NSF and the Department of Homeland Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.