* 2044453
* Collaborative Research: Gas Hydrate Contribution to the Ross Sea Carbon Budget; Shallow Sediment to Water Column; Present and Future
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Richard Coffin, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,082,917.00

Understanding climate change on Earth requires significant insight on
geochemical and geobiological cycles in both polar regions and many environments
in between. Methane is a major focus because of its substantial sediment loading
and its high atmospheric heat absorption as a greenhouse gas. While the Arctic
has been the primary climate change focus for studies on methane, the
Antarctic’s Ross Sea, embedded with a vast ephemeral reservoir of carbon, has
been recognized to have an extensive bottom ocean layer – sediment interface
that is one of the most rapidly warming regions on Earth. New studies are needed
to test the significance of potentially vast transitory gas hydrate carbon
reservoirs present in the Ross Sea and provide a thorough assessment of methane
reservoirs in the Southern Ocean. The focus on the Ross Sea is justified by
recent drilling expeditions, which suggest a susceptibility of the Ross Sea to
climatic fluctuations. This large carbon reserve appears to be sealed in the
form of gas hydrate as evidenced by wide-spread seismic evidence. Intriguingly,
recent recognition of similar seismic data indicates that this carbon reservoir
has been underestimated due to carbon storage in deep sediment
hydrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will serve as a foundation
for improving both future simulations of oceanic carbon and the interpretation
of past paleo-oceanographic cycles. In this project, plans are presented to
explore a possible extensive gas hydrate reservoir in Ross Sea sediment and
determine whether climate change could be influencing this region. This large
carbon reserve appears to be held in the form of gas hydrate as evidenced by key
seismic data. This indication of warming and ice melting coupled with high
thermogenic gas hydrate loadings suggest the Ross Sea is an essential
environment to determine contributions of current day and potential future
methane, petroleum, and glacial carbon to shallow sediment and water column
carbon cycles. The project will compare carbon source(s) and cycling within
phytoplankton, glacier ice, shallow sediment carbon, oil sourced from deep
sediment, and methane trapped in gas hydrates. Data collection will include
seismic profiling, geochemistry, and geo-microbiology parameters conducted via
two field campaigns in the Ross Sea, tentatively planned for December/January
2022/2023 and February/April 2024. The diverse team includes experts in
geophysics, geochemistry, ocean chemistry, geo-microbiology and isotope
geochemistry. Ultimately, the project aims to create baseline data of present-
day conditions in the Ross Sea to provide capability for assessing future
anthropogenic influence on carbon cycling. In addition to the scientific
activities, the project has extensive educational activities, since education
related to climate change requires thorough provision of information across all
academic levels, government and the public. The project will fund four graduate
students and support the training of undergraduate researchers. Results will be
disseminated internationally to non-scientific audiences through field blogs, PI
Websites, numerous education and outreach activities, as well as being
incorporated into graduate and undergraduate courses. Finally, this project will
provide training and support for undergraduate, graduate, and early career
researchers at a Hispanic Serving Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.