* 2044432
* An Interdisciplinary Exploration of Student Engagement in Scientific Practices in Undergraduate Biology, Chemistry, and Physics Laboratory Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Caroline Dahlberg, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 02/29/2024
* USD 299,428.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in undergraduate STEM education
by examining student learning in laboratory courses. Many students enroll in
introductory laboratory courses for multiple disciplines at the same time. As a
result, there is a need for interdisciplinary investigation into how students
experience scientific practices in such courses. This project focuses on the
eight scientific practices described in the Framework for K-12 Education and
embedded in the Next Generation Science Standards. Scientific practices are
important because they are fundamental to scientific discovery, inherently
interdisciplinary, and applicable across scientific contexts in higher
education. This project will investigate similarities and differences in the
scientific practices incorporated into introductory laboratory courses in
biology, chemistry, and physics. It will focus on how students, staff, faculty,
and teaching assistants value scientific practices that are perceived as more
technical (such as analyzing data) or more social (such as communicating
information). This project will determine whether and how students engage with
specific scientific practices in biology, chemistry, and physics laboratory
courses and how that engagement is encouraged and rewarded. The findings from
this project will expand current understanding of scientific practices in
introductory science courses. In doing so, this work will lay a foundation for
making these laboratory courses more equitable and supportive of a greater
diversity of learners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this interdisciplinary
project is to explore the incorporation and gendering of scientific practices in
introductory biology, chemistry, and physics lab courses at a primarily
undergraduate institution using a comparative case study research design. This
project will blend three theoretical lenses: the Framework for K-12 Science
Education, accountable disciplinary knowledge (ADK), and technical-social
dualism (TDS). These three lenses operationalize what counts as a scientific
practice (the Framework), what it means for students to be accountable for
engaging in a practice (ADK), and the gendering of scientific practices that are
perceived to be more technical/masculine versus more social/feminine (TDS). The
comparative case study approach will enable critical analyses of data from a
variety of sources, including surveys, interviews, and classroom observations
and artifacts. Case studies of biology, chemistry, and physics lab courses will
provide insight into structural and interpersonal equity with regard to how
scientific practices are valued, as well as examine how and by whom scientific
practices are enacted across disciplines. Structural perspectives include those
practices that are targeted by departmental and instructor learning goals, as
well how those practices are assessed. Interpersonal perspectives include the
ways that instructors and teaching assistants facilitate student engagement in
scientific practices, and how students participate in them. This work will help
to fill a significant gap in the discipline-based education research literature,
namely the lack of interdisciplinary studies across biology, chemistry, and
physics at the undergraduate level. Further, this project will provide insight
into how structural and interpersonal mechanisms in laboratory courses may
contribute to perceptions of some scientific disciplines as more social/feminine
or technical/masculine than others. Finally, the findings from this work will
provide guidance to support faculty, staff, and other instructors in their
efforts to improve their interactions, instruction, and mentorship of students
in the early stages of their science careers. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.