* 2044385
* Design, Implementation, and Evaluation of a Gene Editing Technology Toolkit for Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Hooi Lynn Kee, Stetson University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,996.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by educating biology students
in the application, use, and ethics of a novel gene editing technology.
Clustered Regularly Interspersed Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) technology
has emerged as a rapid and easy to use gene editing technique. CRISPR
technology, which was recognized with a Nobel Prize in 2020, is making an impact
in medicine, agriculture, food production, public policy, and business, as well
as in popular media. Given the broad reach of CRISPR, there is an increased need
and urgency for undergraduate students to learn about and consider how to use
the technology appropriately. The project plans to build instructional modules
on CRISPR technology for both introductory and advanced biology students. These
modules will be designed to create curricular experiences that are novel,
relevant, and accessible for students as well as to increase faculty
understanding of CRISPR technology. By implementing these modules with both STEM
and non-STEM majors, this work should help develop informed citizens who can
confront the societal implications of CRISPR and other gene editing
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the proposed project is
to develop, implement, and evaluate both dry-lab and wet-lab educational
experiences framed around gene editing using CRISPR. The toolkit to be developed
in the project will include a series of dry-lab Case-Based Learning modules that
focus on CRISPR editing of genes and that will engage students through computer-
based DNA sequence analysis, manipulation, and modeling. Wet-lab experiences
will include a Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experience that is framed
around using CRISPR technology in painted lady butterflies to study butterfly
wing and body patterning and development. Bioethical training will be built into
both curricular activities to promote the studentsâ€™ understanding of the
societal implications of gene editing. The project team will evaluate the
impacts of the new curricula on student learning, scientific design and process
skills, ethical reasoning, and post-course attitudes and activities. The project
is intended to provide broad training and support of educators by disseminating
curricular materials and approaches through virtual instructional workshops,
conference presentations, publications, and the development of a community of
practice for CRISPR technology educators. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.