* 2044526
* CAREER: Ultrasonically Assisted Wire Arc Additive Manufacturing of Metal Matrix Nanocomposites for High-strength, Lightweight Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Xun Liu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2025
* USD 501,865.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant focuses on an innovative
ultrasonically assisted wire arc additive manufacturing process for fabricating
metal matrix nanocomposite structures in freeform and at large scale. Metal
matrix nanocomposites are a promising class of lightweight materials with
superior mechanical performance attributed to well-dispersed nanoparticles
within the bulk. Wire arc additive manufacturing is based on arc welding
principles in which a continuously fed metal wire is melted and deposited into a
desired complex shape, layer-by-layer. The process enables the direct
manufacture of metal matrix nanocomposite functional parts and is advantageous
in distinctly high deposition rate and low cost compared with powder-based
additive manufacturing processes. This project would facilitate wide
applications of metal matrix nanocomposites for lightweight structures, which
improves energy efficiency, reduces fuel consumption and benefits various
transportation industries, thus contributing to national economy and security.
Multidisciplinary and real-world problem-based student training at different
levels are well integrated into this project. Research results are transformed
into multiple outreach initiatives that increase manufacturing career awareness
in young generations and under-represented minorities. The virtual lab tools
promote distance and continuing education. All of these contribute to
development of globally competitive and diverse STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to investigate ultrasonically
assisted wire arc additive manufacturing of metal matrix nanocomposites. While
lightweight, high strength components are possible in these materials, achieving
superior mechanical properties is challenging due to agglomeration of
nanoparticles in the repeated melting cycles, solidification defects, porosity
and inferior as-cast microstructure. To improve wire arc additive manufacturing,
this research utilizes superimposed ultrasonic vibration to disperse the
nanoparticles, refine the microstructure and minimize the defects. Specific
objectives are to (1) understand the interaction of acoustic and electromagnetic
fields and nanoparticle dispersions on melt pool hydrodynamics, (2) reveal
coupling principles of acoustic field and nanoparticles on microstructure
evolution in the repeated melting and solidification cycles, and (3) integrate
data-driven and physics-based approaches for high fidelity modeling and
analysis. The ultrasonically assisted wire arc additive manufacturing system is
equipped with multiple sensors for online thermal-mechanical-acoustic analysis
for process monitoring and control. Parts built with this hybrid process under
different conditions are subject to comprehensive evaluation and multi-scale
microstructure characterization. To establish relationships between process
parameters, deposition profile, microstructure and mechanical properties,
emerging data science tools are utilized, which are regularized by physics-based
molten pool, solidification and phase transformation models. This modeling
framework enables computational and data efficient tools for analyzing complex
nonlinear physics involved in various manufacturing
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.