* 2044786
* EAGER: NSF2026: From Thinking to Inventing: Towards Creative Agents that Discover Novelty and Learn how to Accommodate it
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Matthias Scheutz, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,997.00

While recent successes demonstrate the potential of artificial intelligence (AI)
technologies, there are tenacious challenges left to address before AI programs
will be able to reach the cognitive flexibility and sophistication of the human
mind. One of the most pressing problems is how to deal with the unknown, with
novel contexts or aspects of the world for which an AI system was not originally
designed. Such "open-world" AI is still in its infancy and existing AI
techniques do not easily transfer to open worlds. The goal of this project is to
investigate ways in which AI agents can be endowed with creative problem-solving
skills that allow them to negotiate open worlds and invent new tools, concepts,
and eventually theories. Such a system could be the next major disruptive
technology in AI, enabling not only long-term autonomy and resilience of robots
in the light of faults and unexpected events, but more importantly, providing
technology that could accelerate the solution of pressing problems that humanity
is currently able to solve only slowly, if at all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
AI algorithms rely on having complete models of the task and domain in which
they are supposed to operate. If information is missing, they are not able to
plan how to acquire it and extend their knowledge. Yet, systems that can
determine that they are missing critical knowledge could use that information to
guide their knowledge acquisition process and possibly develop creative
approaches for inventing new tools and theories. This project will develop an
integrated problem-solving system that adapts and incorporates different
learning techniques and deploys each of these methods in a targeted fashion
based on the problem aspect the approach is best equipped to solve. This system
will be extended with the ability to apply different strategies for
experimenting (just like humans) with objects in its environment to discover
their properties and the actions that can be performed with those objects to
build up new knowledge about objects and their
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.