* 2044358
* ChangeMaker K12: A Digital Platform for Supporting Elementary Preservice Teachers in Teaching Engineering and Human-centered Design
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Douglas Williams, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 295,737.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the preparation of
undergraduate pre-service teachers through the design, development, and adoption
of a digital platform that supports effective teaching of engineering design to
children. The project intends to create and test the online teaching and
learning platform, ChangeMaker K-12, through engagement of 40 pre-service
teachers (PSTs) who will assist in the development and piloting of the materials
over five semesters. ChangeMaker K-12 will be designed as a platform for
delivering high quality learning opportunities in engineering and human-centered
design for PSTs and elementary school children. Ultimately, the project aims to
provide a free website with materials and guiding steps to support innovative
habits and problem-solving processes in PSTs and in elementary aged students.
These materials are meant to be useful to students in classrooms, informal
education settings, and homes. For each phase of the process, the platform will
provide step-by-step protocols, with built-in videos and games that assist in
engaging in design thinking with fidelity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This design-
based-research project aims to empower undergraduate K-5 PSTs to confidently
engage K-5 students in engineering processes through the design, development,
and adoption of a free online platform with resources that support effective
teaching of engineering design and human-centered design accessible to
marginalized youth. The project has four key features. First is early and
continuous involvement of PSTs in design-based research cycle. Second is a
platform designed for adoption and propagation. Third is the testing of the
platform in both an undergraduate teacher preparation program and high poverty
low performing schools. And fourth is its dissemination to teacher preparation
programs in Louisiana as well as professional organizations. An iterative design
process will be used to develop the materials and supports that will be
available through the ChangeMaker K-12 platform. The resources will be designed
to scaffold preservice teachers in learning and experiences in solving real
world problems through practitioner inquiry. Resources and support for engaging
elementary school children in engineering and human-centered design is core to
the platform strategy. The project intends to share the materials and project
findings with its community partners including six public school systems, Boys
and Girls Club of Acadiana, and the United Way of Acadiana. Dissemination of
materials and findings will also include peer teacher preparation programs in
Louisiana and through professional organizations with a focus on educational
technology and teacher preparation. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools. The
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship (Noyce) Program is providing co-funding for
this IUSE: EHR project to support the project's preservice teacher preparation
goals, which are well-aligned with Noyce Program
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.