* 2044354
* Transforming STEM Career Pathways: Examining a Multigenerational Mentorship Environment to Support Persistence of Women of Color Pursuing STEM Education at Community Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Dionne Cross Francis, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing the success of
women of color (Black/African American, Latina, Asian American, and Indigenous
women) who are pursuing STEM education at two-year institutions. Women remain
significantly underrepresented in many STEM fields and in the educational
pathways that lead into those fields. This situation has been attributed to
gender-based experiences that result in feelings of invisibility and isolation.
Such experiences tend to be exacerbated for women who hold other marginalized
identities, such as social class, citizenship, age, and race. Yet, most efforts
designed to broaden STEM participation try to advance student persistence by
targeting singular marginalized identities. Researchers have cited the
importance of developing a dual race- and gender-based social network to
increase student success. The importance of an intersectional approach is even
greater because of the COVID-19 pandemic’s impacts on women of color. In
addition to managing their own education in an online format, many women of
color have major responsibilities in maintaining their families' health and
survival during the pandemic. These efforts often require managing food,
financial, and housing insecurity while navigating complex, disjointed support
systems. Advancing STEM participation of women of color requires the creation of
spaces that holistically support the complex interplay of their intersecting
identities. In these “counterspaces,” women of color can develop asset-based
narratives and the mindset and skills needed to thrive academically and
psychologically. This project will examine the effectiveness of a culturally
responsive counterspace that features multigenerational mentorship and is
focused on wellbeing and thriving. It is expected that this counterspace will
promote the persistence of women of color in their pursuit of STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will evaluate the effectiveness of a
program designed to address the psychological and emotional challenges that
women of color experience in pursuing STEM careers. Project goals include
include applying the model of counterspaces and multigenerational mentoring to
women of color in community college and understanding the ways in which an
explicit focus on STEM identity development and psychosocial wellbeing may
affect STEM persistence among women of color at community colleges. To achieve
these goals, the project team will conduct a multi-methodological research study
and a program evaluation comprised of both process and outcome evaluation
components. This study will add to the understanding of counterspaces, including
the specific features of counterspaces that support STEM identity development of
women of color at community colleges. The study expects to identify the ways in
which activities that employ multigenerational mentorship can promote feelings
of belonging, emergent STEM identities, and STEM persistence of women of color
at the community college. The research will expand understanding of the factors
that inform the decision-making processes of Black/African American, Latina,
Asian American, and Indigenous women in community colleges who complete a two-
year program and enter the STEM workforce or transfer into a four-year STEM
program, or do not persist in STEM. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.