* 2044841
* CAREER: Memory-Efficient, Heterogeneity-Aware and Robust Architecture for Federated Intelligence on Edge Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,10/31/2021
* Cong Wang, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 10/31/2021
* USD 181,584.00

The recent trend of migrating computation from the centralized cloud to
distributed edge devices is reshaping the landscape of today’s Internet,
especially under the unprecedented challenges of the COVID19 pandemic. With
privacy being a critical concern in data aggregation, Federated Learning emerges
as a promising solution to such privacy-utility challenge. It pushes the
computation towards consumer’s edge devices, where the data is generated. By
exchanging statistical information, the participants perform collaborative
learning in a distributed fashion. Unfortunately, the original design still
faces new system-architectural challenges from limited memory, software/hardware
heterogeneity, security and statistical diversity from different edge devices.
The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to design, optimize and implement
a memory-efficient, heterogeneity-aware and robust architecture for federated
learning on consumer’s edge devices. In particular, it aims to: 1) remove the
memory barriers of running the computational-intensive learning tasks; 2)
resolve the software and hardware heterogeneity among various kinds of devices;
3) secure the information exchange and the machine learning backend. The
research will provide a stack of solutions to address the urging needs in
realizing collaborative intelligence on edge devices with
computation/memory/energy-efficiencies, security and robustness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address an urgent problem to bridge the
gap between the vast data available from consumer’s edge devices and the rising
interest of utilizing such private data to improve our wellbeing. The algorithms
and tools developed in this CAREER project will lay the foundations to a
plethora of new applications on massively distributed edge devices, as the
essential elements for building a smart, connected and resilient community. The
CAREER program will advance STEM education by developing new educational
components related to machine learning, edge computing and security. This
includes diverse outreach plans of cybersecurity summer camps, junior research
symposium, high school instructor mentorship, coding competitions and the
inclusion of underrepresented minority and women engineers. The potential use
cases will be also explored with the collaborating industrial partners to enrich
their business models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.