* 2044375
* CAREER: Characterizing Persister Cell Metabolism in Bacteria
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Mehmet Orman, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Antibiotic tolerance is one of the most critical global public health threats of
the 21st century. Bacterial cells that are temporarily resistant to high levels
of antibiotics are referred to as persisters. Nearly all bacterial cultures
contain a small population of persister cells. Persisters are thought to be
responsible for recurring chronic infections and drug-resistant mutants. The
goal of this project is to identify common mechanisms exhibited by persister
cells from a variety of bacterial strains. Anti-persister strategies will
developed based on our increased understanding of the underlying mechanisms.
Engagement of pre-college students in STEM activities is an emphasis of the
outreach activities planned. Teaming is already underway with local elementary
and middle schools with &gt;80% underrepresented minority students. A summer
workshop is planned, as well as development of short animations. Articles
describing the research results will be submitted to journals targeted at
4th-8th grade students such as Frontiers for Young Minds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The persistence phenomenon has been documented across
multiple microbes and in response to a variety of antibiotics. Persister cell
survival is marked by growth inhibition during antibiotic treatment and
resumption of growth upon removal of antibiotics. Persisters are generally
assumed to be dormant cells with a depressed metabolism. In contrast, hypothesis
driving this project is that persisters have active but unique metabolic
mechanisms that regulate the reversible switching and maintenance of these
cells. An array of assays will be employed to understand how metabolism: (i) is
involved in the formation of persister cells and (ii) maintains the survival and
resuscitation of persister cells. The results will challenge paradigms regarding
persister cell dormancy and metabolism, shed light on persister cell
resuscitation mechanisms, provide platforms for studying the metabolic
heterogeneity of persister cell subpopulations during and after antibiotic
treatment, and integrate multiple lines of evidence to enhance our understanding
of the eco-evolutionary aspects of bacterial
persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.