* 2044937
* CAREER: Illuminating how plant water-use strategies mediate ecosystem response to multiple climate extremes
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2026
* William Anderegg, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2026
* USD 536,658.00

Climate change is expected to bring more frequent and more severe droughts in
many regions of the globe including the western United States. While important
strides have been made in understanding how forests respond to individual
droughts, the long-term response to multiple drought events is unclear. Thus,
the response of forests to multiple climate extremes like severe drought is
unknown but critical for predicting future forest health and resilience in a
changing climate. This research will combine greenhouse experiments, field
measurements of mature forests, long-term forest plots, and remote-sensing data
to quantify how trees and forests respond to multiple droughts. The research
activities will be integrated with a wide array of education activities to
achieve three goals: 1) develop undergraduate community-engaged learning
projects for three community non-profit organizations, 2) integrate student
learning projects with science engagement activities to broaden participation in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics, and 3) train undergraduate and
graduate students in research activities. The project will establish an
iterative and interactive engagement with land managers and the US Forest
Service to improve forest management and resilience in a changing climate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate extremes pose a fundamental threat to forest
health in the coming century, but the physiological processes that govern tree
responses and ecosystem fluxes remain elusive. In particular, understanding the
cumulative effects of successive droughts at the tissue, tree, and ecosystem
scales remains challenging due to a wide array of individual and interacting
mechanisms that can either increase or decrease resilience. This project will
quantify these drivers across scales from individual trees to ecosystems using a
combination of greenhouse experiments, field trait and demography measurements,
long-term monitoring networks, and remote-sensing data. This research will
develop and discover novel information about the physiology of plant hydraulics
in response to multiple drought events, accounting for variation within
individual plants, populations, and species across the southwestern United
States. The project will tackle the scaling of the non-linear physiological and
demographic processes that mediate responses to climate extremes. Thus, the
project will provide an advance in the ability to predict and manage forest
responses to multiple droughts in a changing climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.