* 2044053
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track B: Strengthening Resilience of Ojibwe Nations across Generations (STRONG): Sovereignty, Food, Water, and Cultural (in)Security
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Aaron Packman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

Practicing resilience has always been vital to Ojibwe lifeways. Grounded in the
importance of place, Ojibwe worldviews recognize the hierarchically dependent
Four Orders (physical, plant, animal, human) and the importance of cultural
security for maintaining these relationships. When any of these orders is
threatened, resilience and sustainability are also threatened. Environmentally
destructive development and climate change, alongside cultural decline, for
example, impact communitiesâ€™ abilities to respond to climate change and natural
disasters. This project aims to address the resilience challenges faced by
Indigenous communities by bringing together scientific and traditional
ecological knowledge and utilizing data science and advanced sensing
technologies to strengthen data sovereignty, resource sustainability, and
climate resilience in Ojibwe communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
Indigenous resilience is a complex endeavor. Most resilience science generally
develops in isolation from the communities experiencing climate change, natural
disasters, and extreme weather events and focuses primarily on cities, large-
scale food and energy production, water resources, and industrial systems.
Integrating scientific and traditional ecological knowledge to strengthen
resilience requires collaborative, sovereignty-affirming, tribally-driven
research to address many fundamental questions: (1) How can transdisciplinary
research best foster resilience in the face of long-term declines in
environmental quality and short-term extreme events?; (2) How can scientific and
traditional ecological knowledge be synergized to improve resilience in
Indigenous communities?; (3) What mechanisms, tools, and technologies best
support collection and synthesis of scientific and traditional ecological
knowledge?; and, (4) What indicators can most effectively translate synthesized
knowledge into improved resilience capabilities in Indigenous communities? This
planning project brings together a core group of scientists in engineering,
natural resource management, computer science, and social sciences with
community leaders and knowledge holders to identify culturally relevant
indicators for monitoring resilience and co-produce decision-support tools to
strengthen community resilience. This will be achieved by: (1) developing a
fundamental and respectful understanding of traditional ecological knowledge,
systems, and co-production; (2) developing understanding of the threats to
Ojibwe resilience; (3) establishing new methodologies incorporating the
relationships of the Ojibwe Four Orders with state-of-the-art environmental
sensing and data science to help identify and evaluate resilience solutions;
and, (4) developing a framework to identify and analyze pathways to adaptation
and/or increased resilience for Ojibwe nations/ The proposed plan will offer a
resilience framework to develop monitoring, prediction, and response systems and
decision-making tools that can be extended to other Native Nations and
communities to advance cultural, food, and water
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.