* 2044620
* Understanding Interstellar Aromatic Chemistry: An Integrated Experimental, Theoretical, and Astronomical Approach
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Michael McCarthy, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2023
* USD 383,933.00

Molecules are identified in space with radio telescopes by matching emission
signals with precise laboratory measurements made on Earth. Using this
coordinated effort, more than 200 molecules, many containing carbon ? an element
central to life ? have been identified in our Milky Way galaxy. In this research
effort, scientists will make new laboratory measurements of large carbon-bearing
molecules that might be detected with radio telescopes. Once very precise
measurements of the molecules? unique signature are made in the laboratory,
scientists will use radio telescopes to search for evidence of the same signals
in space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They will search for these new molecules
primarily in large clouds of gas which are widely believed to be the birthplace
of stars. These clouds are extremely cold (within a few degrees of absolute
zero) and have very low density but are known to harbor a rich inventory of
small carbon molecules. From these observations, scientists will learn what
types of molecules can be formed in space under extreme conditions. These
observations are used to infer the pathways by which more complex molecules are
synthesized under such inhospitable conditions. Molecules with cyclic or ring
shapes are of interest because they are especially stable, commonly serving as
the building blocks for larger molecules such as pharmaceutical drugs, polymers,
and DNA on Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.