* 2044897
* CAREER: Incorporating host phenology into the framework of biodiversity-disease relationships
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Catherine Searle, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 12/31/2026
* USD 738,584.00

Major changes to biodiversity are occurring around the world - this can alter
the risk of disease. Understanding and predicting how these changes impact
infectious disease requires knowledge of the relationship between biodiversity
and disease. However, because biodiversity may vary throughout the year, it can
be difficult to measure host diversity and the contribution of each species to
disease transmission. Therefore, scientists must understand how the seasonality
of organisms in a community affects the risk of disease. In this project,
researchers will study seasonal changes to amphibian biodiversity and how these
changes impact infection with a fungus. A greater understanding of biodiversity-
disease relationships is essential for effective control of emerging infectious
diseases and management of susceptible species. This CAREER project also
incorporates educational activities that focus on increasing the diversity of
students who receive training in the scientific process by providing research
opportunities for undergraduate and high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will combine field sampling, experimental
manipulations, and modeling to incorporate host phenology into the study of
biodiversity-disease relationships. The project focuses on the following
complementary objectives: (1) enhance estimates of host competence for
individual species by incorporating data on temporal habitat use, (2) quantify
the temporal niche of a pathogen in communities with varying species
composition, and (3) predict the effects of climate change on disease risk via
altered host phenology. This work will address these objectives by utilizing an
amphibian-fungal pathogen system, where the presence of amphibian host species
in the aquatic environment varies seasonally and across space. The educational
objectives of this CAREER project focus on increasing the diversity of students
receiving quality training in the scientific process. Educational activities
include (1) improving the availability of course-based undergraduate research
experiences, (2) increasing the diversity of undergraduate research interns, and
(3) engaging high school students in research through participation in science
fairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.