* 2044352
* PFT-TT: Accessible Metal 3D Printing Using Directed Acoustic Energy Direct-write
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Keng Hsu, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2022
* USD 29,282.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the seamless and well-informed
integration and transition of tasks in the project, ranging from acquiring and
applying targeted scientific knowledge, to process development, and market
needs-directed technology development roadmap. The project will culminate not
only in scientific knowledge to enable advancement of a new metal 3D printing
technique into a feasible technology, but it will also identify the context and
market in which this new technology can maximize impact. The project will
deliver a clear roadmap for commercialization of a new, massively-accessible,
metal 3D printing technology. Furthermore, the highly interactive research and
development environment in the project challenges how students understand and
approach engineering problems. Problems are solved not only from the perspective
of the scientific community, but from an engineering feasibility, cost
viability, and long-term marketability, as well as the customer experience point
of views. The project provides students with leadership development in
innovation and entrepreneurship in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project allows students involved in this program to obtain scientific knowledge
specifically related to the how acoustic energy changes the crystalline lattice
defect dynamics under oscillatory shear strain and how defects interact with one
another. This knowledge fills the gap in the current literature on how acoustic
energy alters dislocation dynamics and interaction across multiple interfaces.
The acoustic energy and voxel compression are used to construct a metal 3D
printing process via the direct write of solid metal wires. Through
experimentation, analytical and computation modeling, the knowledge acquired
here not only allows students to deepen their understanding of material
mechanics and process physics, but it also allows them to apply the knowledge to
the design and development of a new manufacturing
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Partnerships for
Innovation (PFI) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.