* 2044631
* PFI TT: A Technology Platform to Enable Microsystems with a Wide Variety of Functions
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Angus Kingon, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 12/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project lies in the creation of a new processing
technology platform that allows the fabrication of microsystems for imaging,
processing, and industrial applications. One example application is the
ultrasound transducer array that may reduce the cost and improve the image
resolution in medical ultrasonic imaging systems. The transducers of ultrasound
imaging systems represent a current global market of &gt; $3 B. The new
ultrasound transducers may help advance the trend towards increased capabilities
for medical diagnostics at home, integrated with mobile devices to facilitate
remote checkups and advanced personal health monitoring. The project will act as
a rich training vehicle, covering multidisciplinary topics ranging from
understanding fundamental properties of environmentally friendly piezoelectric
materials and device structure and integration, to designing elements of medical
imaging systems and ultrasonic transducers. In parallel, the project will
provide training in technology entrepreneurship and commercialization for a
post-doctoral researcher. The collaboration and personnel exchange with our
industrial partners, particularly Xerox, will provide knowledge of commercial
processing and market issues as well as useful insights for the academic team
and students. Project activities will also promote the participation of women
and under-represented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
creates a new, low-cost, processing technology platform that allows for the
fabrication of microsystems such as large arrays of high frequency ultrasound
transducers for imaging, processing and industrial applications as well as
miniaturized “chemical and biochemical reactors” with integrated pumps, valves
and sensors. The robust new platforms provide capabilities between (and
complementary to) silicon-based microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technology
and full scale engineered products. The project seeks to demonstrate two proofs
of concept that involve arrays of piezoelectric transducers. One prototype
addresses the need for improved transducers for medical ultrasound imaging - a
diagnostic technique that is gaining favor due to its harmlessness and low-cost
relative to other medical imaging techniques. The second prototype seeks to
enable the development of acoustic tweezers to open up new applications in the
control and processing of individual particles and streams of particles,
relevant to holographic displays and additive manufacturing. The successful
processing of the prototypes will enable the method to be used as a robust
platform to manufacture a wider range of microsystems that integrate multiple
sensing, actuation and fluidic functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.