* 2044433
* Understanding error-driven learning in infancy and early childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lisa Feigenson, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 649,999.00

Countless times each day people make predictions about what will happen next.
Although these predictions are often right, sometimes they end up being wrong.
Instances where predictions do not match actual outcomes are ripe opportunities
for learning, because learners can focus on building a more accurate mental
model of the world. This project asks how such “prediction errors” affect human
learning early in life, focusing on infancy, when learning is especially
important. The project tests the hypothesis that noticing an inconsistency
between what was predicted and what was observed enhances young children’s
learning across a range of contexts, and that individual differences in
responses to such expectancy violations contribute to later cognitive
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although prediction errors have been much studied
in animal models and in human adults, nearly nothing is known about how they
affect thinking in very young children, even though understanding this important
form of learning may have broad relevance for understanding learning deficits,
and for developing educational strategies. Therefore, this project will
characterize how individual infants differ from one another in their ability to
learn from prediction errors, and will chart the longitudinal consequences of
these early differences, using a combination of measures including infants’
looking time and exploratory behaviors, as well as standardized batteries to
index memory, vocabulary, and IQ. In addition, the project will determine what
kinds of predictions, and what kinds of errors, enhance learning in infants and
young children. Overall, this research will help reveal the mechanisms behind a
fundamental form of learning, with implications for understanding knowledge
acquisition in children, adults, and artificial
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.