* 2044479
* CAREER: Cell-Instructive Smart Bioinks for Tissue and Organ Printing
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Murat Guvendiren, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 01/31/2026
* USD 300,818.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing biomaterials that
enable the production of fully functional, human-scale tissues and organs
capable of replacing failed organs would be a transformative benefit to society.
Bioprinting could potentially be utilized to construct highly complex and
patient-specific tissues and organs as well as tissue interfaces. Despite this
potential, the lack of diverse bioinks that can mimic the dynamic properties of
the native tissue is one of the major bottlenecks that hinders bioprinting of
fully functional tissues and organs. This project aims to investigate materials
design strategies to create smart bioinks to address this gap, and to apply
these bioinks for bioprinting of fully functional osteochondral (OC) tissues. In
particular, this project will answer the following fundamental research
questions: (i) how to control printability by adjusting macromer properties
while ensuring high cell viability; (ii) how to tune printability, stiffness,
degradation and bioactivity independent from each other; (iii) how to tailor
chemistry to enable cell-mediated manipulation of bioactivity, and (vi) how to
instruct stem cells to differentiate spatially within a 3D bioprinted construct
towards OC tissue formation. The interdisciplinary nature of the proposed
research will provide opportunities for minority undergraduate students and high
school students in local schools traditionally underrepresented in STEM
education to gain hands-on research experiences towards development of a highly
qualified workforce. The proposed outreach program with the New Jersey
Commission for the Blind and Visually Impaired will enhance STEM education
accessibility for blind and visually impaired students. Research findings will
be disseminated broadly to students, families, and educators at all levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioprinting
technology has expanded dramatically over the past few years, yet there is a
significant lack of diverse and smart bioinks which could facilitate reversible
and spatiotemporal control of the mechanics, degradation, and bioactivity of the
3D printed constructs independently to mimic dynamic, extracellular matrix (ECM)
changes which occur during tissue development and disease. The proposed research
will specifically tailor the building blocks of cell-laden hydrogels for
bioprintability and for responsiveness to user- and cell-triggered changes in
mechanics, degradation, and bioactivity. These smart bioinks will capture
dynamic changes happening in the ECM during tissue development, disease, and
healing processes. This project will utilize these bioinks to investigate
temporal contributions of developmentally relevant cell-matrix and cell-cell
interactions to instruct stem cells spatially to regenerate osteochondral (OC)
interface. The three objectives of the proposed research are: 1) to synthesize
novel functional bioinks with tunable printability, stiffness, and degradation;
2) to tailor pendant-chain chemistry for cell-triggered temporal control of
bioactivity to enhance stem cell chondrogenesis; and 3) to investigate the
ability of smart bioinks to fabricate heterogenous constructs for regeneration
of osteochondral interface. The proposed educational plan includes: 1)
developing customized research projects for undergraduate students from NJIT and
other universities; 2) engaging high school students, from selected local
schools with low income and underrepresented student population, in hands-on
research experience and providing long-term mentorship; 3) creating a
bioprinting class module with hands-on laboratory component; 4) enhancing
accessibility of STEM education for blind and visually impaired
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.