* 2044516
* CAREER: Data-Driven Wireless Networking Designs for Efficiency and Security
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Zhuo Lu, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2026
* USD 289,949.00

Today's wireless networks are being re-shaped by ubiquitous wireless
connectivity and emerging network architectures. To meet the increasingly
growing demand from the users for more efficient, reliable, and secure wireless
network services, the project aims at exploring the new dimension of creating
data-driven approaches towards improving the wireless network performance and
security. One key difference between the proposed data-driven approaches and
traditional network designs is that the online data due to network behaviors and
activities will be collected, processed, and used in systematic ways towards
improving wireless network efficiency, reliability, and security. The research
will create, design, and optimize efficient methodologies to categorize,
process, classify, use, and validate wireless network data for network
performance and security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on
efficiently harnessing and leveraging the online data observed in wireless
networking to improve network efficiency and security. Specifically, the
research team in this project aims at i) creating data-driven approaches based
on network link data to improve the throughput performance of the wireless
links, ii) effectively managing and mitigating wireless collisions and
interference by collecting and processing network control and data packets, iii)
understanding how new security threats and attack strategies can emerge and
behave based on observed network data in the wireless channel as well as
designing effective countermeasure against such threats and attacks, iv)
conducting extensive simulations and experimental evaluations to validate the
data-driven approaches towards wireless network efficiency, reliability and
security. In addition, appropriate elements in the research from the project
will be integrated into educational materials. The research results will also be
widely disseminated to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.