* 2044026
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A: Shared MicromobIlity for affordabLe-accessIblE houSing (SMILIES)
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,10/31/2021
* Sarah Hernandez, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 10/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

This project presents SMILIES (Shared MicromobIlity for affordabLe-accessIblE
houSing): a community-engaged pilot project to improve the accessibility to jobs
and essential activities for affordable housing communities in small- and mid-
sized cities and rural areas by leveraging the explosive growth of shared
micromobility (SMM) services. Affordable-accessible housing for working families
is increasingly scarce in the U.S., in particular for small- and mid-sized
cities and rural areas. As many small- and mid-sized cities offer only limited
public transportation options, low-income residents living in those areas may
struggle to access jobs, and critical goods and services. The SMILIES project
will deploy SMMs in a mid-sized city to establish the business, operating, and
sociodemographic conditions under which SMM can improve accessibility to jobs
and essential activities (e.g., schools, shopping, recreation, and health care)
for affordable housing communities. Defining such conditions will facilitate the
development and evaluation of new, highly effective and cost-effective policies
and strategies that will help cities and planning agencies leverage SMM while
ensuring equitable distribution of these services.

The overall objective of this project is to determine the degree of impact that
SMM services can have on accessibility to jobs and essential activities,
household transportation costs, and energy consumption for residents of
affordable housing communities in small- and mid-sized cities, and rural areas.
This objective will be accomplished by developing a community-engaged research-
centered pilot project in the City of Fort Smith, Arkansas. The specific
objective of this planning grant proposal is to strengthen collaborations with
relevant stakeholders, solidify academic and civic team members’ roles, and
refine the vision and plan for executing this research-centered pilot project.
This project is transformative as it will leverage community engagement
(residents, decision makers, operators) to first define acceptable conditions
for SMM and then conduct real-world pilot deployments of SMM under the
community-defined conditions.

This project is in response to Track A – CIVIC Innovation Challenge -
Communities and Mobility a collaboration with NSF and the Department of Energy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.