* 2044675
* PFI-TT: Scalable solid state neutron and gamma detectors for diverse industrial applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* MANUEL QUEVEDO, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,392.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop low cost, high
performance, portable radiation detectors that have applications ranging from
homeland security to medical treatment. With this technology, it may be possible
for police officers, fire firefighters and first responders to monitor for the
presence of Medical staff could monitor the production of neutrons and γ-rays
during heavy ion cancer treatments to collect data on the long-term impact of
secondary radiation. Just as important as the technology development is the
talent development that will take place during this project. This project will
support one graduate student and one postdoctoral researcher that will be
trained in the area of radiation detectors, nuclear electronics, and prototype
development and entrepreneurship. The design and use of radiation detectors and
their associated electronics are quickly becoming lost skill sets, so this PFI
project also addresses workforce development in needed areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to demonstrate low cost, high
count rate, γ-ray detectors based on halide inorganic perovskites. These devices
will be integrated with neutron detection / amplification schemes to enable
simultaneous neutron and γ-ray detectors. A traditional γ-ray spectroscopic
system consists of a detector, either a scintillator and a photomultiplier tube
or a high purity Ge solid state semiconductor detector, a pre-amplifier, an
amplifier, an analog-to-digital converter and a multichannel analyzer. Although
effective, these systems are expensive, lack ruggedness and portability, and are
not easily scaled. The main goal of this PFI-TT project is to demonstrate and
integrate CsPbX3 (X=Cl, Br, I or any combination) semiconductor single crystals
as the material of choice for γ-ray sensing and combine neutron and gamma-ray
detection in a prototype using the same charge amplification scheme, which
reduces the overall cost of the system while enabling rugged and scalable
radiation sensing. The gamma-ray detection approach moves away from the
traditional use of perovskite as scintillators, but instead uses the materials
as the active sensing element in solid-state charge and neutral particle
detection. Composition, electrical properties, and device engineering are some
of the unknowns to be elucidated during the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.