* 2044006
* OPUS: Recovery, resilience and the ecology of change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Katharine Suding, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,988.00

A diverse ecological community is composed of many species of organisms, all
responding to environmental change as well as interacting with each other. In
this complex web of nature, predicting how biodiversity will change over time is
challenging. Because changes in one species abundance propagate through
interactions in the community to affect other species, it is often not
sufficient to understand only how organisms respond directly to environmental
conditions. This same challenge affects the utilization of monitoring
information by conservation and restoration practitioners. Considerable time and
resources are devoted to monitoring these complex changes, and it can be
difficult to discern whether changes indicate a healthy self-sustaining system
or one that is declining and on the verge of collapse. Other disciplines outside
ecology also deal with analogous complex processes and have developed metrics
and analytical frameworks to describe dynamics of multi-dimensional systems over
time. In the proposed work, these metrics will be applied to long-term
ecological datasets to inform how managers can utilize monitoring datasets.
Datasets in the proposed synthesis will also form the foundation for graduate
student seminars and exchanges to train across subdisciplines and connect theory
to applied work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a new
perspective on the temporal dynamics of multispecies communities by
highlighting, through synthesis, ways to describe how complex ecological systems
respond to environmental change and how species organization within a community
may cause different dynamics in the propagation of environmental change. The
project focuses on several innovative metrics that can describe dynamic
stability of multispecies communities, using a series of eight long-term plant
community datasets. It then seeks to apply new methods that describe the
organization of species interactions to connect dynamics with community
organization. The last part of the project seeks to make this understanding more
useable to decision-makers through collaborations with managers on analyses of
long-term conservation monitoring datasets. Partnering with managers and
training graduate students, the research will explore new ways to arrive at a
better understanding of how to monitor and anticipate dynamic ecological
responses to environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.