* 2044921
* Atmospheric Process of Microcystins in Airborne Cyanobacterial Aerosol
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Myoseon Jang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 330,000.00

Suspensions of very small particles are called ‘aerosols’. Aerosols are commonly
produced above bodies of water by breaking waves and burst bubbles at the water
surface. Such aerosols can travel great distances from the point of origin.
Cyanobacteria are a type of photosynthetic algae that grow in surface waters
that can produce compounds known as ‘cyanotoxins.’ Many cyanotoxins are toxic to
humans, and are of great concern to those people living, working, or recreating
near water bodies during cyanobacterial blooms. Such events are called harmful
algal blooms (HABs). While the public health threats of HABs are well
recognized, there are numerous gaps in our knowledge about how cyanotoxins move
in the environment, particularly through aerosolization. The goal of this
research is to address this gap through the development of a model for
predicting the aerosol transport of cyanotoxin produced during HABs. This goal
will be achieved through three specific research objectives to: i) characterize
the properties of cyanobacterial aerosols using a novel photochemical reactor to
simulate atmospheric aging, ii) develop a computational model to predict the
atmospheric transport of aerosolized cyanotoxins using data from laboratory
study, and iii) assess the model using measurements of cyanotoxins in field
samples collected during HAB events in Florida. Successful development of the
model will allow accurate projections of public health risk due to HAB events.
Such information would facilitate the use of proactive measures to lessen risk
by public health professionals. Additional benefits to society result from
increasing the Nation’s STEM workforce through the training of undergraduate and
graduate student researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential for exposure to
aerosolized cyanotoxins during HABs is not well studied. The goal of this multi-
phase research project is to advance knowledge through the development of a
mechanistic model for predicting atmospheric fate and transport of the key
cyanotoxin microcystin. The project will have three specific objectives. In
Objective 1, the chemical and hygroscopic properties of atmospherically aged
cyanobacterial aerosols in a novel outdoor photochemical chamber will be
characterized by using state-of-the-science analytical methods. In Objective 2,
the Harmful Algae Atmospheric Reaction (HAAR) model will be developed to predict
the atmospheric oxidation of aerosolized microcystin using chemical reaction
kinetic rate constants and aerosol characteristics obtained from chamber data.
In Objective 3, field data will be collected from lakes and estuaries during HAB
events in Florida to evaluate atmospheric aging of aerosolized cyanotoxins. The
experiments will employ the UF‐APHOR dual chambers, which allow for the
quantification of atmospheric aging of complex cyanobacterial toxins and
reactive chemical species under natural sunlight. The proposed HAAR model will
vastly improve our ability to predict the influence of environmental factors on
the fate and transport of aerosolized microcystins. Successful completion of
this research will answer fundamental questions concerning the longevity of
aerosolized cyanotoxins in ambient air, key information to advance the science
of aerosol transport. Society will benefit from this through improved ability to
predict the risk of harmful cyanobacterial aerosols in coastal and lakeside
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.