* 2044838
* CAREER: Robust heterochiral molecular computing in mammalian cells
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Matthew Lakin, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 03/31/2026
* USD 385,558.00

The DNA double helix is one of the most iconic and well-known molecular
structures. All naturally occurring DNA double helices twist in the same
direction: to the right. These are called D-DNA. Molecular devices made from
D-DNA can interact directly with naturally occurring nucleic acids, but such
devices are easily recognized and degraded by cellular defenses that recognize
naturally occurring D-DNA. A wide range of D-DNA molecular sensors, circuits and
actuators have been developed in recent years, but their utility in living cells
and organisms is limited by this issue. This CAREER project will enhance the
practical utility of DNA-based molecular devices by engineering systems that
include mirror-image “left-handed” DNA (L-DNA). The L-DNA double helix twists in
the opposite direction to D-DNA and can therefore resist degradation in the
cellular environment. In particular, this project will study the transmission of
molecular information between L-DNA and D-DNA in these novel circuit designs,
combining experimental and computational research to optimize the behavior of
these systems and to demonstrate their use for sensing and control of biological
systems. This CAREER project will also strengthen the biotechnology educational
pipeline in New Mexico via a collaboration with ¡Explora!, a hands-on science
museum in Albuquerque, NM. This collaboration will develop biotechnology
minicourses for local high school students, with a focus on members of
underrepresented groups. This project will thus enhance the scientific and
engineering training infrastructure in the state of New
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary CAREER project will study
novel molecular circuit designs that exploit DNA chirality to produce robust
molecular circuits that can execute computations within living mammalian cells.
The project will develop design rules for efficient signaling between L-DNA and
D-DNA components in a mixed system where the L-DNA components are used for
information processing and the D-DNA components are used for interfacing with
the surrounding biological environment. It will also study the robustness to
degradation of such systems in living cells. Finally, innovative mechanisms will
be developed to control cell behavior based on the output from a molecular
computation, and these will be used for targeted control of specific cell types
based on sensing of specific biomarker combinations. These results will advance
the state of molecular circuit design and enhance the utility of DNA-based
molecular devices for practical applications in biomedicine and biotechnological
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.