* 2045853
* CAREER: Mechanical Mechanisms of Biofilm Survival on Implant Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Martha Grady, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,796.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will explore the role that
bacterial biofilm mechanics play in the quarter of a million medical device
infections experienced by Americans each year. Research outcomes will include:
(1) a fundamental understanding of bacterial biofilm mechanics and (2)
establishment of improved biocompatibility criteria. This knowledge will
ultimately be used to reduce medical device infections. The new biofilm
mechanics knowledge produced by this work will inform the ability to control
biofilm accumulation and dispersal. Therefore, the research outcomes will also
impact many industries beyond medicine including the maritime, food, water, oil,
paper, and aerospace industries. Beyond the laboratory, this work will cultivate
a diverse workforce at the intersection of engineering and medicine through a
PI-designed initiative, “Newton’s Team”. Newton’s Team will equip mechanics
instructors in higher education with new hands-on active learning activities
that reduce perceived implementation barriers. Faculty from a wide variety of
institutions (research intensive, primarily undergraduate, engineering focused,
public and private, Hispanic-serving institutions, and Historically Black
Colleges and Universities) will participate in the project by incorporating the
new learning activities into their classrooms and providing their educational
insights across the network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work harnesses
experimental thin film mechanics to investigate an imminent biological adhesion
challenge. Research activities will critically assess the influence of biofilm
mechanics on device infections in three ways: (1) by extracting the dominant
parameters that promote strong biofilm adhesion, which will aid in establishing
a novel Adhesion Index – a ratio of mammalian cell adhesion to biofilm adhesion,
(2) by exploring biofilm deformability, and (3) by generating new information on
the mesh size of biofilms. Armed with this knowledge, the field of pharmacology
can more accurately construct diffusion models relevant for next generation drug
delivery vehicles designed to maneuver through confined networks like biofilms.
Additionally, the Adhesion Index will provide new target values with which to
engineer implant surfaces. Project innovation stems from new approaches to probe
biofilm accumulation through a suite of advanced characterization techniques
which include laser spallation, combined confocal laser scanning microscopy and
atomic force microscopy, and particle mobility assays. These contributions will
elucidate the role of mechanics (adhesion, deformation, confinement) in the
perceived threat level of a biofilm, which will allow the PI to establish her
career in applied mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.