* 2045505
* CAREER: Creating a model for teachers to bridge cultural divides and provide students with culturally relevant pedagogy
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Ginger Shultz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 03/31/2026
* USD 482,831.00

This project aims to increase the support students from non-dominant groups
receive in schools by understanding better how teacher training and curricular
resources can make curricula relevant and compelling to those students.
Culturally relevant education makes visible the value of students’ diverse
perspectives and experiences and may better support underserved students in
STEM. While culturally relevant educational approaches are powerful, they rely
on the teachers' competence in the culture of their students for implementation.
The majority of those teaching in underserved communities are unlikely to share
backgrounds and experiences with students from non-dominant groups. This means
that teachers may be under-equipped to meaningfully implement culturally
relevant practices or otherwise effectively teach students from non-dominant
communities. This project aims to improve the field's understanding of how STEM
teachers who come from cultural backgrounds that are different from their
students, take up culturally responsive approaches. The strategy is to
investigate in-service teachers’ use of the Iñupiaq Learning Framework—a
framework developed by the Iñupiat community in Arctic Alaska and centered on
Iñupiaq values and culture. The project is generalizing findings from this
particular situation to provide a model for supporting teachers to provide
culturally relevant pedagogy to students from non-dominant groups. This is a
Faculty Early Career Development Program project responsive to a National
Science Foundation-wide activity that offers the most prestigious awards in
support of early-career faculty who have the potential to serve as academic role
models in research and education. This project is funded by the EHR Core
Research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project objectives will be accomplished
through a series of teacher-focused professional development activities in the
North Slope Borough School District in Utqiaġvik, Alaska, where teachers are
familiar with the Iñupiaq Learning Framework. Because the majority of teachers
in the district are not Native Alaskan and are from other parts of the U.S., the
project is studying how they interpret, adapt, and use the framework in their
classrooms. The project expands upon existing studies investigating teacher
growth when Indigenous knowledge is the focus by capturing the experiences of 12
"outsider" teachers (defined as those who are not native Iñupiat) who
participate in a community-based design process. By collaborating with Iñupiat
community members to identify problems of interest to the community and
resources to explore these problems, the project is developing place-based
science inquiry activities that intersect Iñupiaq culture with Western science
practices. Finally, to support the implementation of the designed activities in
the classroom, the same teachers are working together with students and
community members in a learning community to implement and adapt the modules in
their classrooms. This project is providing an account of how participation in
community-based design can be used to support "outsider" STEM teachers in taking
up classroom practices that honor community culture and values. Products of this
work include a culturally relevant curriculum for Iñupiat students that will be
available in a curriculum repository that collects place-based materials. Other
products include research results that answer questions about how "outsiders"
come to understand ways of instructing students in culturally relevant
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.