* 2045662
* CAREER: Manufacturing of Mechanically Stable Nanoporous Ceramic Structures Via Selective Infiltration of Polymer Templates
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Diana Berman, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/28/2026
* USD 550,148.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports fundamental
research to elucidate a new strategy of manufacturing nanoporous ceramic
structures with controllable structure and composition and programmable
mechanical stability. Nanoporous ceramic materials play a pivotal role in a
broad range of emerging technologies, including sensing devices, water
purification and filtration systems, and catalytic materials, which are
important to national prosperity and welfare. Despite previous efforts on
nanoscale patterning of inorganic materials, the limited accessibility to the
available surfaces and interfaces remains a central problem in defining the
functionality of the material systems. The ability to predict and control
location-specific microstructures of materials and correlate this knowledge to
their properties greatly extends current manufacturing capabilities for low-
temperature processing of ceramics with high customizability, precision, and
accuracy that are critically important for their potential use in engineering
research and industrial applications. This research is complemented by offering
new educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in the
areas of materials synthesis, mechanics, and surface science, with an emphasis
on recruiting and retaining women and under-represented minorities for the next-
generation manufacturing workforce. The projected outreach activities increase
public awareness and readiness for advanced manufacturing capabilities and
materials design concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this
research is to discover processing-structure-property relationships in ceramic
coatings and heterostructures by providing fundamental insights on the mechanism
of liquid phase swelling-based infiltration of spin-coated polymer templates
with inorganic precursors and defining the rules that control the resulting
structure and, thus, access to various materialsâ€™ surfaces and interfaces. By
in-situ monitoring of the swelling-induced evolution and infiltration of
amphiphilic block copolymer templates using a quartz crystal microbalance and
grazing-incidence small-angle x-ray scattering techniques, the study
investigates the formation mechanisms of organic/inorganic surfaces and
interfaces and unravels the guiding principles of ceramic material
reconstruction. The structure knowledge that is thus revealed is correlated with
the mechanical behavior of the coatings or films towards evaluating the
influence of porosity on the stability of these materials and to quantify the
damage tolerance of these structures under exposure to different environments
and stresses. The accomplishment of the project objectives allows for creating a
robust scalable manufacturing approach applicable to the large genome of
nanoporous ceramics and other materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.