* 2045493
* CAREER: Synthetic approaches to unravel heterogeneous decision-making in individual microbes and populations
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Megan McClean, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 01/31/2026
* USD 629,896.00

Microbes that are identical at the level of their genetic material can still
behave differently (this is referred to as ‘phenotypic heterogeneity’) and one
of the fundamental challenges in understanding and controlling the behavior of
microbes is identifying the factors that control this heterogeneity. The goals
of this project are to understand which specific factors control phenotypic
heterogeneity and what the consequences of this heterogeneity are for
populations of microbes. We will use new tools that allow us to control cellular
processes with light to determine the effect of different factors (specifically
transcription factors) on phenotypic heterogeneity in a model microbe: yeast. To
determine the consequences of phenotypic heterogeneity on outcomes for microbial
communities we will measure how populations of microbes grow and survive under
different stress and drug treatments. In addition to this research, the project
will focus on developing human resources at the interface of engineering and
life sciences research starting at the middle-school level and reaching through
graduate levels. This project will integrate research methods and findings from
the research to develop new curricula and mentor trainees. Development of
outreach and educational materials aimed specifically at middle-school students,
including an innovative interactive modeling game, will enhance science literacy
and maintain students in the STEM pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will utilize new approaches from synthetic and quantitative biology to
understand (1) how the dynamics and heterogeneity of effector activity interact
with additional cellular components to contribute to cell-to-cell variability in
gene expression and (2) how heterogeneity in individual microbial decisions
determines population-level phenotypes such as growth and stress resistance. The
project will pursue these objectives using the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
and combine new optogenetic tools to control effector (specifically
transcription factor, TF) activity with measurement of gene expression, single-
cell decisions, and population-level outcomes. Optogenetic control of
transcription factor activity in combination with a computational model will
allow us to (1) identify transcriptional targets that propagate or suppress
fluctuations in their cognate TFs activity and (2) characterize how TF activity
dynamics control transcriptional bursting. Furthermore, to characterize how
heterogeneous decision-making determines population-level phenotypes in isogenic
microbial populations we will quantify growth and stress survival while using
optogenetic control of TF activity to modulate cell-to-cell variability in gene
expression. The results of this research will increase understanding of how
effector activity contributes to observed heterogeneity in gene expression and
phenotype between individual microbes and the effect of this heterogeneity on
population-level outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.