* 2045329
* CAREER: Wood-eating protists: An evolutionary transition enabled by gene transfer?
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Gillian Gile, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 09/30/2026
* USD 725,355.00

Wood-feeding termites can be highly destructive pests. Their ability to survive
on such a nutritionally poor diet as wood comes from symbiotic gut microbes. In
certain termites, these microbes include protists (protozoa) that can engulf
wood particles and extract sugars using specialized enzymes. This project will
determine how the protists evolved their wood-digesting ability. Did they
acquire new genes for wood-degrading enzymes from bacteria or fungi, or did they
adapt enzymes that are also present in non-termite protists? A better
understanding of wood digestion in protists could be useful for developing
termite control strategies or learning how to convert woody biomass into
biofuels or other biochemicals. Because most termite protists have not been
studied, this project will also illuminate a dark area of the tree of life by
describing many new protist species and determining how they are related to one
another and to non-termite protists. As part of the biodiversity discovery and
documentation effort, a course-based undergraduate research experience at
Arizona State University will train approximately 200 students in systematics
and biodiversity research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities will
include transcriptome sequencing of 43 protist species, 31 from termite-
associated lineages and 12 from related, non-termite lineages. These
transcriptomes will be studied to determine the diversity, distribution, and
phylogeny of cellulases and hemicellulases in the protist superphylum
Metamonada. Transcriptomic data will also be used for phylogenomic analyses to
resolve the protist phylogeny and provide a framework against which to interpret
the evolution of wood digestion. Because termite gut protists are so
understudied, an additional ~200 protist species symbiotic in 21
phylogenetically diverse termite species will be characterized by morphology and
18S rRNA sequence by single cell PCR. This number includes an estimated 50-70
currently undiscovered species that will be formally described. The
characterization of Arizona termite protist species will be carried out by teams
of undergraduate students receiving training in taxonomy and systematics as part
of a course-based research experience (CURE). Involvement in authentic research
has been shown to increase undergraduates’ appreciation of and retention in
science. The proposed CURE will specifically target first-generation college
students, including transfer students from a local community college. Research
results will be disseminated broadly to protistology, microbial ecology, and
termite specialist communities through conferences and the biennial
International Termite Course at the University of
Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.