* 2045887
* CAREER: Chemical Network Based Understanding and Prediction of Electrolyte Decomposition in Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Brett Savoie, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2026
* USD 590,211.00

New types of batteries are needed to sustainably meet growing power demands and
the requirements of novel applications like electric vehicles, renewable energy
storage, and load leveling. A central challenge in the development of new
electrolytes for batteries is poor understanding of the electrolyte degradation
pathways that lead to battery failure. This CAREER project will develop
computational methods to comprehensively elucidate these electrolyte reactions.
Success in this project will transform how electrolytes are designed and
implemented using a computational approach before costly synthesis and testing.
The resulting new knowledge about electrolyte degradation chemistry and new
simulation methodologies will benefit the next generation of scientists and
engineers working on batteries. This projectâ€™s integrated education plan
includes developing hands-on research projects with students and faculty at non-
research institutions and developing continuing education components for
chemical engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this CAREER
project is to establish electrolyte degradation reactions from first principles
as the basis for characterizing, optimizing, and designing novel battery
electrolytes. The proposed methods will leverage a novel combination of two
recent breakthroughs, making this an ideal time to investigate electrolyte
degradation problem from a computational perspective. First, we will use modern
semi-empirical quantum chemistry to provide the simulation throughout required
to comprehensively describe the complex reaction networks associated with
electrolyte degradation. Second, we will apply transfer learning models to
improve the accuracy of describing reactions in condensed phases and at
electrode interfaces. In combination, these strategies will address the tradeoff
between computational accuracy and cost that has limited the application of
reaction network characterizations to liquid electrolytes. These simulation
methodologies will initially be applied to liquid electrolyte formulations that
have widespread usage in contemporary Li-ion and post Li-ion batteries. Despite
the fact that these are established electrolytes, the degradation chemistry that
drives solid-electrolyte interphase formation and electrolyte-related failure is
still incompletely resolved. Thus, by focusing on these electrolyte chemistries,
we will be able to validate our characterization methodology while also
providing the first complete view of the degradation reactions that occur in
these electrolytes. The reaction data generated by these characterizations will
also be used to create reaction databases that will facilitate machine learning
activities aimed at prioritizing or even circumventing more costly physics-based
simulations of electrolytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.