* 2045795
* CAREER: Permissive acidity as a regulator of plant cell expansion
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Siobhan Braybrook, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,111,344.00

Plant life is essential for the health and well-being of the planet, and all
life therein. Understanding the processes that control growth in plants is
therefore essential for ensuring the future of the planet and human life. In
this project, the ‘acid growth’ control mechanism will be investigated in young
seedlings, a key growth stage in the plant’s life that allows for emergence from
the soil. Acid growth refers to a mechanism whereby the cell wall surrounding
the plant cell becomes more acidic; an acidic environment activates changes in
the cell wall that make it more deformable, thus allowing the plant cell it
surrounds to expand and resulting in growth. The acidification of the cell wall
is turned on by a plant hormone called auxin. However, too much auxin inhibits
growth indicating a more complex mechanism for acid growth is at play. In this
project we will extend the acid growth model to better explain the regulation of
growth by auxin and wall acidity; we will investigate the possibility of a
‘permissive acidity’ for growth where the wall can be too basic and too acidic
to result in growth. This project includes the development and implementation of
a summer research program for incoming transfer students called ‘EMERGE’. The
emerge program will have a group of five students working on a seedling growth-
related research project during the summer before their junior year. The EMERGE
program will provide research experience and community for incoming transfer
students, key aspects for successful degree completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Acid Growth hypothesis was proposed over 50 years ago; it states that auxin
leads to cell wall acidification which leads to wall relaxation and cell
expansion. However, for almost 100 years we have known that too much auxin
inhibits growth, as does too much acidity. Using the dark-grown Arabidopsis
thaliana hypocotyl as a model system for elongation, we will investigate an
expanded acid growth model that encompasses the concept of permissive acidity:
there is an optimal acidic pH for cell growth and being too basic or too acidic
may result in cessation of growth. We will quantify the relationships between
cell growth, wall acidity, and auxin response during dark-grown hypocotyl
elongation at both organ and cell levels. Furthermore, we will explore the
quantitative relationship between growth, auxin, pH, and cell wall mechanical
parameters (elasticity, viscoelasticity, and yield strength) using atomic force
microscopy. We will also parameterize the pH dependent activity of several wall
modifying proteins in planta. All of this data will be used to build a finite
element method-based mechanical growth model of the elongating hypocotyl,
instructed by an explicit auxin distribution. This project also includes a
summer research on-boarding program for incoming transfer students called
‘EMERGE’. The EMERGE program will have cohorts of 5 students working on a
project together each summer before traditional Fall enrollment begins in order
to jump-start their research experience and education and to build community
within the transfer student population within Life
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Physiological
Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program and the Plant, Fungal, &amp; Microbial
Developmental Mechanisms Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems, Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.