* 2045663
* CAREER: Coupling Climate and Human Health Models to Build Pathways to Extreme Heat Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Jennifer Vanos, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 647,273.00

Extreme heat is invisible, silent, and deadly, and negatively affects human
health and productivity globally. Understanding how people are affected by
extreme heat, and how best to cope, is important for societal well-being and
economic security. New approaches to adapt to heat are urgently needed as cities
grow and temperatures rise. Existing models of present and future heat-health
impacts focus on survivability and over-simplify how people respond both
physiologically and behaviorally to heat across indoor and outdoor spaces. But
survivable does not equal livable––addressing human complexities is needed to
fully understand the exposure pathways that cause heat to become a health
hazard. The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant is to
advance our scientific understanding of the range of current and future impacts
of extreme heat on human health across different climate types and indoor and
outdoor environments. Models of human heat balance, regional climate at multiple
scales, and building interior heat exposure will be combined with human
vulnerability and adaptive capacity to estimate present and future heat-health
risks across U.S. cities. This research bridges climate and health research
disciplines to support experiential learning and public health guidance to
proactively mitigate risk. The outcomes of this research align with NSF’s
mission to advance national health, prosperity, and welfare. Given the diverse
social, environmental, economic, and health impacts of heat, society will
broadly benefit through reduced heat-related illness, death, and
hospitalizations, decreased energy costs, and improved well-being, productivity,
and community resilience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To create insight into current
and future heat exposures, vulnerabilities, and impacts, this project leverages
research across disciplines to 1) quantify differences in heat stress and strain
across climate types and built/natural environmental contexts in large U.S.
cities, comparing validated human heat balance (HHB) models to simple bioclimate
heat metrics; 2) integrate critical physiological and behavioral adaptations
into heat-health estimates to account for the range of heat stress and strain
responses; and 3) quantify future livability and survivability using HHB models
and dynamically downscaled climate models within and across the U.S. These
objectives acknowledge that an individual’s path from experiencing hot weather
to heat stress, heat strain, and adverse health outcomes is indirect,
multidimensional, and non-linear. Three integrated education objectives will (a)
create, evaluate, and share novel experiential learning and outreach methods
using a new heat chamber in the PI’s lab; (b) co-produce and disseminate
practical heat-health guidance with public health collaborators; (c) support and
inspire a diverse student population to explore interdisciplinary approaches in
STEM. The coupling of human health models with weather and climate data will
drive transformative thinking in climate adaptation and heat resilience
research, introducing the notion that survivable does not equal livable. Key
scientific contributions include a new modeling approach to better understand
the range of human responses to heat; a novel assessment of the interactions
between climate type, indoor and outdoor environmental contexts, human behavior,
and physiology on human tolerance to oppressive heat; and a creative application
of physiological advances that validate the use of sustainable, low-cost (i.e.,
no air conditioning) personal-level cooling strategies and their efficacy in
current and projected U.S. climates. This project also advances discovery and
promotes experiential and inclusive cross-disciplinary training, learning, and
communication for students across education levels. Co-production efforts with
public health officials, practitioners, and community members will directly
support societal health. Such efforts will further build community-scale heat
resilience and ensure that diverse populations benefit from location and person-
and context-specific information for safe and sustainable personal cooling
methods, heat coping strategies, and effective messaging, outreach, and
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.