* 2045242
* CAREER: An Integrated Experimental-Theoretical Framework for Understanding the Multiscale Mechanical Response of Rock-Reactive Brine Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Sara Abedi, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program will support research to
understand and elucidate the evolution of the mechanical properties of rocks
when interacting with reactive brine. The interaction between rocks and reactive
brine in harsh environments plays an important role in several applications,
such as stability of slopes and abandoned underground caves, carbon
sequestration, enhanced geothermal systems, reservoir stimulation, and
contaminant transport. By understanding how rock-reactive brine interaction
affects the mechanical properties of rocks, it will be possible to develop more
realistic physical-chemical models that are critical for predicting rock
mechanical stability and for quantitatively interpreting geophysical monitoring
data. However, the challenge comes from the complex multiscale and heterogeneous
nature of rocks and the complexity of rock-reactive brine interactions, making
the traditional experimental and modeling techniques ineffective for this
problem. This project uses novel multiscale experiments and theory to reveal the
origins of how mechanical properties of rocks change when exposed to reactive
brine. The outcomes of this project will serve the society by enhancing
infrastructure system resiliency, and energy and resource efficiency. This
project also has a comprehensive education and outreach plan to broaden the
participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM and enhance education in
chemistry and mechanics of rock and fluid interaction. This is done through
engaging traditionally underrepresented high school students, increasing the
general public’s understanding of the impact of rock and fluid interaction, and
educating graduate and undergraduate students in collaborative and
interdisciplinary research activities. The main activity is recruiting
underrepresented undergraduates and engaging high school students via an
extended outreach program entitled “Rocks and Fluids.” &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this CAREER program are to (1) Understand the effect of chemo-
mechanical rock-reactive brine interaction on the microstructural/morphological
texture and compositional properties of rocks; (2) Determine the relationship
between chemo-mechanical loading and geomechanical response at multiple scales;
and (3) Determine the stress/strain distribution within the rock as a function
of its time-evolving microstructure, induced by chemical and mechanical effects,
using a physical-chemical pore-scale model. The research approaches include
micro-scale chemo-mechanical characterization of individual rock constituents,
macro-scale mechanical assessment, and microstructural characterization of rock
samples before and after exposure to reactive brine at high temperature and
pressure conditions; and development of a pore-scale model to gain insight into
time-dependent mechanical and deformational behavior of rocks influenced by
chemo-mechanical interactions. Research findings will lead to physics-based
interpretation of monitoring data and enhancement of the mechanical stability
rocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.