* 2045017
* Collaborative Research: IIBR Multidisciplinary: mSAIL (Michigan Small Animal Integrated Logger): a milligram-scale, multi-modal sensor and analytics monitoring platform
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Delbert Green, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 03/31/2024
* USD 613,589.00

An award is made to the University of Michigan and the University of Pittsburgh
to develop and demonstrate a new logger and analytics platform for small
terrestrial animal monitoring called mSAIL (Michigan Small Animal Integrated
Logger). mSAIL is a millimeter-scale miniaturized tag attached to animals to
record, store, and relay environmental, physiological, and behavioral data. This
information is critical not only for a richer mechanistic understanding of
animal and ecosystem function, but also in order to predict how these systems
will change as Earthâ€™s climate changes. This research and resulting technology
will have a significant broad impact such as engaging the public and raising
scientific literacy because the machine learning algorithms for mSAIL will be
trained using real-world data collected by community volunteers. As well, this
work will provide substantial mentoring and training opportunities for diverse
participants in a cross-disciplinary environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research program tackles technical challenges for developing and applying
millimeter-scale data loggers with improved information processing and
visualization. The program aims to build a 50 mg millimeter-scale mSAIL device
that 1) simultaneously measures light intensity, temperature, air pressure, and
acceleration, 2) stores the recorded data in non-volatile memory, and 3)
wirelessly communicates collected data. An integrated, chip-size battery will
support device operation for one month and an energy-harvesting photovoltaic
cell will provide essentially perpetual operation with as little as 500 lux
light level. Using mSAIL, increasingly complex datasets that simultaneously
document animal behavior and environment will be acquired from an expanded
repertoire of species, down to those of sub-gram weight. mSAIL will spur cross-
disciplinary collaborations to address a range of problems including the impact
of anthropogenic environmental change (e.g. light pollution) on wildlife and the
long-range migration of small animals such as monarch butterflies. This award is
co-funded with support from the Animal Behavior Program in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.