* 2045005
* CAREER: Geometric and Electronic Contributions to Bio-inspired Reactivities of Heme-superoxide Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Gayan Wijeratne, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 04/30/2026
* USD 710,000.00

With support from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)
Dr. Gayan B. Wijeratne at the University of Alabama at Birmingham will
investigate the chemistry of small molecules with heme iron centers such as the
ones that activate oxygen in human biology. These model systems can be extremely
versatile, yet straightforward probes for comprehending the complicated
mechanistic details that govern oxygen mediated reactivities in biology. Dr.
Wijeratne and his team will utilize these powerful tools in shedding light on
yet unknown knowledge that can lead to pathways for efficient syntheses of
complex molecules, and the discovery of catalysts that can enhance the
efficiency of catalysts of oxygen reduction benefiting alternative energy
applications. This work will involve bio-inspired design and synthesis of fresh
model systems that combine organic and inorganic synthetic toolkits, and
analyses of reactivities that draw parallels to biological functionalities. As
well, a broad variety of cryogenic spectroscopic tools will be employed,
offering a uniquely specialized skillset to contributing high-school,
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers. Outreach and educational
aspects of this project will involve the orientation of Birmingham City high
school students toward Regional Science Fair via a newly designed Science Club
program. Proposed efforts will strive to bridge the gap of scientific literacy
of youngsters in the City of Birmingham, which is one of the most income-
segregated school districts in the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heme-
containing dioxygenases play pivotal roles in human physiology, disease
progression, and aging, consequently attracting substantial research interests
within the past decade. However, exact mechanistic details concerning these are
only faintly understood. Heme superoxide adducts are presumed to be active
oxidants in heme dioxygenases, however, details pertaining to their definitive
involvement in the actual enzymatic mechanism remain elusive. Synthetic model
systems have long-served as powerful tools in addressing such mechanistic
ambiguities, but synthetic heme superoxide adducts are often found to be
sluggish oxidants. This anomaly calls for revaluation of explicit modeling of
synthetic systems with direct relevance to their biological mode of action.
Comprehension of mechanistic details of such model systems can also be of direct
benefit for the design of superior synthetic methodologies targeting important
complex organic molecules and homogeneous dioxygen reduction catalysts to be
used in alternative energy applications. Proposed research will address this gap
in knowledge by generating a library of synthetic heme superoxide model systems
with divergent structural properties, and thorough investigation into how such
structural modulations would influence their reactivity signatures. This work
will vertically advance the fundamental understanding of reactivity-governing
geometric, electronic, and non-covalent structural properties of mid-valent
heme-oxygen intermediates, introducing a new era of heme-oxygen model chemistry.
Outreach activities of this project will directly benefit the majority of
underrepresented high schoolers in the Birmingham, Alabama area through cutting-
edge research opportunities and high-quality one-on-one mentoring opportunities
geared toward strengthening their preparatory phase for Regional Science
Fair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.