* 2045868
* CAREER: Elucidation and Development of Electrolyte and Interface Mechanisms Governing Calcium Redox in Nonaqueous Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Betar Gallant, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/28/2026
* USD 434,118.00

Electrochemical energy storage plays a critical role in storing energy from
intermittent renewable sources, such as solar and wind energy, and making these
sources suitable for electrified transportation. Today’s lithium (Li)-ion and
emerging Li metal-based batteries have high energy densities, but they suffer
from safety and performance issues along with increasing concerns about scarcity
of Li resources. Calcium (Ca) presents a compelling alternative as the basis for
next-generation batteries: it is the 5th most abundant element in the earth’s
crust, and batteries utilizing Ca metal anodes are projected to have energy
storage capabilities comparable to Li counterparts with potential for improved
safety. However, development of Ca batteries has been hindered by numerous
challenges, including formation of blocking interfaces on Ca metal anodes that
impede reversibility, and the need to design electrolytes specifically optimized
for divalent Ca ion electrochemistry. This research will build the fundamental
understanding of Ca-based electrochemical reactions and the resulting interfaces
on Ca metal. To achieve these aims, this research will create tools to conduct
novel experimental, quantitative analysis of Ca electrolyte and interface
thermochemistry that will guide design of improved Ca batteries. As an
additional outcome of the work, middle-school students will engage in active
virtual teaching modules that use outcomes of this research while fulfilling a
Massachusetts state education standard, bringing exposure to scientists and
engineers and motivating pursuit of STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research effort will conduct a targeted experimental study of the chemical,
thermodynamic and interface parameters that govern Ca ion redox behavior and
elucidate Ca solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) chemistry and properties. The
central hypothesis guiding this work is that the heightened degrees of freedom
in Ca2+ ion solvation present new opportunities to intervene in electrochemical
pathways, which can allow reversibility and reaction selectivity to be unlocked
if better understood. The tools to be developed to test this hypothesis include
a new thermodynamic framework for measuring the solvated Ca state using reaction
calorimetry; metal deposition methodologies to prepare high-quality Ca metal
interfaces for fundamental study; an operando approach to probe the chemical
dynamics of Ca SEI formation; and a cathode conversion reaction involving Ca and
CO2 to test and strengthen understanding of how Ca2+ solvation affects
reactivity. The results will be integrated to identify the fundamental origins
that determine electrochemical parameters: redox potential, Coulombic
efficiency, cycle life, and rate capability, and therein identify strategies to
improve them. Collectively, this work will yield progress in anode, cathode, and
electrolyte aspects of Ca batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.