* 2045695
* CAREER: Resolving the detrital thermal signatures and natural biases of sediment recycling and weathering in orogenic systems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Julie Fosdick, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 407,322.00

The weathering and erosion of the continents is a central component of the rock
cycle and modification of the Earth’s surface. Yet, a fundamental problem in
Earth sciences is the intrinsic difficulty in recognizing sediment derived from
the erosion of primary crystalline rocks versus sediment that may represent
multiple episodes of weathering, erosion, and transport. Resolving these
differences is essential to understanding the growth of the continental crust,
continental-scale river drainage reversals, and glacial-interglacial landscape
change. This project will focus on the signals of recycling on the geochemistry
of detrital minerals during the evolution of the Sierras Pampeanas province of
South America. The Sierras Pampeanas are the modern archetype for the
lithospheric response to flat slab subduction and an ideal setting to develop
improved metrics for geochemical signatures of recycling needed to better
understand the evolution of the continental lithosphere. Educational activities
focus on increasing participation and retention of under-represented groups in
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) by bridging high school
through graduate school laboratory and field experiences. Partnership with the
University College Access Program at the University of Connecticut will develop
summer internships designed for high school students to gain early exposure to
Earth sciences. Geologic field trips in the Hartford Rift Basin, hands-on and
virtual laboratory experiments in thermochronology, and mentoring by
undergraduate and graduate students will broaden student interns’ experiences
and success in higher education STEM opportunities. Graduate student training in
thermochronology will contribute towards a stronger technical workforce in
support of major instrumentation and technological initiatives in the Earth
sciences. Project collaborations will enhance research infrastructure and
education technology transfer among collaborating U.S. and Argentine
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers on advancing scientific
knowledge of the controlling factors and diagnostic geochemical signatures of
sediment recycling during the evolution of the continental lithosphere. By using
the emerging detrital monazite thermochronometer alongside established zircon
geochronology, thermochronology, and sedimentary compositional archives, an
integrated sedimentary provenance analysis will capture the discrete polycyclic
histories of continental growth and basin evolution in the Sierras Pampeanas.
Research components of the program include: (1) fieldwork and sample collection,
(2) detrital zircon geochronology and thermochronometry, (3) development of
detrital monazite double-dating thorium-lead-helium (Th-Pb-He)
thermochronometry, (4) compositional provenance analysis, and (5) synthesis and
thermal history modeling of datasets to explore how different sediment recycling
scenarios impact detrital datasets. This research will generate detrital
fingerprinting and source characterization of the Sierras Pampeanas to track the
influence of pre-existing structures and basin inversion on sediment transfer
during flat-slab deformation; streamlined analytical workflows for detrital
monazite geochronology, geochemistry, and thermochronometry; and development of
a new multiproxy metric for sediment recycling in polycyclic settings. These
fundamental advances have wide-ranging applicability in the Earth sciences for
correctly quantifying continental weathering and erosion rates, crustal growth,
source-to-sink sediment budgets, and constraining rock deformational histories
tied to tectonic and earthquake cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.