* 2045972
* Collaborative Research: RUI: OCE-BO: Biogeochemistry of diurnal vertical migration in microbial mats of Lake Huron’s sinkholes.
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Dale Casamatta, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 88,540.00

Modern-day microbial mats living on the bottom of sinkholes underneath Lake
Huron experience an oxygen-poor, sulfur-rich environment resembling life on
early Earth. These mat worlds are dominated by motile filaments of microbes that
variably use sunlight and chemicals in their daily routines and offer
opportunities for discovering novel microorganisms and ecosystem processes.
Recently, complex patterns of daily vertical migration has been observed in the
field, suggesting different microbes migrate vertically to the surface of the
mat during daylight and nighttime. This project is unraveling the who, why and
how of daily microbial migration through integration of microscopy, cultures,
molecular approaches, and process rate measurements in response to changing
gradients of light, sulfide and oxygen over the day-night cycle. This project
places the vertical migration of microbial mats into a broader geobiological
context through comparisons with other globally distributed cyanobacterial mat
systems such as terrestrial springs and ice-covered Antarctic lakes.
Furthermore, the diverse and versatile sinkhole mats may serve as a useful
working model for robotic exploration of similar life in extraterrestrial waters
like that of Jupiter’s Europa or Saturn’s Enceladus. This project is generating
compelling student projects, attracting public imagination, and fueling active
collaboration between two predominantly undergraduate institutions and a
National Marine Sanctuary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The functioning of
cyanobacteria under sulfidic, low O2-conditions is a major gap in our
understanding of Earth’s oxygenation in the past. Recently, time-lapse images of
diel vertical migration (DVM) were collected revealing alternating waves of
vertically migrating photosynthetic and chemosynthetic filaments that followed
daily fluctuating light in microbial mats in Lake Huron’s sinkholes;
observations corroborated with intact mats under simulated day-night conditions
in the laboratory. Such synchronized diel movement, might have played a critical
role in optimizing photosynthesis, chemosynthesis, carbon burial, and
oxygenation during the Precambrian. This project is evaluating the taxa involved
in DVM and is probing geobiological controls on DVM under low-O2, sulfidic
conditions using macro- and microscopic imaging, physico-chemical
microprofiling, culturing, genetics, and allelopathic studies. Three central
issues are being addressed: (1) what taxa are responsible for the DVM? (2) how
and why do they perform DVM? and (3) what are the ecosystem consequences of DVM
community and activity synergies? The project is revealing specific microbial
populations, metabolic pathways, and geochemical processes that underpin mat
biogeochemistry over the diel cycle. Studying microbial communities that have
regular and measurable daily rhythms in processes that can also be tracked at
micrometer scales yields an unprecedented view of the molecular underpinnings of
microbial mat biogeochemistry and lays the foundation for future studies aimed
at re-defining the role of autotrophic communities in ancient seas and modern
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.