* 2045561
* CAREER: Engaging Rural Students with Next Generation Physiological Interfaces
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Chris Crawford, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 04/30/2026
* USD 480,340.00

Next generation physiological computing systems use sensors to measure data like
brain activity or heart activity. These emerging systems are at the forefront of
human-computer interaction applications involving health technologies, adaptive
smart environments, self-regulation, security and authentication. Future STEM
professionals are needed to design applications and tools that rely on
physiological computing. In addition, physiological sensors are motivating
opportunities for students to learn about computer science, data processing,
technology, and design. This project will provide rural students and teachers
with hands-on learning experiences in physiological computing. The project will
investigate how students learn about physiological data processing and
computational concepts. Products will include learning modules for high school
science and technology courses. Findings from the proposed research will inform
future K-12 work at the intersection of human physiology and technology. This
project is funded by the CS for All: Research and RPPs program. This project is
also funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts, and processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students are expected to gain physiological data
processing and computational skills while engaging with the technology developed
in the project. More specifically, physiological sensors engage students in
learning about wave properties and other signal processing topics. Physiological
computing also requires interdisciplinary learning in data processing,
computational thinking, and scientific phenomenon. This project will explore
physiological computing in high school classrooms through multiple studies that
explore various ways to engage students with physiological computing such as (1)
pre-recorded and real-time data (2) integrating physiological data processing
and computational concepts, (3) textual and visual programming interfaces, and
(4) digital and physical feedback components. The project includes the following
research questions. First, how does hands-on experience with pre-recorded and
real-time physiological data influence students’ ability to gain knowledge of
physiological data processing concepts? How do these experiences influence
students’ interest in STEM? Second, to what extent does integrating
computational and data processing concepts build computational thinking and
physiological computing skills? When compared to a visual interface, how will a
textual interface for physiological data processing influence computational
thinking, knowledge of physiological data processing concepts, and interest in
STEM? Third, when compared to digital approaches, how will physical
physiological-based learning environments influence computational thinking,
knowledge of physiological data processing concepts, and interest in STEM? The
project will gather evidence from audio and video analysis, screen recordings,
student work and other assessments of knowledge and
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.