* 2045348
* CAREER: Harnessing species differences to identify the cellular basis of social attachment
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Zoe Donaldson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,360,000.00

What are the changes in brain function that enable only a handful of mammalian
species to form pair bonds, an essential behavior for monogamy? Prairie and
meadow voles provide an ideal opportunity to home in on such changes in brain
function. While these two species live in the same areas, have evolved from a
common ancestor, and share many physical characteristics, they exhibit
strikingly different social behaviors. Prairie voles form life long pair bonds
while meadow voles are promiscuous. In this CAREER award the PI uses
observational approaches and manipulations to ask how differences in brain
activity in response to interactions with mating partners contribute to these
species-level differences in behavior. In addition to answering a key question
in biology, the implementation of new experimental approaches in voles,
previously limited to mice, facilitates investigation of questions that are
beyond the scope of more traditional laboratory animals. The research activities
provide genuine research experiences and training in advanced neuroscience
techniques for undergraduate and graduate students. In addition, incorporation
of the project’s results in existing undergraduate coursework enhances
interdisciplinary STEM education. The formation of a Pathway to PhD program
provides transformative research experiences and opportunities for advancement
in STEM for students at a local Hispanic-serving institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social behavior can differ dramatically even between
closely related species, and species-appropriate social behavior is critical for
survival and reproduction. The mechanisms that enable this diversity remain
largely unexamined at the level of neuronal encoding. For instance, how do
experience-dependent patterns of neuronal activity differ across species to
produce vast differences in monogamy versus promiscuity even in the face of
similar social experiences, such as mating? The goal of this proposal is to
identify the neuronal basis of social attachment by leveraging differences in
pair bonding in monogamous and promiscuous voles. The PI uses orthogonal imaging
and functional approaches to test the hypothesis that species differences in
pair bonding in microtine voles result from differences in the encoding of
social attachment in mesolimbic reward circuits, and not in brain regions that
encode social memory. Specifically, we compare and manipulate neural ensemble
stability across two social brain regions in two species to illuminate the
cellular and systems-level controls of complex sociocognitive behaviors. The
PI’s passion for social neuroscience, comparative research, outreach, and
education is also harnessed to strengthen interdisciplinary and applied STEM
education by training undergraduate and graduate students in cutting-edge
neuroscience techniques. Advances from these studies are being incorporated into
existing courses at CU Boulder via a Pathway to PhD program for students at a
local Hispanic-serving institution. In sum, this CAREER proposal will
foundationally advance the PI’s long-term goals by providing insight into the
neuronal encoding of social bonds and creating opportunities for STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.