* 2045984
* CAREER: Plasticity, Promiscuity and Transport Mechanisms in Transmembrane Metal Pumps
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Gabriele Meloni, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 05/31/2026
* USD 677,929.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Gabriele Meloni from The University of Texas at Dallas will study
the molecular mechanism of function of transmembrane transporter proteins
involved in metal transport across cellular membranes. In all kingdoms of life,
the activity of metal pumps guarantee that metal concentrations are regulated to
meet cellular requirements. P-type ATPase pumps are a class of transmembrane
proteins that utilize ATP as an energy source to move essential and toxic metals
across membranes playing a central role in metal balance. However, the general
molecular processes involved in specific metal cargo selection and transport
remain to be revealed. Structural, biochemical, and biophysical methods will be
applied to a comparative characterization of metal recognition in pump
subclasses showing diverse metal selectivity patterns to address a new molecular
level understanding of metal recognition and translocation. The expected results
will contribute to a poorly explored area of biochemistry and will provide new
insights regarding metal transport processes in living organisms. The research
plan will be integrated with a multifaceted educational program focused on
promoting interest and student engagement in bioinorganic chemistry. By
developing new course content with peer-led delivery modalities, expanding
undergraduate research engagement with a particular focus on underrepresented
minorities, and creating a lab-based online video “reality-show” to be shared
with Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUI) and high school students, the
project will promote awareness, interest and societal knowledge in inorganic
biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;P1B-type ATPase are ATP-energized primary-
active pumps that control translocation of both essential and toxic transition
metals. The adaptation of a conserved topological and structural framework,
common to all P-type ATPases, to the need of diverse substrate selectivity and
promiscuity allowed the evolution of P1B-type subfamilies capable of selective
translocation of first-row essential transition metals (Mn(II), Fe(II), Co(II),
Ni(II), Cu(I) or Zn(II)), as well as toxic second- and third-row transition and
post-transition metals (e.g. Ag(I), Cd(II), Hg(II), Pb(II)). The project will
address, by in-house and synchrotron-based biophysical and biochemical methods,
the atomic-level determinants controlling metal recognition, promiscuity and
structural plasticity in poorly characterized metal pumps subclasses
(P1B-4-P1B-7 types) with diverse selectivity patterns. These investigations will
be complemented with real-time fluorescence measurements of metal transport
events in proteoliposomes combined with the use of fluorescent sensors to
investigate putative co-transported ions and membrane potential generation, to
provide highlights on the overall kinetics, thermodynamics and mechanism of
transport. This integrated approach will reveal new paradigms underlying energy-
dependent selective metal translocation processes and define how plasticity and
promiscuous recognition is exploited to guarantee metal translocation across
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.