* 2045568
* CAREER: Investigating Black Youths’ Engineering, Innovation, and Design Practices at the Intersection of Museum and Home/Family Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* DeLean Tolbert Smith, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 301,439.00

Informal STEM education spaces like museums can intentionally serve surrounding
communities and support sustainable and accessible engagement. Building from
this base, the project takes a stance that the intersection of the museum,
home/family life and the youth’s internal practices and disciplinary sense of
self are rooted in history and culture. Thus, this CAREER work builds on the
following principles: Black families and youth have rightful presence in STEM
and in STEM learning environments; Black families are valuable learning
partners; and Black youths need counterspaces to explore STEM as one mechanism
for creating future disciplinary agency. In partnership with the Henry Ford
Museum and the Detroit-Area Pre-College Engineering Program, the project seeks
to (a) expand the field's understanding of how Black youth engineer and
innovate; (b) investigate the influence of a culturally relevant curriculum on
their engineering practices and identity, knowledge, and confidence; and (c)
describe the ways Black families and museums support youth in engineering
learning experiences. The work will center on the 20-hour “Innovate” curriculum
which was designed by the museum to bridge design, innovation, and creation
practices with the artifacts of innovators throughout time. The project
comprises six weekend “Innovate” sessions and an at-home innovation experience
plus participation in an annual Invention Convention. By focusing on these aims,
this research responds to the goals of the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) program, which seeks to advance evidence-based understanding of the
design and development of STEM learning opportunities for the public in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening
engagement in STEM learning experiences and advancing innovative research on
STEM learning in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main research
questions of this multiphase CAREER award are: (1) What practices do Black
youths and families engage in as they address engineering, design, and
innovation challenges? (2) In what ways does a culturally relevant museum-based
innovation program influence the design and innovation practices and assessment
performance of Black youths and families as they engage in engineering, design,
and innovation across learning settings? (3) How does teaching innovation,
design, and engineering through historical re-telling and reconstruction
influence a youth’s perception of their own identities, abilities, and
practices? and (4) How do Black families engage with informal STEM learning
settings and what resources best support their engineering, design, and
innovation exploration? Youth in sixth grade are the focus of the research. The
work is guided by ecological systems, sociocultural learning, culturally
relevant pedagogy, and community cultural wealth theories. During phase one, the
focus will be to refine the curriculum and logistics of the study
implementation. The investigator will enhance the curriculum to include
narratives of Black innovators and engineers. Fifteen families will be recruited
to participate in the program enhancement pilot and initial research cycle for
phase two. In phase three another cohort of families will be recruited to
participate. Survey research, narrative inquiry and digital ethnography will
comprise the approaches to explore the research questions. The evaluation has a
two-pronged focus: to assess (1) how well the enhanced Innovate curriculum and
museum/home learning experience supports Black families’ participation and (2)
how well the separate phases of the study connect and operate together to meet
the research aims. The study’s findings can help families and informal
practitioners leverage evidence-based approaches to support Black youth in
making connections between history and out-of-school contexts to model and
develop their innovative engineering practices. Additionally, this work has
implications for Black undergraduate students who will develop skills through
their mentorship and researcher roles, studying cultural practices and learning
experiences. The research study and findings can inform the design of future
museum/home learning programs and research opportunities for Black learners in
informal learning spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.