* 2045347
* CAREER: Information Elicitation in Algorithmic Economics and Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Rafael Frongillo, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 04/30/2026
* USD 328,316.00

A wide variety of important problems, from designing self-driving cars to
forecasting the spread of a disease, rely on making and evaluating predictions.
These problems in turn rely on loss functions, which are mathematical tools to
measure prediction (in)accuracy. Well-designed loss functions can guide both
computers and humans in making accurate predictions. In machine learning, a
branch of artificial intelligence, computers make predictions by choosing the
predictive model that best fits historical data, as judged by a loss function.
Yet a general framework to design and analyze loss functions is lacking for many
common machine learning tasks. In economics, an efficient information economy is
crucial to facilitate the trade of data, predictions, and other information.
Unfortunately, current economic mechanisms fall short for settings involving
competition and collaboration, which are vitally important to a healthy economy.
This project will to address these shortcomings, by (a) developing a general
framework to design and analyze loss functions in machine learning, and (b)
designing collaborative and competitive mechanisms to facilitate markets for
predictions, data, and beyond. These results will impact a number of key
economic sectors as our society continues to progress toward an information
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In supervised machine learning, algorithms employ
surrogate loss functions, which are easier to optimize than the target loss but
still solve the same problem. Despite their prevalence and importance, the
literature lacks a general framework to systematically design and analyze
surrogate losses. Such a framework is especially lacking in structured
prediction settings, as in computer vision, natural language processing, and
bioinformatics, where one tries to predict an object like a tree or sequence.
Using ideas from economics, the project will develop a new framework to study
and design convex surrogate losses, with the potential for sharper and more
general results. Using techniques from discrete convex geometry, this framework
readily applies to polyhedral (piecewise linear convex) losses, a popular class
in structured prediction. In algorithmic economics, information elicitation
mechanisms, which exchange information for money, are a promising foundation for
an information economy. The project will study a variety of new mechanisms, and
develop new analyses of existing mechanisms, to increase efficiency and
incentive-compatibility. Among these settings are machine learning competitions,
forecasting competitions, and a new mechanism to fund general collaborative
projects. These settings address several central questions about multi-agent
elicitation mechanisms, some of which have been open for over a
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.