* 2045058
* CAREER: Mollusk and Arthropod-inspired Bio-Cemented Composites for Sustainable, Resilient, and Multifunctional Ground Improvement
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Michael Gomez, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 524,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will explore the potential
for incorporating bio-inspired principles from natural composites found in
mollusks and arthropods with existing bio-cementation soil improvement to yield
multifunctional, resilient, and sustainable bio-cemented composites for the
improvement of weak and problematic soils. While bio-cementation has been shown
to dramatically improve soil engineering behaviors, the presence of cementation
can also result in some potentially unfavorable responses including rapid
strength and stiffness losses. This project will draw inspiration from the
structure and mechanisms associated with mechanically superior biogenic
composites to modify existing bio-cementation and further enhance soil
engineering behaviors to provide transformative benefits with respect to the
environmental sustainability, economic efficacy, long-term resilience, and
multifunctionality of geotechnical soil improvement and reliant civil
infrastructure. Project education and outreach activities will address critical
deficiencies in the pipeline of underrepresented minority students towards STEM-
based higher education by: (1) increasing the awareness of underrepresented
minority students of STEM fields, higher education, and careers through outreach
at various venues including the Seattle Aquarium, (2) improving the recruitment
of underrepresented minority students to STEM-based higher education through
modules, mobile outreach toolkits, an academy for K-12 teachers, and
implementation of content in classrooms, and (3) enhancing underrepresented
minority student retention in STEM through research experiences, integration
with support programs, and incorporation of project outcomes in curricula. Over
600 K-12 and community college students will be engaged annually from remote and
diverse student populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project research will
leverage small-scale biogeochemical experiments, reactive transport numerical
modeling, triaxial and resonant column geotechnical laboratory tests, and
advanced chemical, biological, and material analyses to: (1) explore the
potential of bio-inspired principles to be translated to bio-cemented soils to
achieve bio-cemented composites with enhanced fracture toughness, ductility, and
strength, (2) investigate the engineering behaviors of bio-cemented composite
treated soils including (a) pre-yielding, post-yielding, and critical state
behaviors, (b) low-strain dynamic properties, and (c) liquefaction behaviors,
(3) examine the ability of bio-cemented composites to provide new
functionalities including contaminant removal and thermal and hydraulic
enhancements, and (4) explore the resilience of bio-cemented composites to
biogeochemical and mechanical stressors and the environmental and economic
efficacy of composites relative to existing technologies. The project will
advance the emerging field of bio-mediated soil improvement by leveraging novel
bio-mediated processes and bio-inspired principles to develop new materials for
geotechnical ground improvement that can improve the resiliency, sustainability,
and multifunctionality of civil infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.