* 2045983
* CAREER: Fluid-driven Deformation in Underground Salt Caverns and Wastewater Injection Sites
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Patricia Persaud, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 04/30/2026
* USD 415,769.00

Earthquakes caused by human activities - such as wastewater injection,
geothermal extraction, and underground carbon storage - tend to be small. With
notable exceptions, such as the 2016 Pawnee Oklahoma earthquake, these
earthquakes often hide below cultural seismic noise. This presents a challenge
for both monitoring and detecting them. It impedes studying their causes and
assessing corresponding hazards. In the U.S., regions that have been free of
earthquakes are now pressed to find reliable ways to address earthquake risks.
Research on induced seismicity has expanded in the last decade; but studies have
mostly focused on known hotspots in Arkansas, Colorado, Kansas, Ohio, Oklahoma,
Texas, and Wyoming. Yet, it is expected that induced earthquakes will occur in
regions which did not face this threat before. It is, thus, critical to monitor
and catalog the natural baseline seismicity in these regions before induced
earthquakes happen; this allows detecting when seismicity rises above background
levels and assessing the risks. One such location is the State of Louisiana. It
is currently at the threshold of implementing CO2 storage and increased oil and
gas exploration. However, Louisiana lacks a statewide seismic network and
monitoring program to assess seismic hazards. Here, the researchers integrate
research and education in the aim to understand human-driven changes in
Louisiana. Deploying geophysical and seismic instruments, they study three key
locations related to human activities and resources. These locations are: 1) in
northwest Louisiana, a region with high wastewater injection rates; 2) an
underground storage cavern, where ground motions have been reported and nearby
sinkhole formation has occurred (with precursor earthquake activity); 3) across
the Baton Rouge fault that also acts as a patchy barrier for salt water.
Integrating multiple data types, the team gradually unveils the new threats
Louisiana is facing. The project also provides support to an early-career female
scientist, one postdoctoral researcher, and graduate and undergraduate students.
It includes the establishment of student-focused regional workshops, notably on
Machine Learning applications in Geophysics. The project also fosters broadening
participation in science, e.g., by involving students from the Southern
University at Baton Rouge, a Historically Black University. This project is
jointly funded by the Geophysics Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is an
integrated geophysical study of multiple data types. It produces a detailed
characterization of fluid-involved crustal deformation. The results have
important societal implications for energy corridors undergoing rapid human
change. They characterize the largely unknown deformation of the subsurface
beneath a region that supplies a major part of the U.S. oil and gas. This region
is challenged by ongoing subsidence, groundwater salinization, and increasing
seismicity associated with wastewater disposal from hydrocarbon exploration. The
seismic arrays installed at three key locations not only measure the levels of
seismicity, but also constrain the poorly understood aseismic deformation.
Indeed, innovative techniques are applied, such as Fracture Seismic imaging,
that image fluid-filled networks by using harmonic resonances within fractures.
Seismological methods are integrated with GPS data analysis to understand the
deformation budget of the crust. This approach provides insight into the pattern
of crustal deformation driven by human activities. One expected outcome is the
first high-resolution mapping of fracture geometry and connectivity, subsurface
material properties, and seismic and aseismic deformation in the region. The
study, thus, has far-reaching impacts on our general understanding of fluid-
driven processes and their effects on crustal
deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.