* 2045596
* CAREER: Specializing Runtime Verification for Software Testing
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Owolabi Legunsen, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2026
* USD 361,666.00

Software testing is usually the last line of defense against bugs. But testing
misses bugs, so costly and harmful bugs often occur in deployed software.
Techniques that can help find more bugs during testing are needed. Runtime
verification is one such technique; it finds bugs by checking program runs
against formal specifications that describe correct program behavior. This
project seeks to make runtime verification more effective and more efficient.
The project also aims to facilitate teaching runtime verification to software
engineers by creating a course on runtime verification, integrating runtime-
verification modules into a software-testing course, and creating publicly
available pedagogical materials and open-source tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on addressing four major impediments to runtime-verification
usage: (1) most signaled violations are false alarms, because existing
specifications are inadequate; (2) confirming whether a signaled violation is a
bug takes too much developer time; (3) runtime verification does not scale to
the large software systems on which society increasingly depends; and (4) it is
expensive for developers to write tests that cover code where specifications may
be violated. Automated solutions to address these impediments will require
fundamental advances in operations on traces -- sequences of program events --
that are generated during runtime verification. Consequently, this project will
develop a trace-aware runtime-verification technique that works directly on
traces. Automated techniques based on trace-aware runtime verification will also
be developed to (1) reduce false alarms by repairing existing specifications;
(2) classify each violation as a likely bug or false alarm; (3) reduce redundant
computations performed during runtime verification; and (4) generate tests
automatically to adequately check code with respect to the specifications. The
project's main impact is to bring runtime verification closer to helping
developers find more bugs during every test run.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.