* 2045135
* Role of Nitric Acid in Chemical Weathering and Pedogenic Thresholds
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Julie Pett-Ridge, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 11/30/2023
* USD 348,523.00

The breakdown of soil minerals contributes to the creation of soil and affects
nutrient supply and carbon dynamics at local to global scales. Nitric acid may
be an important but largely overlooked agent of chemical weathering that
contributes to the breakdown of soil minerals. Nitric acid is produced in soils
by microbes under nitrogen-rich conditions, which occur both naturally in
ecosystems and as a result of human activities. This project will investigate
the role of nitric acid in chemical weathering of soil minerals that originate
from basaltic rocks, which are widespread on Earth. Knowing where, when, and how
much nitric acid enhances weathering can improve understanding of atmospheric
carbon dioxide fluxes, soil fertility and nutrient sustainability, and carbon
storage potential in both forests and agricultural systems. The broader impacts
of this work will include training of undergraduate students in research, and
engaging high school students with a focus on increasing the number of
underrepresented students from rural high schools who are “College Ready” for
STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Weathering rates depend on many factors,
including mineralogy, surface properties, water flow, and vegetation. Carbonic
acid is a primary driver of chemical weathering in many settings, but an
unsolved problem is the contribution and effects of nitric acid-promoted
weathering. Nitric acid-promoted weathering may occur as a result of either
anthropogenic pollutants, addition of nitrogen (N) fertilizers, or via natural N
enrichment through N-fixing organisms. Nitric acid weathering may therefore
change fluxes of carbon, silica, and rock-derived nutrients relative to carbonic
acid-driven weathering alone. In this research investigators will evaluate the
long-term effects of nitric acid on chemical weathering and pedogenesis by
studying N-rich and N-poor forest ecosystems that have developed naturally from
a long history of biological N fixation on basalt in Oregon. They will also
determine the short-term effects of accelerated N cycling and nitric acid-driven
weathering using direct N fertilization experiments in the field. By examining
87Sr/86Sr ratios, soil water chemistry and fluxes, along with soil properties
and mineralogy, they will test the hypothesis that short-term N enrichment and
nitrate leaching primarily displaces cations from the soil exchange complex,
while long-term N enrichment accelerates weathering and alters soil mineralogy.
This assessment will be extended across biomes by also examining weathering
effects of decades-long N fertilization experiments in Costa Rica and Hawaii,
spanning both early and late stages of soil development. Researchers will
directly compare the effects of nitric acid to carbonic and organic acids using
laboratory column basalt weathering experiments that will more precisely
distinguish the unique chemical fingerprints associated with each weathering
mechanism. By identifying when, where, and how nitric acid enhances weathering,
the results of this study will contribute to understanding the sensitivity and
resiliency of both managed and natural systems in an increasingly N-rich
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.