* 2045220
* CAREER: Design and Precision Assembly of Particulate-Based 3D Nanophotonic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Euan McLeod, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 09/30/2026
* USD 516,121.00

Many industrial and consumer devices rely on controlling light at small length
scales, for example, the machines used to make computer chips, the cameras in
cell phones, and medical imaging devices, just to name a few. Miniaturizing such
devices makes them lighter in weight, more energy-efficient, and often higher in
performance because of the ability pack more functional components closer
together in a smaller package. A current challenge is how to miniaturize three-
dimensional (3D) components in devices that have elements smaller than 150 nm,
which is about the same size as a virus, and only a bit smaller than the
wavelength of visible light. Consumer-grade 3D printers have resolution that is
~1000 times worse than this. This proposal aims to develop new, relatively low-
cost techniques to design and assemble 3D structures for photonic devices with
elements as small as ~50 nm. In addition to device performance improvement tied
to miniaturization, the creation of structures with such small elements can lead
to materials with exotic optical properties that are not found naturally. These
exotic optical properties can enable devices such as lenses with resolution
beyond those of glass lenses, or devices like optical cloaks that bend light
around an object. The research will be incorporated into courses at the
University of Arizona, and the course modules will be shared with other
educators via websites, professional meetings, publications, and outreach
events. High schoolers and undergraduate students will also partake in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimate control over light requires control of
the relative permittivities and permeabilities of materials over all three
dimensions of space with deep sub-wavelength resolution. In a steady-state
system, the behavior of light depends entirely on the 3D distribution of these
properties. For example, studies of photonic metamaterials have shown that the
patterning of heterogeneous materials at such deep sub-wavelength scales can
enable negative refractive index, permittivity near zero, and ultra-high
refractive index. Generally, the higher the resolution of the fabrication
approach, the more compact the optical system and the higher its resulting
optical resolution. However, a significant barrier to realizing this ultimate
control over light is that there are currently no means to achieve deep
subwavelength heterogeneous patterning in 3D structures for visible and near-
infrared wavelengths. The goal of the proposed project is to design, fabricate,
and test 3D nanophotonic components assembled out of precisely-positioned
metallic and high-index dielectric colloidal building blocks of various shapes
with ~50 nm, high-resolution feature sizes. Design approaches will use the
coupled multipole method. High speed optical tweezers and biochemical linkages
will be used to fabricate structures and devices out of &gt;1000 building
blocks. Devices that have previously only been theoretically proposed will be
experimentally tested, including superresolution imaging devices and devices
based on transformation optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.