* 2045394
* CAREER: Understanding the Stabilizing Role of Muscle-Tendon Units in vivo
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Christopher Arellano, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 07/31/2026
* USD 478,085.00

This CAREER project combines research, training, and educational activities that
focus on advancing knowledge of how muscles and tendons function during standing
and walking. It is well understood that muscles in the lower body produce forces
and that tendons, which attach to muscles, transmit those forces to the
skeleton, allowing animals to stand and walk. However, most current knowledge
about muscle and tendon comes from experiments that study these tissues when
functioning outside of the body. What is not well understood is how muscle and
tendon function as an integrated system within the body and, in particular, how
they function to meet the demands of maintaining balance while moving. This
project will measure the mechanical behavior of muscle and tendon when the body
responds to a push intended to challenge the ability to maintain balance.
Integrated within the research component is training for two students from
underrepresented groups pursuing a PhD in STEM. These students will gain
knowledge in the field, develop first-hand experience in carrying out scientific
experiments, and develop as leaders in the next generation of interdisciplinary
scientists. This CAREER project will impact society by translating new knowledge
about how muscle and tendon function during movement by (1) contributing design
principles for biologically inspired prosthetics and (2) developing teaching
units and workshops offered to students at the Multicultural Education and
Counseling through the Arts (MECA) non-profit organization, which serves K-12
grade students (~4,000 underserved youth) in Houston’s historic 6th
Ward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project focuses on understanding the role
of muscle-tendon units to control movement and stability using a live, freely
moving animal, and integrates research, education, training, and outreach.
Movement stabilization can be accomplished by several interacting mechanisms: a
muscle’s force-modulating properties, the energy-modulating capacity of
variable-stiffness tendon springs, and the co-behavior of agonist-antagonist
muscle-tendon units. The project’s primary research objectives and outcomes are
to use a work-energy based framework to: (1) Determine the muscle-tendon unit
properties that modulate the rapid flow of energy absorption during active
lengthening in situ. (2) Determine the properties that allow ankle joint
agonist-antagonist muscle-tendon units to govern the response of destabilizing
perturbations elicited during standing in vivo. (3) Determine the properties
that allow ankle joint agonist-antagonist muscle-tendon units to govern the
response of destabilizing perturbations elicited during walking in vivo. The
experimental approach involves the use of a custom-built, high performance
linear actuator to elicit unexpected perturbations to the body during standing
and walking. Custom sensors implanted into muscle-tendon tissue and force
platform measurements are used to understand the response to perturbations at
multiple scales, from muscle-tendon units that control ankle joint function to
whole body mechanics. In addition, the project will implement an educational
outreach plan that will advance a summer STEM camp curriculum that serves K-12th
graders from underrepresented groups. The hands-on activities to be developed
will focus on key biomechanical concepts that integrate math, physics, and
physical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.