* 2045432
* CAREER: Large-Scale Examination of Problematic Online Behaviors and Their Regulators
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Ceren Budak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2026
* USD 317,516.00

This project will help improve the quality of conversations and information
online by identifying the constraints that regulate cross-partisan animosity and
disinformation across different social media platforms. Combining the strengths
of political communication and socioeconomic theories with the methodological
rigor of computational and experimental approaches, this research will identify:
(1) which regulators, or strategies, are suitable or most effective for
combating disinformation and cross-partisan animosity online; (2) how their
strengths vary across behaviors and social media platforms; and (3) how these
regulators interact, at times undermining or supporting each other. Scholars
once thought that online social media platforms would bring in a new era of
democratic discussion and debate. However, scholars and users alike are now
mostly concerned about the dark side of these platforms - problems such as
incivility, cross-partisan animosity, and disinformation are all commonplace
online. While there have been efforts to combat these problems - such as the use
of moral suasion to curb incivility and media literacy to curb misinformation -
the approaches thus far lack a unified theoretical framework that allows for a
systematic exploration of the solution space.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research will develop a framework connecting three of the modalities that
regulate behavior online and offline: (1) Norms constrain through the sanctions
or rules of a community. (2) Market constrains through price. (3) Architecture -
built environment or code in online space - constrains through the structural
burdens it imposes. The impact of these modalities on disinformation and cross-
partisan animosity will be examined by developing a broad range of
methodological approaches, spanning fields such as machine learning, network
science, and causal inference. First, the project will contribute rich datasets
and scalable machine learning and network science approaches for identifying
cross-partisan animosity and disinformation online. Second, this project will
bring together the theoretical strengths of legal and political communication
scholarship and the computational strengths of computer and information sciences
to combat problematic behaviors online. It will investigate the efficacy of
different modalities of regulation through natural and randomized experiments
and identify their interdependencies using structural equation modeling. Third,
it will determine the generalizability of strategies by examining the behavior
and efficacy of regulators across different platforms. Finally, most approaches
that address problematic behaviors online treat individuals as the unit of
analysis. However, structural regulators act upon communities. This project will
overcome issues that generally undermine research at the individual level by
performing comparative analyses across not just individuals but also
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.