* 2045621
* CAREER: Mixing and Vorticity Dynamics in Active Fluid Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Kun-Ta Wu, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2026
* USD 413,702.00

This CAREER project will explore the mixing dynamics and kinematics of active
fluid systems. Researchers and industrial practitioners often use microfluidic
technology to process tiny quantities of fluids, which minimizes waster and
enhances flexibility and efficiency. Microfluidic systems manipulate fluids at a
very small scale, typically smaller than one millimeter. Progress in
microfluidic technology is limited by the challenge of mixing at a small scale,
because it is difficult to generate turbulence at in very small channels. Active
fluids are fluids containing discrete entities that move under their own power
and may be able to promote local mixing. Even in tiny spaces, active fluids can
generates turbulence and promote micromixing. This research will explore the
mixing process and vortex dynamics of active fluids, including the equations
that describe the process, the effects of varying fluid activity and boundary
conditions, and the effects of combining an active fluid with an inactive fluid.
The resulting knowledge will stimulate development of new micromixing
technologies that will increase production efficiency in the chemical
engineering and pharmaceutical industries, enable products to be synthesized on
demand, and reduce the need to store and transport hazardous or reactive
chemicals. This project will also provide K-12 students with hands-on
experiences in mixing dynamics through a contest mixing two different colors of
dough and an online active matter simulation program. This project will also
include an online teacher training module to help bring active matter concepts
to US classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active turbulence has been characterized
and modeled, but little is known about how active turbulence facilitates mixing.
Several fundamental questions remain unanswered, such as, “What is the mixing
efficiency of an active fluid system?” and “What parameters control the mixing
efficiency of active fluid?” To address these questions and expand knowledge
about active turbulence-induced mixing, the mixing process of microtubule-
kinesin active fluid will be modeled by modifying established active
nematohydrodynamic equations developed to characterize active turbulence. This
project will extend the existing active nematohydrodynamic model to describe
active fluid systems with inhomogeneous activity, a moving boundary, and
multiple fluids. The expanded model, which will be validated with accompanying
experiments, will guide the application of active fluid in science and industry
and allow engineers to efficiently explore parameter space to optimize novel
self- mixing systems, particularly at the micron scale. This project will
connect two well-established fields— mixing and active fluid modelling —and thus
extend established mixing theory to include active fluids and elucidate
differences between how active and passive fluids mix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.