* 2045945
* CAREER: Active Bayesian Inference for Collaborative Robot Mapping
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Nikolay Atanasov, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 03/31/2026
* USD 357,852.00

Artificial perception techniques, allowing robot systems to know their location
and surroundings using sensory data, have been instrumental for enabling robot
automation outside of carefully controlled manufacturing settings. Current robot
systems, however, remain passive in their perception of the world. Unlike
biological systems, robots lack curiosity mechanisms for exploration and
uncertainty mitigation, which are critical for intelligent decision making. Such
capabilities are very important in disaster response, security and surveillance,
and environmental monitoring, where it is necessary to quickly gain situational
awareness of the terrain, buildings, and humans in the environment. The methods
developed in this project will impact the design of mapping and active sensing
algorithms for autonomous robot teams and their use in the aforementioned
applications. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program research
develops fundamental robot autonomy capabilities that will also impact other
domains relying on autonomous robots. In addition, the project will develop a
suite of open-source education materials, including theoretical problems,
projects, lectures, and exemplary implementations of core robotics algorithms,
unified in an easily accessible simulation environment. This platform will
support curriculum development for graduate students, as well as outreach and
research-initiation activities for undergraduate and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research agenda will be achieved through two
key technical innovations. First, the project will formally define an Active
Bayesian Inference problem, seeking optimal control of sensing systems for
minimum uncertainty estimation. Methods for distributed approximate dynamic
programming that utilize the structure of the problem, induced by the functions
modeling probability mass evolution and estimation performance, will be
developed to efficiently represent and optimize multi-robot sensing control
policies. Second, the project will demonstrate that a team of ground and aerial
robots, using Active Bayesian Inference techniques, can achieve autonomous
exploration and active high-fidelity mapping of an unknown environment. This
objective will be supported by novel contributions to online dense implicit
surface mapping in terms of distributed and probabilistic techniques that allow
multiple robots to collaboratively estimate the environment geometry and
semantics, while quantifying the uncertainty of these estimates to allow
planning informative actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed
and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.