* 2045744
* CAREER: An Adaptive Stochastic Look-ahead Framework for Disaster Relief Logistics under Forecast Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Yongjia Song, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will contribute to
the advancement of national health, prosperity and welfare by contributing new
knowledge on effective disaster relief logistics operations for advance-notice
natural disasters such as hurricanes and slow-moving storms. Improved disaster
relief efforts can both alleviate human suffering and reduce economic loss.
Current disaster relief logistics planning and operations do not effectively
incorporate evolving weather forecasts and natural hazard analysis tools. This
project will address this shortcoming by creating adaptive decision-support
methods for effectively staging and utilizing scarce resources, leveraging both
real-time forecast information and historical data. This project will foster a
long-term collaboration between the operations research community and emergency
management agencies by designing novel logistics decision support tools. The
accompanying educational program aims to enrich engineering curriculum with
data-driven analytic tools, create interdisciplinary research opportunities, and
develop outreach activities for K-12 students and the general public to help
them understand the role of operations research in addressing critical societal
challenges such as disaster relief logistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will contribute a holistic modeling and algorithmic framework for sequential
decision making in disaster relief logistics planning and operations under
dynamically evolving disaster situations and their rolling forecasts. This
project will: (i) establish new theory to understand the impact of evolving
forecast uncertainty on the quality of the decision policy induced by past
forecast information; (ii) produce novel algorithms that integrate offline and
online stochastic programming models using adaptive sampling, state space
approximation, and stage approximation within a rolling-horizon procedure; and
(iii) create and analyze novel structured decision policies to address the need
to coordinate the timing of various logistics operations with heterogeneous
modalities. The modeling and solution methodology on disaster relief logistics
operations planning will be validated using both historical data on past
hurricanes and simulation data. Research results will help engage and inform
emergency managers in making logistics planning and operational policies that
balance between adaptability, optimality and executability in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.