* 2045829
* CAREER: Efficient computational methods for nonlinear optimization and machine learning problems with applications to power systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2025
* Somayeh Sojoudi, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 12/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Optimization is an important tool for the design, analysis, control and
operation of real-world systems, such as power systems. It also plays a central
role in machine learning and artificial intelligence, particularly in deep
learning, reinforcement leaning, and statistical learning. The mathematical
foundation of optimization has heavily relied on the notion of convexity since
convex optimization problems can be solved using fast algorithms. Nevertheless,
many optimization problems in real-world applications are non-convex, and
therefore it is extremely difficult to solve those problems reliably and
efficiently using the existing methods. As an example, this issue is one of the
main bottlenecks in the upgrade of the legacy power grids and has been incurring
billions of dollars annually in the United States. This CAREER project aims to
develop a set of computational tools for solving complex optimization and
learning problems using efficient computational methods. This project has a
significant impact on many societal problems through the development of a rich
mathematical foundation for non-convex optimization, and its outcomes can be
exploited in a variety of fields. The developed techniques enable solving large-
scale computational problems for improving the efficiency, reliability,
resiliency and sustainability of power grids, which has major societal,
economical, and environmental impacts. Moreover, these tools significantly
extend the application of artificial intelligence to safety-critical systems.
This project has a wide range of outreach plans for K-12 and underrepresented
students, and it also has several educational activities at both undergraduate
and graduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The state-of-the-art techniques for
solving non-convex problems are based on various approximation and relaxation
methods, whose practical use remains limited due to their scalability issues for
real-world systems. On the other hand, the staggering advances made in
artificial intelligence in the last 5 years (e.g., in deep learning) are due, in
part, to handling computationally-intensive machine learning problems directly
as non-convex optimization without relying on convex optimization. Motivated by
the resounding success of local search methods for artificial intelligence, this
CAREER project aims to design low-complexity computational methods for non-
convex optimization problems. To this end, it studies the notion of spurious
solutions, which are those solutions of an optimization problem that satisfy the
local optimality conditions but are not globally optimal. The main property of
convex optimization is the absence of spurious solutions. This project
introduces the class of global functions which is far broader than the class of
convex functions but benefits from the same spurious-solution-free property.
Using the notions of global functions and kernel structure property, four
objectives will be addressed: (i) analysis of the spurious solutions of key non-
convex problems in machine learning and studying how the amount of data and the
structural properties of each problem affects the inexistence of such solutions,
(ii) analysis of the spurious solutions of an arbitrary polynomial optimization
problem via its conversion to a machine learning problem and then discovering
what structural properties guarantee the inexistence of spurious solutions,
(iii) approximation of an arbitrary polynomial optimization problem having a
spurious solution with a sequence of spurious-minima-free non-convex problems in
a higher-dimensional space, (iv) software development and performing case
studies on key problems for power systems and machine learning. This project is
interdisciplinary and contributes to the areas of optimization theory, machine
learning, control theory, and energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.