* 2045844
* CAREER: Leaving the Fold: Leveraging Mass Spectrometry Proteomics to Shift the Paradigm on Protein Folding
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Stephen Fried, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2025
* USD 739,563.00

Proteins must fold themselves up into specific three-dimensional shapes to
perform tasks required by the cell. On the other hand, when proteins fold into
the wrong shape, they can disrupt the normal functioning of the cell, and are
associated with a wide range of maladies including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's
diseases. How is it that proteins ‘know’ how to fold into the correct structures
(at least, most of the time)? Simple proteins typically have the property that
after being disassembled in a test tube, they can spontaneously refold back into
their native structures. This implies that their native states are also their
most stable forms, and therefore thermodynamics naturally favor their formation.
However, most studies of protein folding to date focus on a small number of
simple model systems and leave out the fact that cells have thousands of
different proteins, many of which are bigger and more complicated than the ones
that are typically amenable for biophysical characterization. The purpose of
this project is to apply modern mass spectrometry (MS) proteomics methods –
which can routinely characterize thousands of proteins in complex mixtures – to
problems in protein folding. These tools will enable the exploration of many
classes of proteins whose folding has never been interrogated. Moreover, since
the majority of the concepts and theories about protein folding have been based
on a heretofore “privileged” subset of model proteins, the expectation is that
this research will “leave the fold” and shift current paradigms on protein
folding. The project will also provide opportunities to engage individuals that
are underrepresented in the scientific community and workforce. One of these
activities targets first-generation undergraduates and integrates closely with
the research plan. The second activity is designed to meet a pressing need in
the Baltimore area to introduce more STEM career development resources to low-
income communities. A web database aimed at increasing the accessibility of
proteomic data generated by this research project to the biophysical community
will be developed. Over time, this database could take on the role as the
authoritative resource of protein folding due to the ability of proteomics
experiments to quantify folding for large numbers of proteins under uniform
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project utilizes and
expands two emerging approaches in structural proteomics and seeks to address
two far-reaching questions about protein folding. Methodologically, the project
employs limited proteolysis and crosslinking in order to encode structural
information about proteins (as well as their folding intermediates and their
misfolded forms following failed attempts at refolding) into cleavage sites and
crosslinks, which can be sequenced en masse by mass spectrometry. With these
methods, this project will explore the limits of thermodynamic refolding. In
particular, proteins from thermophilic organisms and ancient proteins might be
expected to be more refoldable than their mesophilic and extant peers. Moreover,
chaperones are expected to help rescue the refolding of proteins that could not
refold on their own. Experiments conducted as part of this project will
explicitly test these hypotheses by using limited proteolysis mass spectrometry
to examine the refoldability of a wide range of proteins and with the assistance
of a range of several chaperone systems. Secondly, this research aims to uncover
the biophysical basis of non-refoldability. When a protein fails to refold, what
structure does it assume and what intermediates lead it down that ill-fated
path? Experiments will address these questions by using crosslinking mass
spectrometry to probe the structural dynamics of refolding proteomes. The
results will provide new insight into the topologies of protein free energy
landscapes and enable the characterization of kinetically-trapped misfolded
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.