* 2045111
* CAREER: Elucidating the Interfacial Structure of Complex Solvents for Chemical Transformations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Burcu Gurkan, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2026
* USD 424,957.00

The availability of high-performing solvents that function as absorbents, co-
catalysts, and electrolytes is a critical and unmet need for advanced
technologies such as integrated capture and conversion of carbon dioxide. This
project will develop functionalized solvents that have high affinity to carbon
dioxide as well as facilitate its efficient conversion to other useful products
such as fuels. These complex solvents are hydrogen-bonded organic complex (HBOC)
liquids with high concentrations of salts and often have molecular-scale
structure and heterogeneity. The mechanisms of absorption and reactivity of
carbon dioxide at the electrode-electrolyte interface are not well understood in
these solvents. This project will explore the fundamental mechanisms that
underpin absorption, interfacial liquid structure, and reactivity to inform
future designs of integrated systems for chemical transformations. The knowledge
gained has far-reaching applications in separations, catalysis, sensors, and
other electrochemical processes. Through these applications, this research
addresses the societal challenges of climate change, emission mitigation, waste
utilization, and energy consumption. The educational goal of this CAREER project
is to enhance students’ learning experience using visuals and to build science
literacy through drawing. Visual illustrations of the scientific concepts of
this project will be created for use as educational materials, which will be
disseminated via publications, seminars, and public events. These activities
will foster teamwork and strengthen ties with the local community in Cleveland
through collaboration with the Cleveland Institute of
Art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from both the Interfacial Engineering and
Electrochemical Systems programs, this project will characterize the liquid
structure of concentrated electrolytes at interfaces with electrified surfaces
and quantitatively assess the structural impact on charge distribution,
thermodynamics, and reaction mechanisms in separation processes and
electrochemical reactions. The solvation structure and reactive state of the
carbon dioxide model compound both within and at HBOC electrolyte-electrode
interfaces will be investigated by spectroscopy, neutron and X-ray reflectivity,
and electroanalytical techniques. These studies will provide a basis for
understanding the structure and dynamics of the behavior of small molecules in
complex solvents. More specifically, the following scientific questions will be
answered: (1) What is the physical environment of the carbon dioxide solvate
complex at the electrode-electrolyte interface? and (2) What is the impact of
the interface structure on electron and proton transfer and selectivity of the
carbon dioxide reduction mechanism? The results from this study will contribute
to the understanding of electrical double layer structures of HBOC electrolytes,
as they cannot be explained by the traditional models suitable for dilute
systems. The results will also impact the discussions on the role of the
electrolyte in carbon dioxide co-catalysis. The project will apply the STEM
educational concept of ‘learning by drawing’ and artistic illustration in
undergraduate and graduate-level courses and public outreach. Learning by
drawing is expected to enhance student engagement in engineering courses,
improve visual literacy, promote knowledge retention, increase diversity among
students pursuing STEM-related fields, as well foster interdisciplinary
communication between art and engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.