* 2045333
* CAREER: New Dimensions in Particle Dark Matter &amp; Physics Pedagogy
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Philip Tanedo, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2026
* USD 160,000.00

This CAREER award funds the research activities of Professor Philip Tanedo at
the University of California, Riverside.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vast majority
of the matter in our galaxy is not composed of protons, neutrons, or electrons.
We call this unknown component "dark matter". While we are certain of its
existence, the properties of dark matter remain a tantalizing mystery.
Discovering the masses and interactions of the dark matter particles would
therefore illuminate the cosmological history of the known universe. Progress
towards this goal requires a robust theoretical framework within which to
interpret the observational data from a range of scientific instruments, from
colliders to telescopes. Professor Tanedo will lead a research program to
develop new theories of dark matter that can explain why it has eluded our
laboratory tests, and show how upcoming experiments may reveal its properties.
This project is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts. Professor
Tanedo will incorporate his research results into secondary and post-secondary
education, including bilingual Spanish/English outreach materials for local
public schools. Professor Tanedo's research and outreach further the national
interest by advancing our understanding of the fundamental laws of nature and by
promoting full participation of under-represented groups in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Tanedo will develop
models where dark matter interacts through a nearly-conformal gauge sector in
the large-N limit. This mediator sector is described by a dual five-dimensional
theory with bulk fields that can have a continuous 4D spectrum and a small mass
gap. This is a particularly compelling scenario whose experimental signatures
can differ dramatically from those of conventional dark sector models. Professor
Tanedo will identify benchmark models of this type that realize the observed
dark matter density and motivate novel experimental searches. He will elucidate
the new signatures through which one could discover dark matter in these models;
these include fractional-power law self-interactions, efficient capture on
compact objects, and modified distributions in fixed-target experiments. In the
education and outreach component of this project, Professor Tanedo will assess
how targeted science communication training can support the full participation
of under-represented groups in physics. He will collaborate with UC Riverside's
Hispanic Studies Program to develop and deploy student-produced bilingual
educational material to local high school students. These efforts will be
assessed through the science identity framework and will contribute to our
understanding of methods to reduce the barriers to entry into
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.