* 2045590
* CAREER: Frontiers in Matrix Sketching
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Christopher Musco, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 03/31/2026
* USD 329,995.00

Advances in sensing and storage technology have increased the ability to collect
and share huge amounts of data. From satellite imagery, to genetic data, to web
content, richer datasets offer the promise of improved data-driven discovery and
decision making across science, engineering, and industry. Realizing this
promise, however, requires enormous computational effort. The goal of this
project is to democratize the data revolution by developing new algorithms to
efficiently process the world's largest datasets, without the need for the
world's largest supercomputers. To do so, the investigator and his team will
study a powerful algorithmic technique known as "matrix sketching". The key idea
is to quickly compress a large dataset (represented as a matrix of numbers) down
to its most essential information by eliminating redundancy and noise. The
compressed data can then be efficiently digested by downstream algorithms for
machine learning and statistical inference. This project will advance the state-
of-the-art in matrix sketching by taking an interdisciplinary approach,
combining tools from theoretical computer science with methods from
computational and applied mathematics. The project also involves a major
educational component, aimed at improving U.S. mathematics education through
closer ties with applications in STEM fields. The project will support an
international high-school applied-mathematics competition, the development of
curricular material and workshops for high-school educators, and course
development to better prepare university students for careers in algorithms,
machine learning, and data science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance research in
matrix sketching, the project is centered around three main objectives, each
involving problems of practical importance, as well as motivating theoretical
questions that will more broadly impact algorithms research. The first objective
is to develop sketching techniques that move beyond low-rank matrix compression,
which only captures information about the largest-magnitude components of a
matrix’s spectrum. Motivated by emerging applications in network science, deep
learning, and computational physics, the research team is developing techniques
that instead capture coarse information about the entire spectrum of a matrix.
The second objective is to develop methods that allow for higher accuracy by
combining existing sketching algorithms with powerful tools for interactive
refinement. The goal is to design algorithms with runtimes that depend
logarithmically, instead of polynomially, on problem accuracy. The final
objective is to extend the impact of sketching beyond applications where data is
over-abundant, by addressing important problems where sufficient, high-quality
data remains a luxury. The theoretical tools of matrix sketching and data
subsampling are being used to design smarter data-collection strategies for the
“small-data” regime, advancing the state-of-the-art in active learning and
experimental design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.