* 2045999
* CAREER: How Transportation User Experiences Shape Future Behavior: Learning from the Past
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Andre Carrel, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 05/31/2026
* USD 655,624.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports foundational
behavioral research to understand what drives shifts from lifestyles oriented
toward sustainable transportation modes – transit in particular – to auto-
oriented lifestyles. Despite the critical importance of urban transportation
systems that are affordable, reduce congestion, and are associated with low
greenhouse gas emissions, developments over the last decade suggest that many
multi-modal travelers eventually migrate to single-occupancy automobile travel.
A key to understanding these shifts may be the way in which past travel
experiences, satisfaction with travel, and subjective well-being during travel
shape future traveler decision-making, but these effects are not sufficiently
captured by current modeling approaches. This research develops a novel
analytical framework to model and forecast such feedback effects, which will
lead to a richer understanding of the long-term dynamics of urban travel and an
improvement of travel demand forecasting tools. Thus, the research supports the
development of policies and infrastructure investment decisions that aim to
increase the environmental and social sustainability of urban travel and the
provision and maintenance of high-quality public transportation services. Such
efforts are central to providing accessible and affordable transportation
options and access to opportunities to communities of concern, to meeting
climate goals, and to enhancing the nation’s economic resilience. The research
activities are integrated with educational activities to improve critical skills
of transportation engineering students and build early excitement and awareness
of transportation engineering among elementary school students in Columbus,
Ohio. Comprehensive outreach activities engage transit practitioners early and
throughout the project and ensure the relevance and applicability of the
research to practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on prior research, several
behavioral mechanisms are hypothesized through which past travel experiences,
satisfaction with travel, and subjective well-being (SWB) during travel shape
future travel behavior. These mechanisms are investigated using detailed travel
diary data from multi-modal travelers in a major US metropolitan area and
appropriate econometric models. The novelty of this research lies in that, for
the first time, the dynamics between satisfaction/SWB, beliefs, and choices are
systematically studied. The research focuses on transit use but aims to derive
generalizable insights about behavioral processes that tie in with the
scientific community’s theoretical conceptualization of traveler choices. This
supports the transformation of the field toward an emerging, holistic model that
adds affective components to the traditional neoclassical economic elements of
the traveler choice framework. The results will be translated into novel
performance metrics that can be used by transit agencies and metropolitan
planning organizations to quantify the link between transit service quality and
passenger behavior and to better quantify the impacts of public funding for
transit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.