* 2045860
* CAREER: From Reactive to Proactive Distribution Grid Risk Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Line Roald, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This NSF CAREER project aims to address climate change mitigation and adaptation
challenges facing today's electric distribution utilities. Distribution
utilities manage the integration of sustainable yet variable distributed
renewable energy resources, which makes it harder to maintain power quality.
They also manage the impacts of frequent severe weather events causing sparks
that ignite deadly and devastating fires. The current approach is to react to
these problems after they arise because of the lack of methods that can
proactively assess and mitigate risks. This CAREER project will bridge this
much-needed gap by developing risk-assessment and optimization methods that will
bring transformative change to distribution grid operation by moving from
reactive to proactive distribution grid risk management. The intellectual merit
of the project lies in developing new risk assessment methods to quantify and
mitigate risk due to load variability, wildfire ignitions and electric outages.
The broader impacts of the project include improvements in power quality, a
reduction in the risk of wildfire ignitions and fewer power outages across the
United States. The project will also improve undergraduate power system
education through the use of open-source software, and contribute towards
increased retention of minority undergraduate students by developing a learning
community that promotes equitable and inclusive teaching practices among
teaching assistants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop
risk assessment methods to quantify short-term operational risk as well as
formulations and solution algorithms for the associated risk-based and
stochastic optimization methods. These data-driven techniques will consider
multiple imminent threats including multiple scenarios for renewable energy
generation and wildfire ignitions, and identify control actions (e.g., setpoints
for distributed energy resources and remote switches) that improve security and
reliability of distribution grid operations across all these scenarios. Modeling
distribution grids requires, e.g., the consideration of three-phase power flow
calculations and binary decision variables to ensure radial topologies, thus
increasing model complexity relative to transmission grids. Solving this
complex, multi-scenario problem will require both new models and solution
approaches for data-driven stochastic and risk-based optimization. A main
technical focus of the proposal is, therefore, to develop computationally
tractable approaches to leverage large amounts of data within an optimization
framework, and effectively interface simulations and
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.