* 2045465
* CAREER: Understanding Molecular Interactions and Processability for the Design and Manufacture of Ultrafine Electrospun Polymer Fibers
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Blair Brettmann, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/28/2026
* USD 567,705.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant focuses on developing a
science-based link between the processing of ultrafine polymer fibers and the
chemistry of the materials used to make them. While progress has been made in
customizing the shape of material goods through advanced manufacturing
processes, customizing the properties of the materials is still a slow
development process. A major factor slowing materials customization is
understanding the interactions between components in the complex mixtures used
to make functional products and, especially, how those interactions impact
processability. This research project uses experiment and modeling to tie the
chemistry of polymer mixtures to the manufacturing of ultrafine fibers via
electrospinning, leading to agile manufacturing of polymer products. The
research work enables the rapid design of materials for manufacturability, which
can expand the applications to high value products such as electronics, sensors
and consumer goods, thus augmenting U.S. economy and prosperity. Integration of
chemistry and processing involves a merging of two disparate fields and provides
an opportunity for training through interdisciplinary research, education and
outreach. Through this CAREER grant, graduate students are trained in project
management to improve their ability to coordinate complex, interdisciplinary
research tasks. In addition, outreach through the Robert C. Williams Museum of
Papermaking broadens participation by showing school groups and visitors how
research enables development of processable formulations and scalable
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this research is to
develop a link between solution chemistry and ultrafine polymer fiber
manufacturability via electrospinning. Attractive molecular interactions, such
as hydrogen bonding and electrostatic forces, can stabilize the solution during
electrospinning and prevent breakup of the jet into droplets, similar to polymer
chain entanglements. This research focuses on understanding how the type and
strength of these interactions impact the formation of smooth fibers and their
diameter, aiming to determine how the interactions affect the shear and
extensional rheological properties and tying those to the fiber production
window. Complementing the experimental work is the development of
electrohydrodynamic models to account for the attractive interactions and
understand the underlying physics. These efforts provide fundamental insights
into how molecular interactions impact the manufacturing of ultrafine fibers.
This research enables processing of low molecular weight polymers and non-
polymeric materials, such as conducting polymers and pharmaceuticals, that are
currently unable to be spun due to a absence of polymer chain entanglements.
This project provides the foundation to rapidly customize ultrafine fiber
products such as sensors, wearable electronics, and drug delivery
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.