* 2045267
* CAREER: Deciphering the neural network orchestrating sex differences in metabolic circadian rhythms
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Julie Pendergast, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 05/31/2026
* USD 775,000.00

The circadian system controls 24-hour rhythms of behavior and physiology, such
as when we eat, sleep, and metabolize sugars and fats. From flies to man,
disrupting circadian rhythms exacerbates metabolic risk. Thus, studying the
timing of metabolic processes is critical for developing approaches to regulate
energy balance and metabolic risk. The neural pathway in the brain that
regulates the circadian eating rhythm, or when we eat, is not known. To discover
this neural pathway, the project studies sex differences in eating rhythms
during a nutritional high-fat diet challenge. Estrogen in female, but not in
male, mice regulates eating behavior circadian rhythms during a nutritional
challenge. This study manipulates estrogen signaling in the brain to reveal the
neural circuitry controlling the eating rhythm in mice. High school,
undergraduate, and graduate students participate in the research through paid
fellowships. The project also develops new course-based undergraduate research
courses (CUREs) for non-STEM and STEM students to study sex differences in human
circadian rhythms, which complements the studies in mice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mammalian circadian system is organized
hierarchically. The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) is the main circadian clock
that coordinates the timing of clocks in the brain and periphery to regulate
behavioral and physiological rhythms. This hierarchical organization of the
circadian system was discovered decades ago in mammals and yet still little is
known about the circuits downstream from the SCN that regulate circadian rhythms
of behavior and physiology. This project studies the extra-SCN neural circuitry
that regulates metabolic circadian rhythms to expand understanding of circadian
control of energy balance. The research goal of this project is to test the
overarching hypothesis that estrogen regulates the neural circuitry controlling
metabolic circadian rhythms resulting in sex differences in energy balance. The
first objective determines whether estrogen receptor α (ERα) signaling regulates
sex differences in metabolic circadian rhythms using knockout mice and ERα-
specific agonists. The second objective determines which areas of the brain
control eating rhythms by targeting estrogen signaling in specific neurons with
Cre-lox and AAV-mediated gene knockdown. The approach integrates the study of
circadian regulation of energy balance across molecular, tissue, and behavioral
levels to understand how the circadian network regulates metabolism. The
educational goal of this project develops sustainable educational projects that
provide instruction in scientific inquiry and analysis of sex differences in
circadian rhythms, and includes students from diverse training, ethnic, and
economic backgrounds. The educational projects provide independent research
experiences for trainees as well as research experiences for groups of
undergraduates through CUREs. This project is jointly funded by the Neural
Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.