* 2045908
* CAREER: Illuminating Interfacial Mechanics: Utilizing Mechanophores to Visualize Mechanical Performance at Soft Matter Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Chelsea Davis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 12/31/2025
* USD 545,800.00

The overall performance of polymer matrix composites is directly tied to the
strength of the interface. Filled elastomers like the synthetic rubber in car
tires rely on the strength of the interface to transfer stress from the softer
rubber matrix into the stiffer carbon black particles to enhance their toughness
and reduce wear. In fiber reinforced polymer matrix composites (e.g. glass fiber
in epoxy), the toughness of the interface again determines the overall
mechanical properties of the system. The directly and actively monitored
interfacial stress transfer mechanism leads to a greater understanding of the
impact of interfacial strength, contact geometry, and materials properties on
composite failure. The reduction in failure and potential for stronger
composites are critical to US prosperity and continued economic growth.
Mechanically responsive fluorescent molecules, termed mechanophores, will be
installed at composite interfaces to experimentally observe interfacial stress
transfer. Fluorescence from this marker molecule during loading is a direct
indicator of the local interfacial state. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award's research provides a fundamental understanding of the activation
of interfacial mechanophores and will inform design principles towards the
development of a new class of molecular sensors that can report real time
feedback on interfacial damage in polymer matrix composites. When this
technology is deployed in the field, service life of wind turbine blades and
aerospace components could be extended and catastrophic failure prevented
through early detection of interfacial defects and stress concentrations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanophores are a new class of stimuli-responsive
materials that undergo a molecular isomerization or structural rearrangement in
response to a mechanical stimulus. Here, dimerized anthracene will be covalently
bound at the interface of silica and poly(dimethyl siloxane). As interfacial
separation occurs, the dimers will separate into two fluorescent anthracene
molecules on both sides of the advancing crack. Contact mechanics adhesion
experiments coupled with laser scanning confocal microscopy enables in situ
monitoring of the interfacial toughness (quantified through vertical load,
displacement, and contact area) simultaneously with the fluorescent activation
response of the mechanophore. Finite element analysis that utilizes nonlinear
cohesive zone models will provide insight into the complex stress state at the
silica/siloxane interface. A fundamental understanding of the materials
properties and geometric parameters that influence the activation of interfacial
damage sensors will be achieved through this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.