* 2045697
* CAREER: Temporal dynamics of microbial and viral function and adaptation in hydrothermal vents
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Rika Anderson, Carleton College
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2026
* USD 554,430.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project is funded by the Biological Oceanography
and the Ocean Education Programs (Division of Ocean Sciences) and the
Systematics and Biodiversity Science Cluster (Division of Environmental
Biology). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbes and viruses living near deep-sea
hydrothermal vents act as filters for carbon, sulfur, iron, and other essential
elements that emerge from the seafloor and flow into the global oceans. However,
due to the challenges associated with sampling the deep sea, most studies to
date have captured only snapshots of these communities, leaving significant
knowledge gaps about how microbes and viruses adapt, evolve, and respond to
changes in this environment. The researchers use infrastructure from the Ocean
Observatories Initiative to conduct high-resolution monitoring of genetic
changes over five years to investigate microbial communitiesâ€™ function, ecology,
and evolution at hydrothermal vents, which are thought to be one of the most
ancient habitats on Earth. Data from this project are expected to be a valuable
scientific resource for these and other researchers to address future questions.
For example, it will inform our understanding about the early evolution of life
on Earth and how microbes and their viruses respond to anthropogenic
disturbances like deep-sea mining and climate change. This project engages and
trains undergraduate students as scientific partners at all stages of the
research process, facilitating their entry into scientific networks.
Additionally, a new course guides college students in examining science within
its cultural, political, and social context. The project also includes a program
with a local elementary school to increase science literacy among young
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is to
understand the ecological and evolutionary forces that mold hydrothermal vent
microbial and viral populations over time. This project uses instruments from
the Ocean Observatories Initiative Regional Cabled Array (OOI RCA) at Axial
Seamount in the Northeast Pacific Ocean to collect hydrothermal fluid and DNA
samples at regular intervals, approximately every 10-20 days over five years, to
yield a time series of microbial and viral abundances and metagenomes. The
specific scientific aims of this project are to: 1) identify environmental
drivers of microbial community composition and function through time-series
analyses of 16S rRNA amplicon and metagenomic datasets combined with chemistry,
pH, and temperature data; 2) use single nucleotide variant and gene content
variation over time in metagenome-assembled genomes to investigate evolutionary
dynamics of microbial populations; and 3) assess models of viral population
dynamics by tracking microdiversity within viral and microbial metagenomes over
time. Comparative samples and data collected from other vent sites are used to
determine the generalization of the results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.