* 2045170
* CAREER: Privacy-Compliant Web Services By Construction
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Malte Schwarzkopf, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 01/31/2026
* USD 337,086.00

Today's web services store and process sensitive personal data without
sufficient attention to data privacy. Privacy laws like the European Union's
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), the California Consumer Privacy Act
(CCPA), and the proposed United States Consumer Data Privacy Act (CDPA) and
Consumer Online Privacy Rights Act (CORPA) give users new rights to control
their data (e.g., access and erasure on request, rights to object to
processing). With today's systems, compliance with these laws requires onerous
manual labor, particularly from small and medium-sized organizations. This
project investigates new systems that – by construction – comply with these
privacy laws. The key idea is to provide a "micro-database" for each user, which
stores all their data and which they can choose to withdraw or resubscribe. This
design enables new, fundamentally privacy-centric models, such as automatically
removing idle users' data while making it easy for the users to return.
Realizing compliance-by-construction requires innovation in storage systems and
data processing techniques. To succeed, compliant-by-construction systems must
match the convenience and performance of today's systems, and the project will
contribute systems that efficiently handle millions of per-user micro-databases
by advancing the state-of-the-art in scalable computing techniques (e.g.,
dataflow systems).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will lead to new,
compliant-by-construction equivalents of today's popular web service software.
These privacy-first systems will provide off-the-shelf tools that automate and
"democratize" good privacy practices for small and medium-size organizations.
This has the potential to save considerable expense, prevent costly mistakes,
and improve data privacy on the internet. The work will affect academic state-
of-the-art through papers, industry practice through technology transfer and
open-source software, and the general public through new tools and raised
awareness of privacy issues. All software developed in this project will be
available as open-source code on the project website
(https://cs.brown.edu/people/malte/research/privacy-by-construction.html).
Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in privacy-conscious system
design and implementation, and in the implications of new privacy laws for
system design, through curriculum integration of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.