* 2045842
* CAREER: Quantitative assessment of models for phylogenetic data
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* April Wright, Southeastern Louisiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 07/31/2026
* USD 668,216.00

Understanding the evolutionary relationships among species and the timing of
speciation events on the tree of life is critical to many fields of biology,
medicine, and biochemistry. Accurately modeling biological evolution is an
increasingly complex process, involving modeling how molecular and fossil
features of organisms change over geological time. This project will provide
insights about how to best model data to obtain an accurate picture of deep-time
evolutionary dynamics. Data- and mathematically-intensive work is increasingly
common in the biological sciences. To prepare a future workforce for a data-
intensive future, undergraduate training must be reformed to include more
quantitative and computational learning. This project will increase
computational and quantitative skills in a diverse student body and analyze
outcomes to determine how quantitative thinking can be most effectively
integrated into early undergraduate learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
advances in methods for inferring dated phylogenetic trees, such as the
fossilized birth-death process (FBD), model the extant and extinct data together
as part of the same process of diversification. The FBD is typically implemented
as a hierarchical Bayesian model involving a model of molecular and/or
morphological character evolution, a model describing how rates of evolution are
distributed across the tree, and a model of how diversification has proceeded in
the focal taxa. These methods offer many advantages over older methods, such as
being able to place specimens known from only morphological data on the tree.
Despite their mathematical elegance, these models are also complex, which can
make it difficult for researchers to apply them to their datasets and evaluate
their performance. This project will develop methods to assess if a complex
phylogenetic model is adequately capturing the vagaries of empirical data. The
project will produce software to enable researchers to evaluate and understand
the performance of models in real time with empirical data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Systematics and
Biodiversity Science Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.