* 2045920
* CAREER: Exploiting Open-Shell Character for Organic Optoelectronic Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Mark Chen, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 04/30/2026
* USD 549,098.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B Program in
the Division of Chemistry and the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program in
the Division of Materials Science, Dr. Mark Chen at Lehigh University will
develop new carbon-based materials that exploit properties of novel molecular
radicals which have unpaired electron character. Most organic molecules only
contain spin-paired electrons. This ensures environmental stability but limits
the capabilities of molecular materials for optoelectronic applications. In this
project, Dr. Chen and his students are using rational design principles to
construct new molecular radicals that are expected to have high environmental
stability, ultimately leading to enhanced device performance when employed as
luminescent and charge transport materials. The project involves a combination
of chemical synthesis, followed by physical characterization studies to identify
and optimize molecular structures and properties. This interdisciplinary
research facilitates the development of educational course materials, which are
designed to inspire science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
students to think outside the boundaries of formal disciplines. Interconnections
within STEM will be promoted through outreach events aimed at recruiting student
groups from the mid-Atlantic region who are underrepresented in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research activities in this project are aimed at the
development of new electronic materials which can exploit the effects of open-
shell electronic structure. For stability, most organic molecules possess
closed-shell electronic structures, where all electrons within a molecule are
spin-paired. This inherently limits optoelectronic applications due to
unfavorable energies related to emission mechanisms and charge transfer
kinetics. In this project, Professor Chen and his students will synthesize and
systematically explore the structure-property relationships of air-stable, pi-
conjugated molecules with bisphenalenyl structures that possess persistent
unpaired spin. This research builds on an efficient synthetic route already
developed by the Chen research group. Synthetic modifications of bisphenalenyl
structures are designed to control emission wavelength and quantum efficiencies
during luminescence, while also enhancing electron mobilities and conductivities
during charge transport. Research in this project is expected to impact society
by introducing new optoelectronic materials and devices that are more portable,
energy efficient, and less expensive to manufacture. This interdisciplinary
research, which relies on chemical synthesis and diverse methods of physical
characterization, provides diverse professional training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students. New curricula and outreach programs will
inspire students to cultivate broader interests in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.