* 2045239
* CAREER: Toward a wireless power transfer system: high-frequency power electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Jungwon Choi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

The modern electronic systems have been transforming rapidly to realize
automation, such as automation in factories or warehouses and autonomous
vehicles. As demand for automation grows, enabling technologies such as
artificial intelligence, control, and smart charging systems become beneficial.
However, while other technologies have been considerably revolutionized, the
effort to develop a smart and efficient charging system for automation has not.
Power electronics is a critical technology in the charging system to convert
electric energy into a different level or type to deliver it to an electric
load, such as batteries. Therefore, it must tackle the key challenges that
prevent us from obtaining a smart, compact, and efficient charging system. As an
effort to overcome the challenges, wireless power transfer technology has been
explored to reduce the charging error and remove manual intervention to charge
their batteries. It can eliminate heavy wire cables, connectors, and power plug
failure resulting from dust, dirt, and other environmental factors. Moreover,
the autonomous driving technology makes this technology beneficial because they
can go to the charging station when their batteries run out. However, current
power converters for wireless power transfer are limited in maximizing
performance because of the available technologies and designs. This proposed
research aims to develop a high-frequency power converter to miniaturize a
wireless power transfer system efficiently and investigate pioneering charging
methodologies for battery-powered vehicles. This research will accelerate
advances in various applications such as transportation electrification and
renewable energy technologies by improving the battery charging methodology.
Broader transformative impacts are also anticipated from the proposed research
into undergraduate and graduate curricula and the involvement of undergraduate
and underrepresented students in research. Also, outreach to K-12 students and
local industries will be pursued to introduce wireless power transfer and power-
electronic circuits and ensure the broad transformative impact of the research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to investigate new design
techniques to improve power density and performance of power electronics while
studying innovative approaches that enhance the charging ability in the WPT
system. The research will be performed through the intertwined thrusts that
involve: i) designing and implementing a high-frequency resonant converter with
magnetic resonant coupling coils to increase power density efficiently, ii)
investigating a bidirectional wireless power transfer system using self-
synchronous rectification and control system to provide Vehicle-to-Grid
capability, and iii) exploring advanced wireless power transfer charging
approaches such as vehicle-to-vehicle and dynamic charging to reduce the
charging time by diversifying the charging methods. The dependence of the
circuit performance on the switching devices, magnetic designs, gate drive
circuitry, and compensation network topology will be explored in detail. The PI
will simulate the proposed system in the multiphysics software to evaluate human
exposure to electromagnetic fields due to high-power operation at high
frequencies. Also, multiple coil structure will be studied to reduce the leakage
fields and minimize the expensive and lossy shields. Successful project
completion is anticipated to expand the operating range and power level of
power-electronic circuits for wireless power transfer systems using novel
charging approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.