* 2045715
* CAREER: Impacts of Intracellular and Extracellular Hydraulic Environments on Mammalian Cell Migration in Confined Spaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Yizeng Li, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 12/31/2022
* USD 526,671.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will study how mammalian
cell migration in confined space is influenced by the hydraulic environment both
inside and outside the cell. Most of the current knowledge on the fluid dynamics
in mammalian cell motility has been developed by studying fluid motion alone, or
fluid interaction with a single type of structure. This limitation does not
consider how the interaction of the fluid and structure affects cell behavior.
This project will use mathematical modeling to decipher these coupled effects in
confined cell migration. This project is expected to reveal new mechanisms of
how hydraulics can actively facilitate confined cell migration. The results will
open new avenues of research in the synergistic effect of fluid in biophysical
processes such as immune response, wound healing, tissue regeneration, and
cancer metastasis. The theoretical strategies are expected to advance modeling
techniques in broader areas that involve multi-component coupling and foster
creative designs for bio-inspired, water-based systems. Additionally, this
project will enhance science and engineering education via developing an
interdisciplinary course on cell mechanics in a partially flipped-classroom
approach, nurturing future biophysicists through establishing a scaffolded
undergraduate research program on the mathematical modeling of cell mechanics,
and promoting K-12 interdisciplinary education through outreach programs
targeting underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives of this project are as follows: (1) identify how the velocity of a
migrating cell in a confined channel is affected by the presence of an
additional cell at the front, (2) determine the condition when cells utilize
unsynchronized nucleus-cell migration mode within confined spaces and quantify
the associated energy efficiency, and (3) elucidate the dual role of the nucleus
when cells deform into confined spaces from open spaces. Physiology- and
continuum mechanics-based mathematical models will be developed to study the
objectives. The models will target a few cell type-dependent features such as
membrane protein expression levels and at the same time be as generic as
possible to inform typical features of confined cell migration. The model
results and prediction will be theoretically and experimentally evaluated. The
outcomes are projected to have a positive impact by advancing the knowledge of
the active roles of hydraulics in confined cell migration and the techniques of
modeling strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.