* 2045425
* CAREER: Infrared and Terahertz Electrodynamics of Chiral Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Mengkun Liu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2026
* USD 379,004.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports experimental
research and education on the electronic and photonic properties of newly
discovered chiral topological materials. A chiral object is something that
cannot be superimposed on its mirror image, like a left and a right hand. Amino
acids are well-known chiral materials. Topological materials have interesting
properties that make them useful for developing advanced electronic and photonic
devices. For example, a topological insulator is a state of quantum matter that
behaves as an insulator in its interior but as a conductor on its surface.
Chiral and topological materials are found throughout nature, and these
phenomena are often coupled. Understanding the mechanism of generating chiral
charge carriers with light is important for optoelectronic applications such as
low-loss and polarization-selective light detectors. The project aims to advance
the understanding of chiral topological materials through study of the intrinsic
light-matter interaction in the under conditions with controlled temperature,
strain, and magnetic-fields. Spectroscopy at terahertz (THz) and far infrared
(IR) frequencies will be performed with nanoscale spatial resolution and
femtosecond time resolution. This research effort offers fascinating
opportunities for detection and sensing of IR and THz light and ultrafast
switching at close to room temperature. The activities enabled by this research
can open new routes to study novel topologies and photonic devices. These
studies will provide sophisticated training to young researchers in a broad
range of subjects including THz nanoscopy and spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In three dimensional chiral
materials, chiral charge current can be generated via the chirality imbalance
induced by external gauge fields with non-trivial topology such as parallel
electric and magnetic fields or circularly polarized light. This so-called
“chiral magnetic effect” yields interesting chiral anomaly phenomenon such as
nearly non-dissipative transport and large negative magnetoresistance. The
chiral anomalies will likely emerge in a wide class of materials that are near
the transition between trivial and topological insulators, e.g. ZrTe5, TaAs,
HfTe5, etc. In this project, the research team investigate photoelectronic
properties of chiral microcrystals and photonic devices with lateral sizes below
and above the valley relaxation length of chiral carriers. The team plans to
characterize the low energy excitation spectrum (0.1-15 THz) of chiral materials
and exploit their ability to generate ultrafast photocurrent using circularly
polarized light. Ultrafast photocurrent generation and its resultant THz
emission in crystals can be systematically studied with magnetic field or strain
induced effect. The research also determines how much the chiral band is
involved in the light conversion between the far-IR and near-IR frequency ranges
and its capability to turn IR light to THz emission or vice versa. All the
experimental schemes can be extended to other photonic microcrystals or devices
with broken time or spatial inversion symmetries. Research in this area can
profoundly broaden the fundamental knowledge of physics in chirality-sensitive
optoelectronics and open new routes to achieve non-trivial photosensing and
photovoltaic effects. The team will work closely with a diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate students, especially those from underrepresented
minorities, to develop novel research activities such as educational 3D printing
for reconfigurable optical components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.