* 2045721
* CAREER: What’s next? Developing novel quantitative tools to address conflicting evidence in temporal ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Christine Bahlai, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2026
* USD 538,792.00

The big data revolution is changing how scientists approach explaining and
predicting the behavior of ecological systems. Sensor networks, ecological
observatories, and open data shared from classical experiments can be brought
together to provide more holistic picture. However, problems often arise when
combining data from multiple sources because of both environmental variability
and, importantly, subtle differences in howobservations are made as a result of
human choices. These issues can be exacerbated when studying how processes that
unfold over time, leading to contradictory interpretations. For example, several
recent studies which examined evidence of insect populations declining at a
global level have found a full range of possible conclusions, depending on the
data selected and the way in which the studies’ calculations were performed. The
objective of this CAREER award is to understand and explain these discrepancies
by building and evaluating tools for combining ecological data and to provide
new approaches for ecologists to evaluate the uncertainty in the patterns they
observe over time in ecological systems. An integrated education and outreach
program will enable scientists-in-training to take a flexible, critical and
transparent view of data and analytics, and will also offer insights into how
students conceptualize data and promote public data literacy. Effective
synthesis of broad scale ecological data is key to tackling a wide variety of
environmental problems and has the potential to form the basis of ecological
forecasting. Because ecological systems often have non-linear behavior,
understanding process trajectory and changepoints in dynamical systems is a key
aspect in describing their future behavior, but inadequate diagnostics for data
quality and synthesis issues can mask or confound these patterns.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award addresses both technical and cultural
gaps preventing meaningful synthesis of temporal processes in ecology through
three specific aims. Aim 1) develop novel approaches to data integration and
tools for evaluating the reliability of trends in ecological timeseries data.
This will be achieved through comparative field experiments to assess
biodiversity monitoring strategies, data mining approaches, and development of
novel software products for processing temporal data. Aim 2) develop a new
graduate quantitative methods course which integrates critical numeracy and
historical context. Aim 3) develop an interdisciplinary podcast in collaboration
with sociologists and education specialists to advance societal understanding of
data and information, as well as highlight the work of early-career and
minoritized scientists to give diverse context to issues of "knowing" and data.
Results of this project, including links to publications, curriculum, and
podcast episodes can be found at
https://bahlailab.org/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.