* 2045704
* CAREER: Mitonuclear conflict and co-evolution in a wild polyploid animal
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Rob Denton, Marian University
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2026
* USD 781,988.00

Animal cells are partially defined by the relationship between their two
different sources of DNA, one from the nucleus and one from the mitochondria.
Efficient communication between these sources of DNA is essential for energy
production and survival, and their compatibility can influence how species
reproduce, regulate their physiology, and diverge from one another. Because the
ongoing collaboration between the nucleus and mitochondria is foundational to
survival, opportunities to study the consequences of miscommunication between
these cellular components are rare. This project uses a unique group of all-
female salamanders that possess an evolutionary distinct mitochondrial genome
that is forced to interact with nuclear genomes taken from males of other
species. How these salamanders have persevered for millions of years while
managing their enormously complex genomic challenge can help us understand how
other organisms suffer severe consequences when their mitochondrial and nuclear
genomes produce conflicts. This project will integrate across biological
disciplines from different universities and students will acquire training for
careers in diverse, data-driven fields. At the same time, the data from this
project will be directly integrated into university curriculum to forward
initiatives that increase students’ data analytics and scientific communication
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how mitonuclear interactions evolve
and are maintained is necessary for understanding the consequences of
mitonuclear mismatch, whether due to new mutations or interbreeding between
species and populations. To connect mitonuclear genotypes to functional
phenotypes, this research includes measurements of sequence evolution,
mitochondrial performance, and whole-animal metabolism. This will provide a
comprehensive picture for how mitonuclear relationships in all-female
salamanders have evolved and are maintained over millions of years in the face
of frequent introgression. The first project aim will describe the evolutionary
relationships between the mitochondrial and nuclear genomes being shared between
salamander groups over generations and millions of years. The second aim will
estimate measures of selection for genes originating from the mitochondrial and
nuclear genomes that must interact to form basic metabolic pathways. The third
aim will connect the molecular measurements to physiological performance at both
organelle and whole-animal scales. The final aim will provide new whole-genome
resources for salamanders to understand the genomic context of identified
mitonuclear interactions. Despite their importance in biomedical, evolutionary,
and ecological studies, salamanders have been an undersampled taxonomic group
for genomic resources due to the technological challenges issued by large,
repetitive genomes. This project will provide much needed genomic resources for
salamanders broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
following programs in the Directorate for Biological Sciences: Evolutionary
Processes in the Division of Environmental Biology, Genetic Mechanisms in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, and Physiological and Structural
Systems in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.