* 2045504
* Using Dual-Polarization Radar Observations to Detect Entrainment Zone Depth and Verify Model Forecasts of Convective Boundary Layer Evolution
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* David Stensrud, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 768,013.00

The layer of the atmosphere closest to the surface is known as the planetary
boundary layer. During the daytime, when the sun warms the surface and air rises
and becomes turbulent, meteorologists refer to this layer as the convective
boundary layer (CBL). The height above the ground of the top of the CBL is
variable and has relevance to thunderstorm initiation, precipitation, and
pollutant concentration. However, there is no simple way to provide continuous
measurements of the height of the CBL over large areas. This project will
further investigate a method to retrieve the CBL top height by using the
operational National Weather Service radar network. These weather radars are
sensitive enough to detect gradients in different airmasses, such as the more
humid convective boundary layer and the drier air above that. The significance
of the work is through the development of a dataset that can be used to assess
the ability of numerical models to simulate the convective boundary layer, and
therefore practical weather phenomena. The project also has a significant
education and outreach component, with training for multiple graduate students,
creation of features for a public television program, and implementation of a
Research Experience for Teachers program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this project is to improve understanding of the evolution of the
convective boundary layer top height (CBLH) using the clear-air remote sensing
capabilities of the operational WSR-88D radar network. S-band weather radar, in
non-precipitating situations, can differentiate between biological returns (e.g.
insects) and Bragg scatter (refractive index gradients) by using differential
reflectivity to define the CBLH. This technique would provide a significant
increase in observations of CBLH due to the rapid updates and nationwide
footprint of the WSR-88D network. Five main activities are: 1) Develop monthly
mean values of observed hourly daytime CBLH from at least 50 radars across the
US over two distinct years (2014 and 2022) to explore similarities and
differences in CBLH evolution, 2) Develop monthly mean values of predicted
hourly daytime CBLH from the operational Rapid Refresh (RAP) model, 3) Calculate
the difference between the radar observed CBLH and the RAP predicted CBLH, and
explore reasons for the differences using all available observations, 4) Explore
the ability of the differential reflectivity observations to estimate
entrainment zone depth by comparing them to new rawinsonde observations, and 5)
Study the late afternoon inversion layer separation and CBL descent using the
observations and modeling derived above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.