* 2045978
* Collaborative Research: Power System Flexibility:  Metric, Assessment, and Algorithm
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Lei Fan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 03/31/2024
* USD 154,573.00

This NSF project aims to establish critical metrics and develop a comprehensive
evaluation framework to assess the flexibility of power systems. The project
will bring transformative change to the power industry by supporting
practitioners and researchers to better understand and improve power system
flexibility, which is especially crucial due to the volatility and
unpredictability of net loads intensified by the increasing penetration of
renewable energy. The proposed work includes i) defining metrics to describe
complicated flexibility information, ii) developing a unified mathematical
modeling framework with various underlying modeling structures, and iii)
designing broadly applicable, efficient, and scalable solution approaches for
different metric or application combinations. The intellectual merits of the
project include enriching the understanding of system flexibility from different
perspectives, enabling the comparison of flexibility across power systems, and
providing a safety and resilience enhancement direction for power system
planning and operations. The broader impacts of the project include advancing
the theoretical foundations in the interdisciplinary field of optimization and
artificial intelligence as well as applying cutting-edge learning techniques
into traditional engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will address
challenges in the existing literature by proposing innovative scientific methods
in three aspects. (1) The employment of multiple flexibility metrics satisfies
the needs of investigating flexibility on individual buses and the whole system,
while a single metric is not able to reveal enough information on the high
dimensional feasible regions of net loads. (2) The flexibility metric assessment
models that involve nonlinearity, discreteness, and nonconvexity, are
significantly harder to solve compared to their linear counterparts. To handle
the complex cases, the project will use a wide range of modeling techniques,
including mixed-integer, two-stage and multistage formulations to reduce the
complexity of measuring flexibility. (3) The proposed hybrid mixed-integer
programming and deep learning algorithm will significantly improve the
efficiency to obtain critical information for flexibility assessment in a time-
critical environment and meet the requirement of operations
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.