* 2045277
* CAREER: Integrating geology and metallurgy for efficient, sustainable production of critical elements for the green economy
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Isabel Barton, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2026
* USD 349,100.00

The transition to a sustainable, low-carbon economy depends on viable long-term
supplies of energy metals such as uranium, vanadium, copper, and cobalt.
However, producing these metals from domestic sources is becoming more difficult
as easy-to-mine deposits are exhausted; what remains are lower-grade ores with
complex mineralogy. Current extractive processes are designed for simpler ores
and are inefficient, sometimes ineffective, with the more complicated remaining
resources. This project will instead develop a geometallurgical approach to
mining and extracting energy metals and other critical elements. This consists
of tailoring extractive processes to the detailed mineralogy and composition of
individual ore zones, enabling more efficient extraction of energy metals and
less mine waste. This will help to maintain a sustainable supply of the metals
that support low-carbon energy in the future. Ancillary benefits from this
project include an education and outreach program that will broaden engagement
with mineral resources topics among teachers and the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate geological data and
metallurgical experiments to develop tailored geometallurgical approaches to the
extraction of critical energy metals, starting with uranium, vanadium, and
cobalt. These metals are vital to low-carbon energy generation and the green
economy, but their supply is threatened by low ore deposit grades, complex
mineralogy, and gaps in the understanding of how mineral properties control
metallurgical behavior. Research will begin with detailed characterization of
ore properties and ore mineral distribution in the globally important sediment-
hosted ores of U, V, and Co. A series of leaching experiments will illuminate
the connections between ore mineral properties (crystallinity, composition) and
fluid-mineral reactions, enabling optimized extraction design. The initial
results will be used to develop geometallurgical models of optimized extraction
parameters for ore zones in the Colorado Plateau U and V deposits, where this
approach will be tested. This will reset the traditional paradigm, which
compartmentalizes geological from metallurgical insights, and will provide a
model for extension to other critical mineral resources
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.