* 2045885
* CAREER: Unifying Millimeter-wave Networking and Sensing using Commodity Backscatter
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Parth Pathak, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2026
* USD 391,214.00

Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices are being integrated into virtually every
aspect of our daily lives with applications in logistics, supply chain,
healthcare, smart cities, human-computer interaction, tracking, sensing, etc.
However, providing high-speed wireless connectivity to these IoT devices remains
a challenging open problem. While very high-speed wireless networks such as the
next generation 802.11ad/ay WiFi and 5G cellular networks are being deployed
using the high-frequency millimeter-wave (mmWave) spectrum, today’s IoT devices
(such as Bluetooth and RFIDs) still primarily operate at lower frequencies
(sub-6 GHz) due to their low power requirements. The aim of this project is to
develop methods and tools for commodity mmWave backscattering and enable IoT
devices to operate at mmWave frequencies. The proposed mmWave backscattering
will enable high-speed, low-power, and low-cost mmWave wireless connectivity to
millions of IoT devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate
commodity mmWave backscatter (called mmIDs) and realize a unified mmWave
networking and sensing framework where (i) the mmID devices can be integrated
into today’s mmWave networks for their seamless high-speed connectivity and (ii)
robustness of the mmWave networks can be improved through the presence of
densely deployed mmID IoT devices. The project includes four research thrusts:
(1) Robust backscatter communication techniques will be developed where mmID
tags can exploit the existing mmWave networking protocol messages to modulate
their data; (2) Densely deployed mmWave backscatters will be leveraged for
proactive blockage mitigation and mobility resilience in WLANs; (3) A high-speed
commodity mmWave backscatter will be devised through symbol translation
techniques and self-interference mitigation; (4) The commodity mmWave
backscatter will be exploited to enable high-accuracy and low-cost sensing with
applications in accessibility. The proposed techniques and protocols for mmWave
backscattering will be designed, implemented, and evaluated for emerging
commodity mmWave networks such as 802.11ad/ay WLANs and 5G NR. The project
presents integrated research and education plan with outreach activities
involving high school students from underrepresented minority groups and
undergraduate students with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.