* 2045082
* CAREER: Understanding the Interaction between Mechanical Twinning and Fatigue Crack Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Garrett Pataky, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2026
* USD 561,634.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will investigate the
influence of a submicron microstructural feature called mechanical twin on
enhancing the fatigue crack growth resistance in metals. Cyclic mechanical
loading causing crack formation, known as fatigue, remains a common danger to
structural metals in service. Mechanical twinning is an efficient means for
intrinsically strengthening and increasing ductility in metals, but its effect
on crack growth remains unclear due to its lack of formation during the typical
low loads of high cycle fatigue. Insight gained from this study will promote the
design of advanced, fatigue resistant materials supporting aggressive design
strategies to improve energy and material efficiency. Intelligently modifying
the microstructure of established, qualified metals will lead to accelerated
deployment of enhanced fracture resistant materials in comparison to the cost
and time investment required for new material development. In addition to the
technical advances made, this award will also provide educational experiences
for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be intimately involved in integrated material science and
mechanical engineering research. Educational modules will be incorporated into
outreach for K-12 classrooms and girls’ summer camps to increase students’
science self-efficacy. Additionally, workshops will be held for students with
little social capital, such as first generation and underrepresented students,
to help them navigate and apply for fellowship and research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fatigue crack growth, particularly in Stage
I, is highly dependent on dislocation-microstructure interactions. Research has
shown that annealing twin boundaries enhance the slip reversibility, especially
in nanocrystalline alloys, but it is unclear how bundles of mechanical twins
affect fatigue crack growth. Due to the localized nature and lower than yield
stresses applied during high cycle fatigue, the critical resolved twinning
stress to nucleate twins is typically not met. The research in this CAREER
project will quantify the magnitude of slip irreversibility at pre-populated
deformation twin boundaries during Stage I, high cycle fatigue crack growth to
enhance the understanding of microstructure-based crack growth resistance.
Experimental quantification of crack-microstructure interactions will be
measured through high resolution digital image correlation and electron
microscopy. Knowledge generated about the role of twin boundaries, twin density,
and dislocation density will serve to connect information gathered from
atomistic simulations to established mesoscale frameworks to support fatigue
resistant material design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.