* 2045955
* CAREER: Understanding Ultrasonic Processing of Layered Polymer Composites Across Length Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Genevieve Palardy, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2026
* USD 585,950.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant supports research
contributing to the understanding that underpins the ultrasonic processing of
fiber-reinforced polymer composites, promoting both the progress of science and
revitalizing the U.S. manufacturing industry. Composite materials possess high
strength and low weight, as compared to conventional materials like metals,
which can be tailored according to fiber orientation and layer sequence. Certain
polymer composites offer further sustainability because they may be reformed at
high temperatures, recycled, and joined through fusion bonding. Current
manufacturing techniques typically require high temperature and expensive
tooling, which limits the use of thermoplastic composites as primary structural
components in a wide range of industries. In the search for energy and cost-
efficient manufacturing and assembly techniques, processing through ultrasonic
vibrations is a promising candidate that can achieve consolidation and bonding
in a fraction of the time required by traditional methods. This fundamental
research furthers the development of ultrasonic processing of composites,
advancing growth of several applications in aerospace, transportation, maritime,
piping, and wind energy industries. An integrated outreach plan includes hands-
on activities to engage a diverse population of K-12 girls, as well as training
of undergraduate and graduate students through senior design projects and
technical elective courses. This will result in a highly trained workforce for
the composites manufacturing industry and thus, will support national
prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenges in the use of ultrasonic
processing for polymer composites are due, in part, to the difficulty in
experimentally capturing the detailed processes of occurring at the interface
due to ultra-fast cycle times and geometrical constraints to the region of
interest. This proposal addresses those challenges by elucidating processing-
structure-performance relationships and establishing novel experimental and
modeling solutions. More specifically, it will address two main research
objectives: 1) understand how ultrasonic and material parameters govern heat
generation and crystallization mechanisms through multiscale experiments (from
molecular structure to macro-scale); and 2) establish a multiphysics finite
element model based on experimental outcomes to simulate the process and predict
bonding efficiency. Achieving greater understanding of this process will allow
scale up and confident deployment for critical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.