* 2045417
* CAREER: Integrated Design and Digital Fabrication using Topology Optimization and Material Extrusion 3D Printing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Josephine Carstensen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 05/31/2026
* USD 560,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports fundamental
research to formulate the first topology optimization frameworks that will
systematically tailor freeform computational design to manufacture by a specific
digital fabrication technology. The research will focus on fabrication
technologies based on material extrusion-type Additive Manufacturing (AM), which
is used in a wide range of 3D printing technologies at various scales. Topology
optimization is a freeform design technique that generates new, high-performing
design solutions. Topology optimization is often suggested as a powerful design-
for-AM approach because it does not require a pre-conceived idea of the final
design layout. However, most topology-optimized designs must be “interpreted” or
prepared by the design engineer to facilitate manufacture, a process that may
result in performance loss of the final product. This research will develop
original topology optimization frameworks that leverage the possibilities and
constraints offered by extrusion-type AM processes. The integration of design
and manufacture investigated in this project will ease the process used by
design engineers and improve the performance of the final fabricated product.
Equally important for the project is the integrated educational program that
will inspire and train the next generations of design engineers to creatively
approach design problems while considering manufacturing aspects. The
educational program will stimulate interest in futures in engineering design,
especially among students who do not typically engage with the topic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is the discovery of a
new design-fabrication paradigm that shifts design and manufacture from being
two separate entities into a single unified process, where the preparation for
fabrication step is eliminated. This objective will be achieved through the
formulation of novel topology optimization algorithms that leverage the
possibilities and constraints associated with extrusion-type AM. The constraints
will be formulated implicitly as new manufacturing primitives that mimic the
manufacturing process. The design algorithms will consider the fundamental
extrusion characteristics and constraints, including: (i) discrete size of the
extruding nozzle, (ii) bond quality between adjacent extrusions, (iii) support
in the third dimension, and (iv) effects on the extruded sections of the
unsteady processing controls. The new design frameworks will be validated
against benchmark problems, and experimental testing will be performed to
investigate performance. The research has broad societal impacts, as it will
enable many applications in diverse fields, including (but not limited to)
design of civil structures, aerospace and automotive components, sports and
other protective equipment, novel lightweight materials, and biomedical
implants. The integrated educational plan includes the creation of STEM-based
outreach initiatives for K-12 middle school art class students and teachers.
Furthermore, it encompasses courses and research engagement for undergraduate
students of engineering and computer science and graduate engineering
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.