* 2045095
* CAREER: Leveraging neuroscience to predict and improve science learning in early elementary school
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Allyson Mackey, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,186,896.00

It is critically important that all U.S. children, regardless of socioeconomic
background, are prepared to join the scientific workforce of the future. Prior
research shows that having a strong early start in science and math is crucial
to later academic success. This study combines innovative approaches in
neuroscience, psychology, and education to predict and improve science learning
in early elementary school, when foundational scientific knowledge and skills
are beginning to be built. This research focuses on understanding how early
experiences shape the brain, and how brain development supports learning, which
can be leveraged to individualize educational interventions and generate new
strategies for broadening participation in STEM. The project is supported by a
CAREER award through the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports
fundamental research on STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves
three studies that will investigate early science learning by studying cognitive
and behavioral predictors of early science learning and will use structural and
functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to study neural networks. In the
first study, 144 children between the ages of five- and seven-years-old will be
recruited from schools and after-school programs in low-income neighborhoods.
Children will participate in MRI and cognitive assessments, as well as eight
science lessons designed to align with Next Generation Science Standards.
Parents will complete questionnaires about children’s early experiences. The
study will test whether exposures to stress and cognitive enrichment are
associated with the development of learning, memory, and motivation systems, and
whether connectivity in these neural systems predicts science learning. In a
separate longitudinal study, 200 two-year-old children from low-income families
will be randomly assigned to an intervention that includes weekly home visiting
by an early learning specialist or to a control condition that includes
information about physical health. In the first year of this study, parents will
complete questionnaires about their children’s experiences and development. In
the subsequent years of the study, children will complete cognitive measures and
MRI and participate in science lessons. This longitudinal design will allow the
researchers to assess whether early cognitive enrichment causally influences
learning, memory, and motivation systems in the brain, as well as children’s
ability to learn science in Kindergarten. A final experimental study will
investigate the efficacy of specific pedagogical approaches for enhancing
children’s learning. The study will examine whether encouraging children to ask
questions improves their learning and other behavioral aspects of curiosity.
Together, these studies will provide insights into how to best support
children’s early science learning, which will be shared with parents and
educators through partnerships with community
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.