* 2045935
* CAREER: Silicon-Photonics High-Resolution Real-Time Probability Apparatus for Quantum Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Tzu-Chien Hsueh, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Quantum technology research e.g., quantum computing, communication, imaging,
sensing, and cryptography, has become a strategic research direction for the
future. Silicon photonics (SiPh) integrated-circuit technology offers high-
scalability, low-cost functional integration, and the possibility of using
photonics to encode and process quantum information under room-temperature
operations. One can envision that low-cost, high-quantity integrated silicon-
photonics quantum circuits and systems will be at the heart of the future
quantum Internet of Things where quantum computing devices will be all linked
together by a robust and secure quantum communication network. The long-term
goal of this project is to create new mixed-signal circuit techniques and
exploit the advantage of SiPh integration capability for future civil quantum
applications. The vision of this project is the realization of quantum
communication circuits on a CMOS Chip to meet the needs of future quantum
applications and information networks by exploiting integrated SiPh circuits for
entangled quantum-state preparations, generations and detections. Going along
with the existing large-scale industry research efforts, this research on
integrated quantum-state and probability measurements has the potential to be a
part of commercial quantum devices therefore to have a transformative impact on
quantum communication and cryptography. The quantum-state probability
measurement apparatus that is proposed to be developed has the potential to be
utilized in biological and medical applications, Also, because of the low-cost
and low-power implementation approach, the apparatus proposed to be developed
has the required functionality and performance for industrial and commercial
applications as well as adoption in undergraduate quantum laboratory
instructions. The latter of which will potentially accelerate the development of
a diverse and globally competitive science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics workforce. Developing quantum-mechanics curricula with affordable
and accessible quantum experimental verifications and laboratory exercises in
community colleges will become possible along with career training opportunities
for a socioeconomically diverse pool of learners including under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research includes two
specific aims. The first aim will focus on the theoretical analysis and IC
implementation of the high-resolution time-correlated probability measurement
technique fabricated in a commercial CMOS process technology. The second aim is
the realization of an integrated SiPh real-time quantum measurement apparatus,
which can provide the Qubit preparation and detection capabilities on the chip-
scale to effectively accelerate the scalability and reliability of future
quantum computing and communication systems. Compared to conventional
approaches, this research proposes a low-cost and almost fully digital circuit
architecture for the high-resolution randomly-sampled averaging process along
with a low-power variance reduction technique to simultaneously achieve high-
dynamic range and high-accuracy real-time probability measurements. Also, the
circuit innovations proposed are based on the random-process and probability
theories rather than incremental physical circuit improvements. The attribute of
the entire research is planned to be both theoretical and experimental: the
theoretical component will include the development and optimization of enhancing
digital random-process techniques and their rigorous mathematical analyses; the
experimental component will involve the developments of the electronic
integrated-circuits and SiPh chip-to-chip
integrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.