* 2045826
* CAREER:  Discovering and Understanding Layered Nickelate Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Antia Botana, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 01/31/2026
* USD 300,447.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an integrated
research, outreach, and educational effort to advance the fundamental
understanding of superconducting materials. Superconductivity is a quantum state
of matter whereby electrons move through a material without resistance, namely,
without losing any energy to heat. Superconducting materials are of paramount
importance to different technologies: from magnetic resonance imaging machines
to accelerators for high-energy physics, and magnetic levitating trains.
However, their usefulness is often restricted by the prohibitively low
temperatures at which superconductivity usually emerges. Increasing this
transition temperature and discovering new superconductors has been limited by
the lack of consensus as to what causes superconductivity in some classes of
materials. One of these classes is represented by copper oxides whose discovery
in the 1980s had a profound influence on physics as they could superconduct at a
higher temperature than any material known at the time. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will use advanced computational and theoretical methods
to investigate nickel oxides - promising candidate materials for
superconductivity based on the proximity of nickel to copper in the periodic
table. The goal of the project is to discover a new family of nickel-based
superconductors while providing insights into the origin of high-temperature
superconductivity. The team will develop computational approaches suited for
superconducting materials and perform simulations of electrons to establish the
differences and similarities between the physics of nickel and copper oxides.
The discovery of the first family of nickel oxide-based superconductors will
open new venues and establish the relevant parameters that give rise to
superconductivity. This is a necessary ingredient to enhance the temperatures at
which superconductivity emerges and to provide routes to create novel
superconducting materials. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research activities are
integrated with an educational and outreach program to bring superconductivity
and computational modeling in physics to students and to the general public in
metro Phoenix. The program has an emphasis on mentoring high-school students
from underserved areas via an outreach day for high-school girls in majority-
Latino neighborhoods, and through a series of computational summer workshops for
students from low-income areas. The broader impact of these activities will be
early exposure to research for young talented students who generally do not see
science career paths represented in their communities. The PI will also develop
demos for open house events to educate and engage the general public on
superconducting materials. Finally, this award will contribute to forming
tomorrow's scientific and technological workforce by recruiting and advising
undergraduate and graduate students to participate in condensed matter physics
and materials research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an integrated research, outreach, and educational
effort to advance the fundamental understanding of superconducting materials.
More than a century after its discovery, superconductivity remains one of the
most active areas of condensed matter physics research. The discovery of iron-
based superconductors in 2006 reinvigorated the field after an intensive
exploration of cuprates from the late 1980s. However, pinpointing the mechanism
of high-temperature superconductivity and determining why the characteristics of
high-temperature superconducting materials are so special are fundamental
questions yet to be answered. Among the multiple approaches to addressing these
questions has been the search for cuprate analog materials. In this context,
targeting nickelates is an obvious strategy since nickel and copper are next to
each other in the periodic table. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop theoretical and computational approaches to investigate
superconductivity in layered nickel oxide materials. The explicit goal of the
proposed research is to discover and establish the theoretical foundations of
the first family of nickelate superconductors while addressing their behavior in
a microscopic way. The theory approach will run the gamut from fast density
functional theory to computationally intensive quasiparticle-self consistent
GW+dynamical mean-field theory calculations. With this methodology, the team
will determine the complexity of the layered nickelate phase diagram, the
relationship between competing phases therein and superconductivity, and
ultimately provide new insights into the nature and origin of high temperature
superconductivity. The systematic comparison with superconducting cuprates will
lay the foundation of the relevant parameters that give rise to high-temperature
superconductivity and establish routes to create novel superconducting
materials.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Integrated with the research efforts, the PI
will establish an educational and outreach program to bring superconductivity
and computational modeling in physics to students and to the general public in
metro Phoenix through i) a computational summer workshop for high school
students from low-income areas, ii) an outreach day for high school girls in
majority-Latino neighborhoods, and iii) open house events centered around
superconductivity. These outreach and educational efforts will directly benefit
the community Arizona State University serves by exposing a wide cross-section
of people to science and by influencing younger generations that generally do
not see science career paths represented in their communities. Finally, this
award will contribute to forming tomorrow's scientific and technological
workforce by recruiting undergraduate and graduate students to participate in
condensed matter physics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.