* 2045981
* CAREER: Beyond Conditional Independence: New Model-Free Targets for High-Dimensional Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Lucas Janson, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2026
* USD 153,222.00

The field of statistics has seen great success over many decades drawing
scientific insights from simple, easy-to-understand models. But progress in
computing is now allowing researchers to measure and store huge amounts of data
at once, opening the door to understanding and manipulating much more complex
systems than ever before. Indeed, the field of machine learning has been very
successful at fitting predictive models to such data sets, but the black-box
nature of these methods makes it hard to draw scientific insights from them
using the usual statistical approach. In fact, not only do classical statistical
methods fail in this modern big data setting, but the questions they answer no
longer even make sense because the models they are based on do not hold even
approximately. In this research, the PI will first come up with new statistical
ways of posing scientific questions that make sense in complex data but still
have interpretable answers. Second, the PI will find new statistical methods to
answer those questions in a rigorous way, and study the mathematical and
computational properties of these methods so that they can be used as
effectively as possible. And finally, the PI will work with experts in the areas
of genomics, the microbiome, and political science to use these methods to gain
new scientific insights in these fields. Throughout the project, the PI will
also run a free statistical consulting service to help the broader research
community, develop new curricula with high school teachers, and provide
enriching educational and research experiences for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the importance of a covariate in a
high-dimensional regression, it has become increasingly popular to perform a
hypothesis test for conditional independence with the response. The appeal of
such a test is that it provides statistically rigorous insight that is well-
defined and scientifically interpretable no matter how the response depends on
the covariates, including the case when their relationship is highly nonlinear
and includes interactions, possibly of high order. However, conditional
independence as a model-free inferential target only provides a type of
scientific insight that can be of little use in some applications. The PI will
extend conditional independence to new model-free targets for two types of data
on which it does not provide a useful inferential target, namely, data with
highly-locally-dependent covariates and data with compositional covariates.
Then, the PI will move past conditional independence entirely to propose novel
model-free targets that instead of just identifying (as in variable selection)
actually numerically quantify relationships in the data, such as the
relationship between a covariate and a response or the interaction between two
covariates in the response's conditional distribution. Along with each new
target, the PI will develop entirely new methods for powerful and provably valid
inference. The novelty of the proposed targets and associated methods will
provide for new connections with other fields of statistics including Bayesian
computation, measure theory, statistical physics, experimental design, causal
inference, and graphical model estimation. Ultimately, this research aims to
provide a suite of new tools for researchers to move beyond the constraints of
parametric targets and instead leverage state-of-the-art machine learning tools
to answer novel and important questions about their data in a statistically
principled way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.