* 2045555
* CAREER:Computational Frameworks for Higher-order Graph and Network Data Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Austin Benson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 06/30/2022
* USD 76.00

Connections in networks are an essential aspect of society, technology, and
infrastructure. For example, social connections influence our daily activities,
electricity in our homes is delivered by connected power lines, and connections
in the brain facilitate our ability to process information. The ability to
understand, design, control, and make predictions about these types of
connections and networked systems is crucial to improving physical
infrastructure, the national defense, and the health of the economy. This
project will develop new artificial intelligence capabilities for leveraging big
data coming from connections within a wide range of networks. The key novelty in
the research is the direct consideration of connections among several entities
at once. For example, connections in small group gatherings affect the spread of
disease, connections between multiple drugs are key to many medical treatments,
and financial transactions often involve several parties. By harnessing these
multiway connections, we can make improvements to and make discoveries about
mechanisms within networks in many settings. For instance, the research has the
potential to improve models that forecast disease spread, propose new types of
drug combinations, and enhance our ability to detect adversarial and malicious
groups on the Web. This project also involves teaching these ideas in a
research-based, interactive summer workshop for college students that is
designed to broaden participation in computing-related postgraduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graphs or networks are a fundamental abstraction
for complex relational data throughout the sciences. The basic idea of network
models is to represent components of the data by a set of nodes, and to model
the relationships among these components using edges that connect pairs of
nodes. Computations designed to mine and learn from graph data have resulted in
diverse applications within biomedicine, economics, transportation, sociology,
and other fields. However, the focus on pairwise relationships, as encoded by
edges in a graph, inherently limits traditional network models. Much of the
structure in complex data involves higher-order relationships that take place
among more than two entities at once. For example, people communicate in groups
over email or text message, students gather in groups in classrooms, and
biological interactions occur between a set of molecules rather than just two.
Going beyond graph methods is necessary to fully realize the richness of such
higher-order interactions that are pervasive in data. This project ushers in the
next generation of network data analysis by directly modeling higher-order
interactions in network data and developing data mining and machine learning
algorithms for generating meaningful data insights from such models. The
research focuses on three models for higher-order network data, hypergraphs,
tensors, and simplicial complexes, which are promising for the way in which they
make us think about computations associated with the data. For each model, the
project will develop data mining and machine learning methods that offer new
insights into network data. These methods will be applied to a variety of real-
world data to demonstrate applications in social networks, e-commerce,
biomedicine, and information management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.