* 2045581
* CAREER: The Musculoskeletal Biomechanics and Control of Limbless Locomotion
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Henry Astley, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 04/30/2026
* USD 917,949.00

This project uses locomotion by lateral undulation in snakes as a model system
for investigating how animals meet and prioritize mechanical and control
demands, especially when these demands are constrained or conflicting.
Terrestrial limbless locomotion, despite being used by almost 20% of terrestrial
vertebrates, remains understudied. In lateral undulation, the most widespread
and common mode of limbless locomotion, waves of bending pass down the body,
pressing against structures in the environment (e.g. plants, rocks) to propel
the snake forward. Lateral undulation poses several simultaneous challenges,
including meeting mechanical power demands, overcoming the force of friction,
and controlling forces at multiple, constantly shifting contact points. These
demands may conflict; for example, the body posture that generates the most
effective propulsive force from a contact point might reduce muscular force or
power output. This project addresses how snakes handle this conflict and
investigates whether mechanisms exist to mitigate or avoid potential tradeoffs,
by testing animals in environments that impose different mechanical and control
demands. This research will provide general insights into how animals manage
competing demands during locomotion, particularly the need to simultaneously
meet mechanical and control demands. Understanding limbless locomotion can also
benefit snake-inspired robots, a target of bio-inspired robotics due to the
exceptional ability of snakes to move through complex, cluttered, and confined
spaces. In partnership with the University of Akron field station, the project
also provides a unique outreach opportunity in bio-inspired robotics to nearby
high schools serving economically disadvantaged youth, by leveraging a new type
of feedback-based robotic programming based on stop-motion animation to
eliminate the need for students to learn how to write
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central challenge of biomechanics is understanding
how the physiological properties of muscle influence the movements of animals,
often examined in specialized systems adapted to maximize a particular metric
(e.g., power or cycle frequency). However, most animals must meet numerous
independent mechanical and control demands simultaneously and can modulate their
movements in a wide variety of ways to accomplish this. This project uses
terrestrial lateral undulation in snakes as a model system to understand how
animals meet these demands, particularly when the demands conflict. The
friction-dominated mechanics of terrestrial limbless locomotion impose
straightforward demands on mechanical force and power output, which will be
directly measured from instrumented test arenas. The highly variable patterns of
midline bending in snake locomotion suggest correspondingly variable muscle
strain trajectories, which will be measured via fluoromicrometry. The multiple
propulsive reaction forces depend upon local posture at each contact location.
If both muscle mechanical output and control are determined by body kinematics,
there is potential for conflict between these goals: control of reaction force
orientation may compromise muscle mechanical outputs, and vice versa. This
project involves a novel outreach program using a combination of live-animal
demonstrations and robotics to provide students with a bio-inspired robotics
design experience in which they observe a snakeâ€™s movements, hypothesize
mechanisms, and test those mechanisms using snake-inspired robots. Two post-
doctoral fellows and a graduate student will contribute to the research, thereby
benefitting from interdisciplinary training and
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.