* 2045966
* CAREER: Hybrid Ankle Exoskeleton Therapy to Optimize Long-Term Gait Rehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Zachary Lerner, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 02/28/2026
* USD 538,563.00

This NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project seeks to advance the
scientific study of walking rehabilitation and pioneer a novel wearable
rehabilitation strategy. There is a critical need for treatments that address
the root causes of walking disability, including impaired strength, muscle
control, and coordination. While wearable robotic exoskeletons hold potential
for individuals with walking disabilities, prior research has focused on
immediate improvements in walking performance from powered assistance. This
project seeks to understand if alternating assistance and resistance with a
wearable ankle exoskeleton will elicit greater improvements in walking than
either approach alone. The outcomes of this project have the potential to
transform the treatment of walking disabilities across a wide range of
conditions. Through a new curriculum in assistive robotics and engineering, this
project aims to motivate engineering students to address the challenges
experienced by individuals with disabilities and improve engineering education
on human-centered design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this CAREER
project is to develop a holistic treatment framework for gait rehabilitation
based on the hybrid application of adaptive assistance and resistance and apply
it to the treatment of ankle plantar-flexor dysfunction. The first objective is
to establish foundational knowledge on the hybrid delivery of adaptive plantar-
flexor assistance and resistance across different severities of walking
impairment. The second objective is to develop a framework to optimize the long-
term delivery of the hybrid exoskeleton therapy through the use of a holistic
performance metric, accounting for both spatiotemporal and neuromuscular
outcomes, and an artificial neural network to learn from participant responses
over time. The third objective is to validate the hybrid optimization framework
against training with assistance and resistance alone and compare hybrid
exoskeleton training to standard gait training. This CAREER project is expected
to pioneer the development of long-term human-in-the-loop optimization
techniques to deliver lasting improvements in neuromuscular function and walking
ability. This project will establish fundamental knowledge on the interplay
between disease severity and wearable assistance and resistance. The strategies
developed will be generalizable, enabling other investigators to apply this
framework to different types of control algorithms, devices, joints, and patient
populations. New Curriculum in Assistive Robotics and Engineering (CARE) will be
developed as part of this project, incorporating advanced robotics course
modules, design-for-disability capstone projects, and K-12 experiences. It is
anticipated that the students involved in CARE will gain an improved
understanding of the needs of people with physical disabilities, which will
translate into effective engineering solutions, and result in more motivated,
insightful, and impactful engineering students and
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.