* 2045593
* CAREER: Methods for Targeted, High-Throughput Single-Entity Analyses
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Caleb Hill, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 02/28/2026
* USD 600,000.00

With this CAREER award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the
Division of Chemistry is supporting Dr. Caleb Hill and his group at the
University of Wyoming to design new experimental techniques to probe the
reactivity of single, discrete entities. Understanding reactivity at the atomic
or molecular scale has long been a central focus of the chemical sciences.
Scientists have traditionally approached these questions through the analysis of
bulk properties, employing techniques which probe upwards of millions of
individual atoms or molecules simultaneously. Unfortunately, many systems of
interest, such as nanoparticles, are extremely heterogeneous and exhibit
significant variations in reactivity that are “averaged out” in conventional
studies. The ability to obtain measurements that reflect the reactivity of
single chemical entities could fundamentally improve our understanding of these
systems. These techniques utilize small pipets as multipurpose tools to
manipulate the position of single entities within a sample and to characterize
their chemical behavior. The techniques are being validated and then applied to
identify promising electrocatalyst materials for applications such as water
splitting and CO2 reduction. Complementing these research efforts, the Hill
group is also establishing a "Measure Anything" outreach program focused on
measurement science, enabling K-12 students across Wyoming to design their own
research projects that utilize analytical facilities at the University of
Wyoming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogenous chemical systems play an important
role in many modern technologies, but their design presents unique challenges
not found in the traditional chemical world of small molecules. Entity-to-entity
variations within heterogeneous ensembles make the elucidation of meaningful
structure-function relationships difficult when using conventional analytical
techniques. The ability to obtain measurements that reflect the reactivity of
single chemical entities, such as nanoparticles, could fundamentally change the
way heterogeneous chemical systems are developed. In the Hill lab,
electroanalytical techniques are being developed to produce quantitatively-
reliable single-entity data at the throughputs necessary to serve as a practical
tool for guiding systems design. Small pipets “dispense” individual entities at
well-defined locations within a sample and probe the electrochemical behavior of
these entities in a targeted fashion. The research entails both fundamental
studies of each step of this single-entity electroanalytical approach and
assessment of its practical utility to explore the reactivity of complex, high
entropy alloy electrocatalyst materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.