* 2045523
* CAREER: Eye Tracking Streaming Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Sampath Jayarathna, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 03/31/2026
* USD 341,502.00

The primary goal of this project is to use real-time processing of eye tracking
data to derive non-invasive measurements that can reveal objective and
quantifiable information about the attention of individual subjects (e.g., being
able to select useful information). Research advances made through this project
will be used towards improved training assessment for neurodiverse (e.g., Autism
Spectrum Disorder and Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder) children, low-
vision magnifiers focusing on accessibility, and performance assistance for
unmanned aircraft pilot operators. The integrated research and education goal is
to provide a foundation to mentor, train, and attract underrepresented minority
and female students from local high schools to a college pathway and transition
them towards graduate studies on interdisciplinary areas in STEM. The outreach
efforts will provide direct training to a cohort of students involved in a
summer camp for neighboring school districts, with the aim of attracting
underrepresented high school students to STEM fields. The project work will also
positively impact neurodiverse children and their caregivers through an annual
event that provides hands-on activities using the eye tracking technology built
in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will determine the
correlation of neurocognitive indices of attention and gaze transition via an
eye tracking streaming analytics framework. The project builds on a converging
operations approach using analytic-streams and multi-user eye tracking, and
establishes novel eye tracking models during tasks associated with joint
attention and gaze transition. The project work will fundamentally advance
research in eye tracking data processing and analytics, by creating a “streaming
hub”. Next, it will investigate the possible relationships between eye movement
metrics representing gaze transition collected during attentional control tasks
and build a gaze transition model. Subsequently, the research will focus on
working memory models by answering the research question: “Can eye tracking
measures index working memory capacity during complex span tasks?” Furthermore,
considering that most existing eye tracking systems only support standard
analysis and offline batch-processing of eye movement data, this project will
advance computationally efficient stream processing and real-time analytics
useful for a broad range of eye tracking applications. Advances in real-time eye
tracking analytics will enable entirely new application areas. For this, the
research team will collaborate with different organizations such as Lighthouse
Guild (non-profit) and NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration), as
well as healthcare/medical professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.