* 2045393
* SBIR Phase I:  Regulation of Hyperinflammation and Cell Survival Under Hypoxia with NELL1/NV1: A Therapy for Severe Lung Tissue Damage in Viral Infections (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Cymbeline Culiat, NELLONE THERAPEUTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 09/30/2022
* USD 242,342.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project is
the development of a first-in-class therapeutic that minimizes lung damage and
promotes tissue healing under the adverse environment of viral infection. The
current standard of care for COVID-19 patients battling SARS-CoV-2 infection is
limited to supportive care, long hospitalization, and re-purposed anti-
inflammatory or anti-viral drugs. Many survivors suffer long-term lung scarring
that reduces respiratory function. There remains a need for effective
therapeutics that prevent or reduce virus-induced lung damage and/or promote
tissue healing. Recombinant human NELL1 protein has an excellent safety profile
in healing tissue injuries and a virus-agnostic mode of action. NELL1 is
strongly differentiated from COVID-19 therapeutics in clinical development
because it can be manufactured large-scale, cost-effectively, and has broad
utility in treating future viral outbreaks independent of causative virus,
strain, or variant. The proposed studies will rapidly advance NELL1 towards
preclinical and clinical studies using COVID-19 expedited path(s).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will demonstrate the scientific and technical feasibility of advancing
NELL1 as a protein therapeutic for the treatment of viral-based respiratory
damage, including damage caused by SARS-CoV-2. The first technical objective is
to demonstrate NELL1 potential in promoting cell survival under hypoxic
conditions and reducing inflammation in epithelial cell cultures. After NELL1
treatment and exposure to hypoxic growth conditions, the survival of bronchial
epithelial cells and accumulation of reactive oxygen species will be monitored
relative to no treatment controls. Similarly, inflammation will be induced in
primary epithelial cells treated with NELL1 and inflammatory marker abundance
and cell survival will be compared to no treatment control cells. Success is
demonstrated by ≥30% cell survival under each condition and a concordant
reduction in reactive oxygen species and markers of inflammation in cells
treated with NELL1. The second technical objective is to demonstrate in vivo
efficacy of NELL1 in modulating SARS-Co-V-2 induced cytokine storm. These
studies will be performed in a validated hACE2 transgenic mouse model and it is
expected that the abundance of at least three cytokines will be reduced by ≥30%
in treated animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.