* 2045901
* CAREER: Signal to Noise: How Complex Social Information Regulates Brain Genomics and Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Clare Rittschof, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2026
* USD 851,648.00

Life experiences change individual behavior through complex interactions between
environmental inputs and gene activity in the brain; it is unclear why certain
experiences have lasting effects on behavior while other effects are easily
reversed. This question is relevant to animal biodiversity, but also human
health research, where one goal is to mitigate the behavioral impacts of
experiences like social trauma. Though dynamic brain gene activity underlies
experience-induced changes in behavior, the exact mechanisms that regulate the
persistence of an experience are unclear. For example, experience may chemically
alter brain DNA and therefore permanently change gene activity. However, a
change in gene activity itself may be temporary, but lead to permanent changes
in other factors that influence behavior, like brain structure. This study uses
experimental manipulations of gene regulating mechanisms to determine whether
certain ones reliably predict the longevity of an experience. The subject of
these studies is the honey bee (Apis mellifera), a critical crop pollinator with
a well-established relationship between social experience, brain gene activity,
and aggressive behavior. Teams composed of students and beekeepers will complete
research objectives and organize a summit that introduces high school students
to research results and academic, industry, and non-profit career opportunities
in Agricultural STEM. In addition to filling critical knowledge gaps in the
study of behavioral diversity, this project will improve public science literacy
and enhance partnerships among students and professionals inside and outside of
academia. These steps contribute to an overall outcome of increased STEM
workforce diversity, retention and career success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In honey
bees, adult defensive aggression and brain gene expression are persistently
changed by social information accrued over the course of several days. To a
degree, these phenotypes are also responsive to immediate information about
threats to the beehive, enabling researchers to assess the circumstances under
which persistent social experiences are updated by new information. Persistent
effects are correlated with changes in brain DNA methylation and decreased lipid
content in a peripheral endocrine tissue known to impact brain gene expression,
the fat body. Thus, the longevity of social experience could be a result of the
gene regulatory impacts of brain DNA methylation, endocrine signaling patterns,
or both. Researchers use intricate adult social manipulations to produce bees
that display similar levels of aggression, but with different gene regulatory
underpinnings (variation in brain DNA methylation, fat body lipid content, or
both). These bees will be used to examine which regulatory mechanisms predict
the strength of response to new information, in terms of behavior, brain
physiology (mitochondrial bioenergetics), and genome function (gene expression
and chromatin accessibility measured using RNA-seq, bisulfite-seq and ATAC-seq).
Larval bees also show persistent behavioral effects of their pre-adult
environment. Manipulations of larvae and measures of adult behavior will be used
to determine whether the longevity mechanisms identified in adults also apply to
a second life stage. This study addresses critical knowledge gaps in the
relationship between brain genomics and behavioral plasticity, including how
peripheral systems and brain epigenetic mechanisms work together to regulate
brain gene expression and behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.