* 2045742
* CAREER: Electrical and Thermoelectric Transport Beyond the Metal/Insulator Paradigm
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Brian Skinner, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2026
* USD 294,695.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic materials are
traditionally dichotomized into two broad classes: metals and insulators. In
this dichotomy, metals are materials that can conduct electricity via a "Fermi
surface" of electrons, and insulators are materials that do not conduct
electricity and have no such Fermi surface. But the last decade has uncovered
whole new classes of materials, "topological materials," that defy the
established dichotomy. Topological materials are able to conduct electricity but
have no Fermi surface of electrons. The possibilities for new technology and new
physical phenomena inherent in this combination of properties remain largely to
be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an integrated plan of
research, outreach, and education. The research activities aim to explore,
theoretically, the possibilities for new bulk phenomena in topological
materials. The research focuses in particular on thermoelectric properties (the
conversion of heat to electric power) and on the nature of the transition from
conducting to non-conducting states. Key questions include these: 1) which
conditions and which materials are conducive to achieving an efficient
conversion of heat to electric power?, and 2) what new forms of the metal-to-
insulator transition are possible, and what are their experimental
signatures?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New topological thermoelectric materials may
have applications in both waste-heat recovery and more efficient cooling.
Understanding new forms of the metal-insulator transition could lead to new
generations of electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outreach and
education activities make concrete steps toward improving the visibility and
accessibility of condensed matter physics as a field, and toward broadening
participation within it. Activities include (i) developing lesson plans that
introduce electricity and electric materials to elementary school students in
underserved communities, (ii) developing problem sets and lectures for the
community of high school students participating in olympiad-level physics
competitions, (iii) building an inclusive research group and developing new
courses at the graduate and undergraduate level, (iv) mentoring students from
underrepresented demographic groups through the Bridge Program at Ohio State
University, and (v) developing social media content that introduces condensed
matter physics to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an integrated plan of
research, outreach, and education that is based on the transport properties of
electronic materials. The research focuses primarily on topological materials,
which harbor the possibility for fundamentally new kinds of transport properties
and electronic phases compared to those possible in traditional metals and
insulators. Exploring these possibilities requires theories that go beyond the
non-interacting, free-particle descriptions that led to the discovery and
classification of topological materials. The aim of this research is to produce
such theories, focusing in particular on bulk thermoelectric transport and on
the nature of the metal-insulator transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One thrust of
the research is concerned with the thermoelectric response of topological
semimetals and its dependence on magnetic field. The PI and his research team
will consider magnetic Weyl semimetals, compensated topological semimetals, and
other topological materials beyond Dirac/Weyl. The goal of this work is to
identify conditions and material properties that are conducive to achieving
large thermopower and large thermoelectric efficiency. A second thrust considers
how topological systems admit novel bulk metal-insulator transitions, beyond the
canonical Anderson and Mott perspectives. The research team will consider
different scenarios for such transitions, including in strongly disordered
systems, hydrodynamic systems, and in electron systems with nonperturbative
electron-phonon coupling. The goal of these works is to uncover possible new
electronic quantum phenomena, which have strong manifestations in the electrical
conductivity, and to illustrate how they may appear in real
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated with these research efforts is a
comprehensive plan for outreach and education that will take concrete steps
toward improving the visibility and accessibility of condensed-matter physics as
a field, and toward broadening participation within it. Activities include (i)
developing lesson plans that introduce electricity and electric materials to
elementary school students in underserved communities, (ii) developing problem
sets and lectures for the community of high-school students participating in
olympiad-level physics competitions, (iii) building an inclusive group and
developing new courses at the graduate and undergraduate level, (iv) mentoring
students from underrepresented demographic groups through the Bridge Program at
Ohio State University, and (v) developing social media content that introduces
condensed-matter physics to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.