* 2045995
* CAREER: Driving Hierarchical Collagen Fiber Maturation with Mechanobiology
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Jennifer Puetzer, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2026
* USD 564,697.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will examine how the
mechanical forces of development guide cells to produce collagen fibers.
Specifically, this work will study how fibers are made to have the same
organization and strength as native collagen fibers. Collagen fibers are the
primary source of strength in tissues throughout the body, particularly in
tendons, ligaments, and menisci. However these fibers are not recreated after
injury. Engineered tissue replacements do not include these fibers, which makes
repair options inadequate. Native collagen fibers are primarily formed
postnatally when mechanical cues guide cells to assemble small fibrils into
larger fibers and fascicles. These mechanical cues are critical to fiber
formation, however their individual contributions are unknown. This work will
explore how developmental slow stretch and muscle-inspired cyclic loading drive
cells to produce hierarchically organized collagen fibers. Additionally, this
research will shed light on the mechanics that govern fiber formation. A multi-
level educational program based in orthopaedics and tissue engineering will be
developed as well, aimed at recruiting and retaining underrepresented minorities
and women in STEM. Specifically, undergraduates will participate in research
opportunities and interdisciplinary courses, middle and high school students
will be engaged through hands-on research and National Biomechanics Day
programming, and local middle and high school teachers will be trained in
inquiry-based curriculum techniques to promote enhanced retention of STEM
throughout the central Virginia area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of
this research is to explore how developmentally-inspired mechanical loads drive
ligament fibroblasts to produce engineered ligament with native organization and
strength. The central hypothesize is that tensile strains, which mirror
developmental slow elongation and rapid cyclic muscle activity, will
individually and synergistically drive native-like hierarchical collagen
organization and matrix maturation, in a magnitude- and duration-dependent
fashion, resulting in significantly stronger, functional replacements. Using a
novel culture system, which supports cellular development of the largest, most
organized hierarchical fibers to date, this research will investigate how 1)
slow strains (0.1-1 mm/day) that mimic postnatal growth rates, and 2) rapid
intermittent cyclic tensile strains (1-2 mm/sec) that mimic muscular activity,
individually and 3) in combination drive hierarchical collagen fiber maturation.
Specifically, collagen organization at the fibril, fiber, and fascicle level,
matrix composition, and tissue mechanical properties will be evaluated with each
type of strain. Slow growth elongation and rapid cyclic muscle activity occur at
strain rates orders of magnitude apart, most likely producing very different
effects on cells. Understanding the different effects of these loads will not
only help to engineer functional replacements, but will be integral in
developing rehabilitation protocols to restore function after injury. Future
work can use these results to drive regeneration of collagen fibers after
injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.