* 2045101
* CAREER: Solution‐based, Continuous Manufacturing of User‐friendly, On‐Skin Electronics for Customized Health‐Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Zheng Yan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 01/31/2026
* USD 517,380.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports the fundamental
studies necessary to achieve solution-based, continuous manufacturing of user-
friendly, on-skin electronics which can simultaneously record multiple desired
human physiological signals (i.e., multimodal) for customized health-monitoring.
Emerging on-skin wearable electronics can find broad applications in clinical
healthcare, personalized fitness tracking, human-machine interfaces, and the
internet of things, which are important to national prosperity and welfare. To
unleash their full potential in real-world settings, next-generation on-skin
wearables should be user-friendly (e.g., breathable, antibacterial, thermally
regulatable), be low-cost and disposable to minimize infection risks, and be
multimodal to provide a comprehensive picture of the body’s health. However, the
field of flexible electronics lacks the knowledge necessary to achieve mass
production of user-friendly, breathable on-skin wearable electronics. This
project aims to meet this challenge through the study of slot-die-based scalable
synthesis of multifunctional porous elastic substrates and high-throughput mask-
free inkjet printing of multimodal bioelectronics on porous substrates. The
proof-of-concept device generated in this project will perform concurrent
measurements of multiple human biophysical and biochemical signals to aid in the
early diagnosis of heart diseases and virus infections. The research plan is
complemented by synergistic educational and outreach activities, including
curriculum development, research training for graduate and undergraduate
students, summer internships with industry, interactive exhibitions for the
general public and summer camps for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this research is to discover the processing-structure-property relationships
in phase-separation-induced porous elastomers for their mass manufacture and to
understand the interplay of inkjet-printed nanomaterial droplets with porous
structures for high-quality bioelectronics printing. The three interrelated
research objectives are to (i) uncover the solution-based synthesis of
multifunctional user-friendly porous elastic substrates; (ii) study inkjet
printing of model nanomaterials (silver nanowires and laser-induced graphene) on
porous elastic substrates via simulations and experiments; and (iii) explore
inkjet printing of nanomaterials-based, customized, multimodal bioelectronics on
porous substrates. This project seeks answers to the following questions. (i)
What are precise interpretable relationships of the processing conditions,
porous structures, and properties of slot-die-coated, phase-separation-induced
porous elastic substrates? (ii) How does surface integration of silicone
nanofibrils on user-friendly porous substrates improve the uniformity,
reproducibility and resolution of inkjet-printed nanomaterial patterns to enable
high-quality mask-free printing of customized multimodal bioelectronics? In
addition, surface-coated silicone nanofibrils can offer antibacterial capability
due to their small diameters and irregular three-dimensional arrangements. This
project can advance the key knowledge base of advanced manufacturing from both
phase-separation-induced scalable synthesis of porous materials and solution-
based high-throughput printing of multimodal bioelectronics on the porous
substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.