* 2045212
* RUI: The role of ecological memory in nearshore seagrass beds affected by multiple stressors
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Elizabeth Whitman, Bentley University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 676,239.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to determine
how ecological memory, shaped by an extreme disturbance, informs the response of
coastal ecosystems to multiple stressors at population, community, and ecosystem
levels. Seagrass ecosystems are among the most highly productive ecosystems on
earth, yet are vulnerable to disturbance by both human activity and natural
processes. Hurricane Dorian was a Category 5 hurricane that hit the Bahamas in
2019. By comparing seagrass communities in the direct path of the storm with
neighboring areas that were less impacted, this project is evaluating how
ecological memory might affect responses of seagrass ecosystems to common human-
caused and natural stressors. The investigators are early-career scientists, and
results from this study are likely to inform conservation, management, and
restoration of seagrass ecosystems. They are providing substantial educational
opportunities for students in the United States and in the Bahamas, including
virtual and hands-on field research experiences for undergraduate students, some
from groups traditionally underrepresented in science. Facilitated by Friends of
the Environment, a local NGO on Abaco Island, virtual reality videos and
curricula will also enhance STEM educational opportunities for Bahamian high
school students &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seagrass ecosystems, a widespread and
ecologically important nearshore system, may be shaped by the ecological memory
of past disturbances. These legacies may influence how seagrass ecosystems
respond to environmental change. The investigators will conduct new research
that complements seven years of existing data in a study system in the path of
Hurricane Dorian in the Bahamas to assess how ecological memory shapes the
response of coastal seagrass beds at multiple levels of biological organization.
They are using a combination of modeling, field observations, field experiments,
and laboratory analyses to compare highly and minimally hurricane-impacted sites
to determine: the distribution and relative abundance of three seagrass species;
the relative abundance and species diversity of naturally occurring invertebrate
and vertebrate grazers; overall species richness, functional diversity, and
habitat complexity of each field site; seagrass growth rates and primary
productivity; and abiotic environmental characteristics — irradiance,
temperature, and nutrient content— of ambient seawater. They will sample twenty
plots per site each quarter—including unaltered controls and experimental plots
simulating mechanical damage, increased grazing pressure, and both mechanical
damage and grazing. The goal is to provide a better understanding of how
ecological memory drives the outcome of current ecological processes, which in
turn will inform conservation and restoration efforts as seagrasses continue to
decline globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.