* 2045785
* CAREER: Physiological and Behavioral Determinants of Energy Use in Tropical Mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Danielle Levesque, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 666,925.00

The ability to use energetically costly physiological processes to maintain body
temperature at levels elevated above ambient temperature or endothermy, is a
defining characteristic of mammals. The evolution of endothermy allowed mammals
from warm, aseasonal climates to diversify and radiate into previously
inhospitable environments as temperatures cooled. Much of what is known about
temperature regulation and energetics in mammals, however, has been derived from
high latitude, northern hemisphere species whose evolutionary history has been
shaped by large changes in temperature and extreme seasonality. To address this
gap, the PI will leverage an existing collaboration, to examine the costs of
living for nocturnal and diurnal small mammals in the tropical forests of
Malaysian Borneo. The PI and her team will collect long term data on the body
temperatures, metabolic rates, and life history characteristics of free-living
small mammals. A novel, comprehensive database of mammalian physiological and
life history traits, will be generated providing access to new, real data as a
valuable learning experiences for the impact of climate on mammalian energetics.
Education activities will target University of Maine undergraduate and graduate
students, and K-12 students throughout Maine. Through first-hand experience with
novel datasets from a unique environment, students will learn the importance of
thermoregulatory physiology in understanding how animals respond to their
environment. By increasing our knowledge of the functional energetics of
tropical mammals not only can we understand the mechanisms underpinning current
species distributions, but also help to improve our predictions of organismal
responses to changing global climates.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal
of this early career project is to build a framework to better understand the
macrophysiology of mammals and better predict their potential responses to a
warming world, by integrating physiology, ecology, and evolutionary biology. A
high degree of biodiversity, endemism, and an almost complete lack of basic data
physiological data available for small mammals from the Indo-Malayan
zoogeographic region, creates an ideal arena in which to stage a long-term
project of integrated research and education. The PI and her team seek to answer
the following questions: 1) do nocturnal small mammals have more flexible body
temperatures than their diurnal counterparts; 2) does it cost more (in terms of
energy and water) to be nocturnal or diurnal in a consistently hot and humid
environment and, 3) how will these differences affect their ability to respond
to climate change. Through answering these questions, the research will generate
novel datasets on the physiology and energetics of six or more species of
tropical small mammals. When combined with existing data from temperate mammals,
these data will be used test hypotheses on the evolution of homeothermy, and the
role of energetics in the life history of mammals. Ultimately, the research will
generate a comprehensive framework for using mammalian thermoregulatory
phenotypes in modeling mammalian responses to climate. The research aims of this
proposal will be integrated with education activities that will target
undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Maine and K-12 students
throughout the state. Through first-hand experience with novel datasets from a
unique environments, will learn demonstrate the importance of thermoregulatory
physiology in understanding how animals respond to their environment, while
providing research and outreach opportunities for junior scientists and the
general public. Together the knowledge of the functional energetics of tropical
mammals will advance the understanding of mechanisms controlling current species
distributions, but also help to improve our predictions of organismal responses
to changing global climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal was
supported by the Integrative Ecological Physiology Program within the Division
of Integrative Organismal Systems within the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) Program
within the Office of Integrative Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.