* 2045181
* CAREER:  Geometric Quantum Order: Fractons, Tensor Gauge Theories and Beyond
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Andrey Gromov, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2026
* USD 342,091.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports joint theoretical
research and education to advance the theoretical foundations of condensed
matter physics. Condensed matter physics concerns itself with systems composed
of a large number of interacting constituents. Materials are a common example as
they contain many atoms and many electrons. It is common to think of such
complex systems not in terms of the individual constituents, but rather in terms
of properties that emerge from their collective behavior. The concept of phases
of matter is an important example of a collective property. Systems that show
the same phase have similar properties. Ferromagnets have the collective
property that the constituent atoms or electrons align in such a way that the
magnetic axis of each one points in the same direction. Ferromagnets made of
different materials are all ferromagnets. However, a ferromagnet is
qualitatively different from an antiferromagnetic phase in which the magnetic
axis of one atom points in the direction opposite that of its neighbor. So,
systems that belong to the same phase have similar qualitative properties, while
systems that belong to different phases have different properties. When quantum
mechanics mingles with strong interactions among constituents very strange
phases can emerge, such as the topological phases of the fractional quantum Hall
effect; the latter occurs when electrons confined to a two-dimension plane by
semiconductors are exposed to an intense magnetic
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently proposed fracton phases of matter are
another turning point in this development. These phases have the interesting and
distinct property of being hypersensitive to the geometry of the underlying
material, for example the way atoms are organized on a lattice, as well as the
presence of geometric distortions of the lattice. The PI will undertake a
careful study and characterization of these phases, which necessitates the
development new concepts and new theoretical tools. New tools will help advance
understanding of the physical properties of fracton phases as well as suggest
routes for experimental detection of fractions in materials. This is fundamental
research; however, fractons could play an important role in developing quantum
memory, and suggest new ways to think about quantum computing. Finally, it is
already becoming clear that some fracton phenomena may have been discovered long
ago in superfluids and liquid crystals, without realizing that these are but a
page of a much bigger story. The PI will utilize the new techniques developed in
the fracton context to gain new insights into the problems of vortices in
superconductors, turbulence, and quantum liquid
crystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education component of this CAREER project
includes training undergraduate and graduate students. Students will explore how
to use machine learning methods to gain insight into theoretical problems. The
PI will participate in global efforts to increase diversity in physics through
mentoring undergraduate students who are members of underrepresented groups
leveraging American Physical Society initiatives. The PI will engage in outreach
in local high schools by participating in career days and encouraging students
to study science. PI will develop a course aimed at undergraduate and graduate
students that will focus on applications of condensed matter physics ideas to
deep neural networks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports joint theoretical research and education to advance the
theoretical foundations of strongly correlated topological and geometric phases
of matter. The project is focused on the physics of systems that support
emergent fracton excitations. These excitations possess two remarkable
properties: (i) they are topologically non-trivial and (ii) they cannot freely
move through space. The constraints on their motion arise dynamically, while the
underlying physical system is translation invariant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
concretely the research concentrated on three major efforts. (i) Fracton
excitations can emerge in gapless correlated spin liquids. The PI will explore
how the existence of these excitations affects observable properties of these
systems. (ii) The constrained mobility of fracton excitations can be formally
imposed by introducing additional symmetries. The variety of all possible
mobility constraints roughly corresponds to all possible symmetries of this
kind. The PI will develop a general theory of such symmetries and their
manifestation in low energy properties of the physical systems constrained by
these symmetries. (iii) A particular form of fracton behavior is already present
in well-known systems such as superfluids, liquid crystals and quantum Hall
states, where vortices, crystalline defects and composite fermions have a subtle
version of constrained motion. The PI will investigate this tantalizing
connection with the expectation that fracton machinery will provide a fresh look
at these systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The education component of this CAREER
project includes training undergraduate and graduate students. Students will
explore how to use machine learning methods to gain insight into theoretical
problems. The PI will participate in global efforts to increase diversity in
physics through mentoring undergraduate students who are members of
underrepresented groups leveraging American Physical Society initiatives. The PI
will engage in outreach in local high schools by participating in career days
and encouraging students to study science. PI will develop a course aimed at
undergraduate and graduate students that will focus on applications of condensed
matter physics ideas to deep neural networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.