* 2045366
* I-Corps:  Biodegradable device for the surgical closure and structural support of luminal repairs
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Renea Sturm, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is a the
development of a Bio-Zipper technology to improve outcomes in internal tissue
closures related to Lower Urinary Tract Reconstructive (LUTR) surgery.
Collaboration with surgeons, healthcare providers, and robotic surgery
specialists will determine how to best develop, modify, and optimize the Bio-
Zipper to ensure that it will not only be highly effective, but also highly
adopted by leaders in the field. Once the device is optimized to lower the
hurdles to successful internal closures in LUTR surgery, the device utilization
will be expanded into other areas of minimally invasive surgery where internal
tissue closure is challenging, such as reconstructions following
gastrointestinal tract procedures, appendiceal procedures, and proctectomy. The
Bio-Zipper will lower the skill-based barriers to successful robotic surgeries
and provide a consistent, reliable closure method. This device, with small
modifications based on the target tissue, may result in improved patient
outcomes by allowing for more minimally-invasive robotic surgical options in
clinically challenging areas. The device may drive the adoption of more complex
robotic surgeries in a larger number of medical
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on a Bio-Zipper
technology that lowers the hurdles to successful internal closures in Lower
Urinary Tract Reconstruction surgery. The use of the device may also be expanded
into other areas of minimally-invasive surgery where internal tissue closures
are challenging. The Bio-Zipper Luminal Repair Device for LUTR addresses
practice gaps directly through the development of a biomimetic adhesive patch
with mechanical properties tuned to those of the tissue to which it has been
applied. The device is specifically designed to ensure distribution of tension
across the repair and to provide watertight, stable support despite physiologic,
intermittent bladder filling during the healing process. The device has the
potential to improve quality of life and outcomes for children and adults
undergoing LUTR via rapid, consistent closures that will facilitate the
transition to minimally invasive, intracorporeal, patient-driven diversion
selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.