* 2045292
* Collaborative Research: Vertical signatures of lithospheric deformation in the western US
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Thorsten Becker, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2024
* USD 358,157.00

Continuous space geodetic observations using GPS and similar constellations
allow estimating relative motions of the Earth’s crust, easily down to sub-mm/yr
levels. We now have long, 10-20 year GPS records of vertical ground surface
motions in the United States with precision levels of 1-2 mm/yr. These precise
vertical motions contain important signatures of deformation deep in the Earth.
For example, recorded vertical motions close to the subduction zone boundary in
the Pacific North-West where the Juan de Fuca plate subducts underneath North
America imply that there is a signature of the associated mantle convection
processes at depth as well as the process of stick-slip behavior at the plate
interface associated with the megathrust earthquake cycle underneath Cascadia.
This project will use a range of numerical models and GPS data to capture both
the seismic cycle and long-term mantle timescales and work toward disentangling
the two. These efforts will help to better understand how the crust deforms and
plate boundaries evolve in general, and how the data from Cascadia can be best
integrated for a physics-based estimate of seismic hazard in the region. The
project engages summer students of UT Austin Jackson School's GeoFORCE program,
and with Indiana University’s College of Arts and Sciences Undergraduate
Research Experience, which are designed to increase the number of students
pursuing STEM degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Space geodetic constraints on
present-day vertical motions of the crust within the western US are critical for
discriminating between competing hypotheses of deformation processes working at
various temporal and spatial scales. It has been suggested that small-scale
convection signals from the asthenosphere may mask some of the expected
signatures of the visco-elastic seismic cycle in Cascadia, for example. This
proposed work will use numerical modeling and inversions to disentangle deep-
seated and shallow contributions. This research will compare visco-elastic cycle
deformation models with visco-plastic mantle flow predictions, and build
viscosity models of the mantle in the western US and geodynamic models of long-
term deformation with elasto-visco-plastic deformation of the crust and viscous
flow in the mantle. The researchers will explore both permanent deformation in
the crust as well as transient viscous flow in the mantle and compare with the
geodetic velocity field, and also examine deformation at the time scale of the
earthquake cycle through kinematic interseismic earthquake cycle models which
account for mantle flow due to past earthquakes and interseismic coupling across
faults. They will design techniques to integrate results from geodynamic models
and kinematic cycle models to obtain a consistent estimate of vertical surface
velocities. Such efforts have implications for understanding the tectonic
evolution of the United States as well as implications for seismic hazard
assessment in the Pacific Northwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.