* 2045519
* CAREER: Modernizing Risk Assessment Through Systematic Integration of Probabilistic Risk Assessment (PRA) and Prognostics and Health Management (PHM)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Katrina Groth, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Safe, reliable, affordable energy is intricately connected to broad advances in
health, science, prosperity, and our national defense. Engineering risk
assessment is an essential tool used in designing the regulations, codes, and
standards that enhance energy system safety and resilience without imposing
unreasonable regulatory burden. Advancing the science behind risk-informed
regulation is essential as systems become more complex and new challenges
emerge. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project investigates how
principles from two domains of reliability engineering can be systematically
integrated to advance this science. This research that Probabilistic Risk
Assessment (PRA) and Prognostics and Health Management (PHM) have complementary
characteristics that can offset their individual weaknesses. The research will
establish and validate a conceptual framework along with mathematical and
computational methods to systematically integrate PRA and PHM methods, data, and
models. Direct engagement with interdisciplinary stakeholders from nuclear power
plant and hydrogen transportation infrastructure applications will facilitate
both validation and adoption of the new methods. The results will provide new
knowledge about the range of data and models that can be used in regulatory
design and decision making. Integrated educational initiatives include design of
the first public museum exhibit on energy system risk assessment, enhanced
reliability engineering coursework, and diversity and inclusion initiatives for
women and underrepresented minorities in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to establish a strong foundation of
integrated research and educational activities centered on energy system risk
assessment. The research focuses on transforming risk-informed regulation for
energy systems through systematic integration of concepts, data and methods
drawn from PRA and PHM and rigorous validation using both energy system case
studies and expert stakeholder engagement. The educational activities enhance
K-12 and public education through a new museum exhibit on energy system risk
assessment that will be displayed in the nationâ€™s only nuclear history and
science museum and that will also be made available to a broad network of
affiliated museums. Graduate coursework in reliability engineering will be
enhanced through development of new active learning exercises based on this
research. The research draws upon engineering techniques of PRA, which provides
a comprehensive quantitative approach for synthesizing data, scenarios, and
probability models to assess risk under uncertainty for complex engineering
systems; and PHM, which provides powerful algorithms for using sensor data and
failure models to understand and predict health of components. To date, there
has been little work at the intersection of PRA and PHM. Unlike previous
approaches which seek to make PRA more dynamic or to extend PHM to more
complicated components within their current architectures, this research seeks
to deconstruct PRA and PHM and engineer a new approach which leverages the
benefits of both approaches. The research starts by defining the conceptual
framework and then defining mathematical and computational structures. The
candidate structures will be compared and validated using energy system case
studies and stakeholder-based validation. Nuclear power plants and hydrogen
fueling stations are used as testbeds to ensure that the results are
generalizable beyond a single energy system or regulatory process. The research
has broader societal impact by creating new knowledge and methods that will
impact the design of regulations for nuclear power plants, hydrogen
infrastructure, pipelines, and other energy systems and critical
infrastructures. The integrated educational activities broaden K-12, graduate
student, and public understanding of the science behind energy system safety.
Broader participation of women and underrepresented minorities in engineering
will be encouraged via the enhancement of graduate student recruitment and
mentoring activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.