* 2045013
* CAREER: CAS: Colloidal Ligand-Exchange Synthesis of Dilute Noble Metal Surfaces for Electrosynthesis of Hydrogen Peroxide
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Christina Li, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 02/28/2026
* USD 657,561.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Christina W. Li of Purdue University is studying catalysts to
efficiently prepare hydrogen peroxide directly from air and water using
electricity. Hydrogen peroxide is an important commodity chemical that has
widespread use in water purification and disinfection. In developing efficient
catalysts, this project has the potential to enable small-scale, mobile
production for deployment in infrastructure-poor areas. Manufacturing hydrogen
peroxide from air and water is a sustainable alternative to the current
hydrogen-based process. The catalysts are to be optimized for two key
parameters: peroxide productivity (how much hydrogen peroxide is generated for a
given amount of electrical energy) and peroxide selectivity (the relative ratio
of desired hydrogen peroxide product compared to undesired water by-product). To
achieve both high productivity and selectivity, a strategy that enables precise
control over the geometric and electronic properties of catalyst nanoparticles
(sizes on the order of a few billionths of a meter) will be developed. This
approach will use chemistry to prepare catalyst structures ranging in size from
single metal atoms to full layers one atom thick with the electronic control
provided by the nanoparticle support at the core. Dr. Li's research and
educational activities are closely integrated and will educate the next-
generation of electrochemistry and battery researchers by engaging students from
high school through graduate school. A laboratory activity, the “Battery Design
Challenge”, will be developed that is geared toward high school AP Chemistry
students in partnership with the AP Fridays program at Purdue University. This
activity will bring high school students from across Indiana to Purdue’s campus
to compete in this laboratory challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support
of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor
Christina W. Li of Purdue University will be studying submonolayer core-shell
nanoparticles for the electrosynthesis of hydrogen peroxide. Catalysts for
peroxide-selective oxygen reduction typically comprise noble metal alloy
nanoparticles, in which surface ensemble geometry and electronics are tightly
convoluted with the alloy composition. In order to independently control the
redox and geometric properties of the catalytic active site, this project will
develop a colloidal ligand-exchange deposition strategy to access broadly
tunable noble metal surface ensemble geometries—ranging from isolated atoms to
small clusters to large islands—in a core-shell nanoparticle. Both metal
precursor adsorption and galvanic replacement reactions will be studied to
deposit noble metal shells onto a range of core nanoparticle compositions. In
both cases, the steric bulk and redox potential of the precursor complex will be
tuned though ligand chemistry in order to enforce atom isolation and surface-
limited deposition. In addition, operando spectroscopy will be performed to
characterize how core-shell and single atom microstructures evolve during
electrochemical polarization with the goal of stabilizing the most active and
selective surface morphologies. By independently controlling the ensemble
geometry and electronic properties of the noble metal surface atoms, this
project seeks to develop fundamental structure-mechanism principles for the
efficient and selective electrochemical reduction of molecular oxygen to
hydrogen peroxide. These systematic and precise materials should permit for the
elucidation of optimal ensemble sizes for high selectivity and optimal O-binding
strengths for low overpotential peroxide production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.