* 2045392
* CAREER: Advancing academic cultures of well-being by understanding professional  experiences of engineering faculty
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* James Huff, Harding University Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Grant
* 05/31/2026
* USD 371,137.00

In the COVID-19 pandemic, we have all come to recognize the importance of
promoting well-being in every facet of life, including and especially in higher
education. We recognize that promoting well-being among faculty and students
must be a central focus rather than an afterthought of professional education.
Accordingly, this project will advance cultures of well-being in engineering
education by understanding faculty members’ personal experiences of coping with
negative emotions and failure within their professional context. Engineering
faculty members are highly influential to students who seek their guidance to
understand what it means to become an engineer. Faculty are best positioned to
influence equitable, inclusive, and healthy cultures of engineering education
when their own emotional needs are met. Therefore, this project will examine how
faculty members meet their well-being needs and how they use their influence to
nurture or inhibit cultures that allow for engineering students to experience
well-being. This project aims to transform how faculty relationally connect with
students and other faculty and staff by transforming the ways that they
understand themselves. In addition to the research plan, which includes
intensive interviews with engineering faculty at multiple institutions, this
project will also provide direct training to faculty on coping with failures and
preserving a positive professional identity. In line with the PI’s career
mission, this project will develop and define a scholarship of care within
engineering education research that influences national and local policies of
well-being through research-informed
insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will address two
significant gaps in extant literature: 1) the role of failure and negative
emotions in facilitating or mitigating cultural patterns of well-being; 2) the
complex, dynamic nature of the lived emotional experiences of engineering
faculty. This project is organized around the following
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1: Examine social and individual experiences of
failure and negative emotions in engineering faculty. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 2:
Characterize the link between faculty’s emotional experience and their
surrounding cultures of well-being. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 3: Establish a
framework to provide training for engineering programs to establish cultures
that support healthy strategies for coping with professional failure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a qualitative mixed-methods approach
that embeds an interpretative phenomenological analysis (IPA) study that
examines the lived experiences of professional failure and negative emotions in
engineering faculty (Objective 1) within a constructivist grounded theory (CGT)
analysis that generates a theoretical model of the relationships between faculty
emotional regulation and cultures of well-being (Objective 2). The education
plan to develop faculty training on regulating emotions related to professional
failure (Objective 3) will be interwoven with the research focus to change
cultures of well-being (Objective 2). This study will occur at three
purposefully selected institutions and involve 10-12 faculty participants for
the IPA study, 18-22 participants that are interviewed twice for the CGT study
(36-44 total interviews), and a three-module training series to be delivered at
four institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Broadening Participation in Engineering (BPE) in the Engineering Education and
Centers (EEC) Division of Engineering (ENG), and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.