* 2045641
* CAREER: A Robust and Data-driven Design for Carbon-intelligent Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Mohammadhassan Hajiesmaili, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 01/31/2026
* USD 433,153.00

The internet is a 24/7 service, it could be 24/7 carbon-free too. This is an
ambitious goal that has been recently advocated by internet pioneer industries
as a response of the computing domain to climate change. Achieving this goal
requires the decarbonization of operations of geographically distributed digital
infrastructure, e.g., data centers, providing services such as video streaming,
or hosting compute-intensive applications. Despite a decade of effort on the
sustainability of digital infrastructure, the current design is still inadequate
to achieve the 24/7 carbon-free goal. The current design focuses to minimize the
energy cost and/or consumption or maximize renewable participation. The latter
is the closest effort towards the decarbonization goal; however, when the wind
is not blowing or the sun is not shining, this design has no carbon
intelligence, i.e., it obliviously draws energy from the grid without taking
into account that the carbon intensity of grid changes over time due to
existence of other carbon-free sources such as hydropower. This proposal
explicitly considers carbon intelligence as a first-class design principle of
digital infrastructure. It will develop and evaluate novel carbon-intelligent
methodologies that are robust against uncertainty and provide a design space for
data-driven adaptation for improved practical performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed theories will create a foundation for
designing robust and data-driven systems and will be applicable more broadly to
the computer and network systems. The carbon-intelligence approaches open new
research directions for advancing the research at the intersection of computer
science and sustainability. More broadly, this proposal is a response of the
computing domain to climate change, one of the largest problems’ society has
ever faced. Last, it creates opportunities for educational, sociotechnical, and
outreach activities. The planned sociotechnical activities broaden the research
outcome of this proposal for measuring and improving the inequity of the energy
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.