* 2045023
* CAREER: Parallel Two-Dimensional Liquid Chromatography Utilizing Capillary Columns
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* James Grinias, Rowan University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 12/31/2025
* USD 534,899.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Dr. James Grinias at Rowan University will study new two-
dimensional liquid chromatography (2D-LC) techniques used to measure critical
quality attributes in small molecule-protein materials. Biopharmaceuticals
composed of small molecules and proteins are increasing in importance within the
pharmaceutical industry, because of their potential for addressing the
shortcomings of other types of pharmaceutical agents. Chemical analysts within
this industry need new measurement tools to ensure the content and purity of
these small molecule-protein materials. Dr. James Grinias of Rowan University
uses liquid chromatography to help separate and measure the individual molecules
within complex mixtures that contain both active pharmaceutical ingredients and
impurities. This project focuses on the creation of a two-dimensional liquid
separation technique that can simultaneously measure multiple attributes of such
complex mixtures, which helps ensure the purity of small molecule-protein
materials. A group of chemical separation experts from multiple industries are
collaborating with Dr. Grinias to provide feedback on high-value technical
skills that are required in modern chemical measurement science laboratories in
industrial settings. A new outreach program teaches these critical skills to
nontraditional students by use of remote learning strategies, thereby helping
them obtain careers in this field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the
Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program is funding Dr. James Grinias at Rowan
University to study new two-dimensional liquid chromatography (2D-LC) techniques
used to measure critical quality attributes in small molecule-protein materials.
Current strategies for characterizing these attributes in small molecule-protein
materials require multiple, different chromatographic methods and columns, which
can be a slow and arduous process. Dr. Grinias is overcoming this issue through
the use of a parallel 2D-LC technique that utilizes multiple capillary LC
columns in the second dimension to simultaneously perform multiple separation
methods. This approach increases the throughput of the analyses, reduces the
amount of chemical waste that is generated based on the small solvent volumes
used, and limits the risks of sample handling for analysts through improvements
in method automation. This CAREER Award project establishes this new technique
by developing a multi-pump, capillary-scale system for parallel 2D-LC, coupling
absorbance and mass spectrometric detection for selective channel monitoring,
and demonstrating the parallel completion of multi-attribute methodology. These
research objectives are connected to an educational plan that focuses on the
identification of important job skills by industry leaders and the creation of a
remote learning curriculum designed to teach these
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.