* 2045864
* CAREER: Developing a Fire Ecology Framework for Soil Bacteria
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Thea Whitman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2026
* USD 993,133.00

Wildfires cause major ecological as well as economic disturbances. They are
increasing in frequency and severity in many regions of the world and burn
hundreds of millions of hectares of land every year. The burned landscape
results in large losses of carbon and nitrogen from ecosystems. Microorganisms
in the soil play a critical role in the recovery of wildfire-affected ecosystems
through their roles in cycling nutrients and their interactions with plants. The
ecological impacts of wildfires on plant life are somewhat understood. This is
not the case for soil microbes. The goal of this NSF CAREER project is to
develop a fire ecology framework for bacteria, to improve understanding of why
certain bacteria are “pyrophilous” – i.e., why they thrive following exposure to
fire. The approach will draw on field research on northern forest wildfires and
controlled prairie burns, laboratory experiments, and genetic sequencing. At its
core, improving our understanding of bacterial response to fires will help
underpin our understanding of how fires and changing fire regimes will affect
the climate, an issue of great societal importance. This project will realize a
myriad of broader impacts through its education goals, which are tightly
integrated with each research goal. Undergraduates will be trained in the lab
throughout the grant, working with the University of Wisconsin-Madison
Undergraduate Research Scholars program, which will help support full
participation of women and members of underrepresented groups in STEM fields. A
podcast about fire ecology, developed in collaboration with undergraduates in
the Life Sciences Communication program, and a new public outreach booth, “What
happens belowground during a fire?”, will both help increase public scientific
literacy and engagement with science and fire ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will build on the PI’s prior results to strengthen and
integrate a trait-based understanding of bacterial responses to fire. The
overarching hypothesis is that fire survival will be most relevant shortly after
wildfires (~1 year), fast growth will be relevant over longer timescales (~5
years), and pyrogenic organic matter degradation will be relevant over longer
periods of time (~10 years). The first theme will address the patterns and
traits of pyrophilous soil bacteria. In seeking to determine which bacteria and
genetic characteristics are associated with burned soils, the research team will
add a ten-year timepoint to a current one- and five-year timepoints in a 40-site
wildfire field experiment, building toward what will ultimately become a long-
term field study of boreal forest wildfires. In addition, the research team will
apply an untargeted metagenomics-based approach at multiple time points to
characterizing post-fire functional potential. Part of the proposed approach to
strengthening a fire ecology framework for bacteria lies in experimentally
investigating bacterial fire response through its separate components, such as
heat tolerance. The second theme focuses on the interactive effects of
temperature and drought on bacterial survival and post-fire carbon (C)
mineralization. The approach will use laboratory experiments with bacterial
isolates, intact soil cores, and gas flux tracing to determine the temperature
ranges that pyrophilous bacteria can survive and whether prior drought stress
affects bacterial survival of high temperatures and influences post-fire C
mineralization rates. The third theme will aim to develop an integrative
understanding of fire ecology for soil bacteria. Here, the research team will
draw on current and emerging datasets and cross-domain collaborations to
determine the relative importance of different traits in determining post-fire
success of pyrophilous bacteria over time and across burn severities. Studies
will compare how the traits that make bacteria successful fire-responders
correspond to (or contrast with) equivalent strategies in other organisms.
Overall, the project will advance our understanding of fundamental questions
about the effects of fire on bacteria – critical players in post-fire ecosystem
recovery. Undergraduate training will be coupled with mentorship training for a
PhD student and a research technician, helping them become better future
educators, themselves. To help support a globally competitive STEM workforce,
the PI will develop new metagenomics tutorials for soil microbiology courses,
which will provide cutting-edge bioinformatics skills to students. These
tutorials will be developed with a postdoctoral researcher, who will also
participate in UW-Madison teaching workshops, further helping to improve both
STEM education and educator development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.