* 2045363
* CAREER: Discovering the Mechanisms Governing Fracture in Fragile Bones
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Claire Acevedo, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 03/31/2026
* USD 609,011.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will improve our
understanding of the mechanistic origins of fatigue fracture in aged and
diabetic fragile bones. This will be achieved by combining low-radiation images
of bone damage with mechanical testing of bones and machine learning. This is
important because fatigue (cyclic) fracture is a prevalent failure mechanism in
nearly all engineered structures, but its relevance to the field of bone tissues
has been neglected. These fatigue fractures are common in young athletes,
especially in dancers. These fractures are also common in those who have bone
fragility. For example, aged and diabetic bones have poor collagen quality and
become fragile. Fractures are often thought to be the result of a single
overload event, such as a fall. However, this may not explain the cause of all
catastrophic fractures because it overlooks the role of fatigue from daily
activities. This research project will develop novel dynamic imaging and machine
learning for capturing the origins of bone failure mechanisms and associated
risk factors. The results will ultimately be used to prevent fragility
fractures. This research will provide a transferrable methodological framework
for medical imaging, and foster the development of new fracture-resistant
materials inspired by biological design principles. The research will be
integrated into a long-term educational plan to attract the next generation of
female engineers through dance class and other creative learning supports. It is
of note that female engineering students in Utah, where this work will be done,
are particularly underrepresented in comparison to the rest of the United
States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to advance
the development of new bone fracture mechanics theory by using a novel synthesis
of synchrotron radiation micro-computed tomography and specific machine learning
algorithms to capture the 3D damage evolution during mechanical loading.
Previous work has shown that this is typically not achievable by standard
synchrotron micro-computed tomography imaging, which involves high radiation
doses and causes deterioration of tissue’s mechanical properties. The research
work will test the hypothesis that collagen cross-linking accumulation and other
diabetic changes in bone quality play an important role in driving fragility
fractures. The research tasks of this project include: (i) determine the (sole)
effect of collagen cross-linking accumulation on fatigue and fracture resistance
; (ii) evaluate the contribution of collagen cross-linking accumulation in
diabetic bone resistance compared with other bone quality factors; (iii)
quantify the microscale failure mechanisms in deforming diabetic and
crosslinking-rich bones during in situ fatigue and fracture tests; and (iv)
evaluate whether cyclic loadings might drive a significant fraction of fractures
in diabetic and crosslinking-rich bones. This project can reveal the origins of
damage mechanisms in all types of collagenous tissues, and has the potential to
lower the radiation level and improve image quality of medical scans. This new
knowledge will establish the PI’s long-term career in bone fracture
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.