* 2045323
* CAREER: Universal Circles Between Dynamics and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Steven Frankel, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2026
* USD 254,505.00

The mathematical notion of a dynamical system allows for every time-varying
physical system to be considered in a uniform framework, as a "state space" that
organizes the sea of possible instantaneous configurations, together with a
"flow" that describes the evolution of states with time. From this viewpoint a
predator-prey system bears a striking resemblance to a swinging pendulum: both
have 2-dimensional state spaces whose axes correspond to either the total
predator and prey populations or to the position and velocity of the pendulum
point. This illustrates the unifying power of mathematical dynamics, which is
the primary focus of this project. The PI's research program will connect the
geometry of low-dimensional phase spaces with the dynamics of the systems that
they support, with an eye towards applications in both geometry and dynamics. At
the same time, the PI's educational program will bring the tools and viewpoint
of mathematical dynamics to a wide audience across the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research component of this project is
concerned with quasigeodesic and pseudo-Anosov flows on 3-manifolds. These flows
give rise to lower-dimensional structures — flowspaces, leaf spaces, and
universal circles — that entwine the large-scale dynamics of the flow with an
action of the ambient manifold’s fundamental group, and act as a conduit between
the underlying dynamics and geometry. The PI aims to show that one can use the
universal circle action of a quasigeodesic flow to reconstruct the entire
manifold, together with a pseudo-Anosov representative of the original flow, and
characterize the group actions on circles that appear as universal circles. In
addition the PI aims to use quasigeodesic flows as tools to probe the structure
of 3-manifolds with potential applications towards the Cannon Conjecture and
understanding the faces of the Thurston norm ball. For the educational component
the PI proposes what he calls the State Space Project, an interdisciplinary
working group (which includes faculty from engineering, chemistry, biology,
physics and statistics) which includes graduate courses and a seminar. The PI
also plans to continue broader impact activities related to student mentoring,
curriculum development, involvement in Math Circles and editorial
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.