* 2045500
* CAREER: Predicting transcription factor binding dynamics across cell types and species
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Shaun Mahony, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2026
* USD 503,308.00

The health and function of any given cell type depend on various sets of
proteins interacting with one another and the genome’s DNA to regulate gene
activities. Experimental approaches can profile where specific proteins attach
to the genome, providing insight into regulatory relationships between proteins
and genes in a given cell type. Such experiments are expensive and laborious,
however, and provide limited insights into gene regulatory activities in the
large portion of the genome that is composed of repetitive DNA. This project
will develop new machine learning software methods that will predict where
regulatory proteins bind to the genome in currently problematic settings.
Specifically, these investigators will train neural network methods to recognize
features of gene regulatory sites from existing experimental data and transfer
that knowledge to predict gene regulatory sites in the genomes of other species,
repetitive DNA areas, and in other cell types. Our new software methods will
therefore unlock new layers of insight into gene regulation in healthy and
diseased cells. All software produced by this project will be made freely
available and accessible to the general research community. This project
directly supports computationally intensive training and research opportunities
in machine learning for graduate and undergraduate students who are working at
the interface of computer science and biology. Strong efforts will be made to
recruit students from under-represented groups. The education goals of this
project will support the development of broader education initiatives in
bioinformatics and genomics. This project will develop discovery-oriented
bioinformatics research modules for use in teaching genetics and developmental
biology concepts in high-school science classes. These research modules will be
implemented in collaboration with Pennsylvanian high-school science teachers and
students and will offer a new way to engage students in inquiry-based science.
The PI will also develop curriculum proposals for a new degree program in
bioinformatics at Penn State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop neural network-based transfer learning approaches that predict
transcription factor (TF) binding sites across three domains where TF binding
activities are difficult to assay. Aim 1 will focus on predicting TF binding
sites across species. Neural networks will be trained on observed TF binding
data from one species, and used to predict where the same TF binds in the same
cell type in other species. A new domain adaptation strategy will be developed
that addresses systematic biases resulting from shifts in the genomic makeup of
different species. Transferring TF binding information across species will
enable the study of regulatory evolution and innovation in many species without
the need for expensive TF ChIP-seq experiments. Aim 2 will apply related domain
adaptation approaches to predict TF binding sites within transposable elements
and other repetitive regions. In this application, neural networks will be
trained on observed TF binding data from uniquely mappable portions of the
genome and will be applied to impute binding sites from partial signals in low-
mappability regions. Predicting TF binding in low-mappability regions will
provide a new way to study the regulatory contributions of transposable elements
and other currently ignored parts of the genome. Finally, Aim 3 will predict
where a TF would bind if it were expressed in a new chromatin environment. This
last application differs from approaches that aim to impute unobserved TF
binding signals from concurrent chromatin features; the goal is rather to use
information from a preexisting chromatin environment to predict the future
binding patterns of an induced TF. Developing the first principled approach for
predicting where a TF would bind in new chromatin environments will be the first
step towards predicting which regulatory perturbations can be used to transform
cellular phenotypes. Predictions from all three aims will be tested in ongoing
collaborations focused on understanding TF-driven cell identity specification in
hematopoiesis and neuronal differentiation, thus providing new insights into how
TFs select their regulatory targets during development. The results of the
project will be available from http://mahonylab.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.