* 2045139
* CAREER: Biology Integrated with Mathematics to Optimize Development of Approaches to Learning Sensemaking
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Anita Schuchardt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 12/31/2026
* USD 858,449.00

In both research and medicine, there has been a shift toward greater use of
mathematical expressions to describe and test predictions involving biological
phenomena. Thus, college and university faculty members have increased the focus
on quantitative reasoning in biology courses to better prepare students for the
workplace. As future scientists, students will encounter complex and novel
problems that will require the application of robust quantitative reasoning.
Therefore, traditional approaches in biology that teach students step-by-step
procedures to solve problems algorithmically will limit students’ learning and
their ability to thrive in scientific research settings. A better approach is to
engage students through sensemaking that requires students to make connections
between the variables and operations in mathematical expressions and the
scientific phenomena. This project will study what sensemaking opportunities are
currently provided to undergraduate biology students, how students engage in
sensemaking processes, and what teaching methods support student learning of
sensemaking of mathematical expressions in biology. The results of the studies
will then be used to design new materials to teach mathematical sensemaking in
biology courses, and to conduct workshops to help other college instructors
develop their own mathematical sensemaking units.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will advance knowledge of how undergraduate students can be supported to
productively engage in sensemaking of mathematical expressions in the context of
biological problems. First, using qualitative analyses of classroom observations
and faculty interviews across multiple institutions, the project team will
describe the sensemaking opportunities currently provided in biology courses.
Second, using students’ survey and quantitative problem-solving responses, the
researchers will develop a model of students’ sensemaking of mathematical
expressions in biology. Using structural equation modeling, this model will
assess the impact of factors including the type of mathematical expression,
student demographics and attitudes about mathematics. The model will also
include potential outcomes including correctness of and approaches to
quantitative problem solving. By combining the student and instructor level
findings, the project team will then (1) develop, implement, and refine exemplar
modules designed to enhance students’ sensemaking of mathematical expressions in
introductory biology courses; and (2) design, implement and evaluate the impact
of workshops to support college instructors in developing units to facilitate
students’ sensemaking of mathematical expressions in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
Program is a National Science Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that supports
early-career faculty who have the potential to serve as academic role models in
research and education. This CAREER project is supported by NSF's Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.