* 2045007
* SBP: CAREER: Race, Gender, and the Science of Science
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Hannah Rubin, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 184,412.00

The "science of science" has recently exploded in popularity as researchers turn
scientific methods of investigation around to investigate the practice of
science itself. While some attention has been paid to issues of marginalization
and representation, these concerns have generally not been brought to bear on
other questions within the science of science regarding how to enhance
scientific progress. The research component of this project fills the resulting
gaps in our understanding. The project demonstrates when attempts to improve
science not only further entrench (or even amplify) current injustices, but
backfire, ultimately impeding scientific progress. Moreover, it examines how
ideas spread throughout diverse communities, both providing insight into how
current inequities hinder scientific progress and illuminating questions
surrounding belief spread and polarization. Finally, it uncovers hidden,
unsuspected roadblocks for marginalized groups and suggests potential remedies,
promoting diversity in scientific fields. This research component is intertwined
with teaching and outreach components, with initiatives including the
development of courses discussing diverse methods used to investigate scientific
practice (e.g., from philosophy, history, sociology, science of science), a
national workshop for members of underrepresented/marginalized groups intending
to pursue research in the science of science, and innovative K-12 STEM
programming which demonstrates the importance of diversity in
action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs tools from evolutionary game
theory and network science to provide a picture of how aspects of social
identity, e.g. race and gender, matter both to scientific progress and to how
researchers scientifically investigate the institution of science. These tools,
which capture the dynamics of scientists' interactions and the structure of
scientific communities, enable the project to integrate insights from feminist
philosophy of science with insights from science of science, to the benefit of
both fields. Many theories in the science of science take for granted that there
are the same credit incentives, chances of work being published and cited, etc.
for all scientists, regardless of social identity. Yet, as has long been
recognized within feminist philosophy of science, these considerations matter:
researchers are excluded or marginalized according to social identity, and
scientific progress is hampered by the resulting lack of diverse ideas and
perspectives. This project reveals how our understanding of how to achieve well-
functioning science can change drastically once social identity is taken into
account. Meanwhile, the scientific tools used in this project have clear power
to illuminate questions of interest to feminist philosophers of science, e.g.
how communication networks within scientific communities influence knowledge
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.