* 2045776
* CAREER: An Inclusive Approach to Diversity Inspired Design on Novel 3D Printed Electric Motors
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Shanelle Foster, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Electric motors are widely used in all of the economic sectors that contribute
to greenhouse gas emissions. Improvements in efficiency and power density of
electric motors can reduce the amount and types of pollutants emitted into the
environment. Manufacturing design modifications aimed to improve the performance
of electric motors can be a nightmare with conventional manufacturing
techniques. 3D printing technologies offer unique versatility in size, shape and
diversity of materials, promoting flexibility in motor design that is presently
unavailable with conventional manufacturing technologies. To create the next
generation of high performance electric motors, 3D printing can be used to
strategically deposit material during motor manufacturing similar to the way
spiders strategically deposit silk in key areas to optimize web design. Spiders
use diversity in web silks to build a more structurally sound web. The
variability of the silk properties is the strength of the web and enable it to
perform its intended task more efficiently. Likewise, 3D printing allows motor
designers to manufacture lightweight, robust motors, which can significantly
reduce the emissions of greenhouse gases, which is key to preserving the
environment. This proposed project aims to stretch the imagination beyond
conventional electric motor design to inform creation of new design rules and
materials by adopting aspects of the inclusion based diversity in design used by
spiders. The proposed project extends inclusion-based diversity to strengthen
the pipeline of talent in engineering as well. An integral part of the proposed
project includes faculty-mentored undergraduate research experiences for
underrepresented minorities and women, as well as, development of inexpensive,
project-based, pre-college basic physics courses for both in-person and virtual
delivery. Virtual delivery will facilitate participation of students from
underserved domestic communities and those on other continents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electric motor performance is dependent upon its design,
properties of its materials and the processes used in manufacturing.
Conventional manufacturing techniques place a ceiling on power density and
inhibits production of more compact motor designs. Moreover, the inclusion of
intricate design features that enhance motor performance is complex with
conventional (subtractive and powder metallurgy) techniques. 3D printing
(additive manufacturing) can potentially overcome many of the challenges that
currently limit realization of many novel electrical machine designs. This
proposed project will consider the capabilities of 3D printing, which mimic the
intuits of a spider, which include material diversification, consideration for
resources and environment as well as optimization of energy input without
sacrificing functionality. The specific research goals of the proposed project
are to rethink the use of homogeneous electrical steel in the design of stators
and rotors and explore the capabilities of non-homogenous electrical steels for
multi-material 3D printed magnetic cores. Topology optimization techniques are
excellent options for exploring this uncharted territory; however, a model of
the electric motor is required for accurate computation of the machine
performance characteristics. Subdomain models will be developed to include local
and spatial material heterogeneities. Each subdomain will include variations in
thermal, mechanical, electrical and magnetic properties of the material
(magnetic, conductive and dielectric). Exploration of optimization algorithms,
including social spider optimization, genetic algorithms, and gradient methods,
is required to select the algorithm that best handles multiple objectives,
multiple variables, and multiple physics. Regression analysis, sensitivity
analysis and analysis of variance will extract new design rules. Additive
manufacturing processes in design of electric motors have not been adequately
explored in literature or the engineering industry. The research activity will
provide a broad knowledge base and advance the development of electric machines
that capitalize on the benefits of additive manufacturing without sacrificing
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.