* 2045021
* CAREER: Synthesis of Multiple Architectures of Decodable Biohybrid Polymer Libraries
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2025
* Abigail Knight, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2025
* USD 536,109.00

Non-Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers are pervasive in society –
from plastic bottles to fingerprint resistant coatings on cell-phone screens,
these materials are a critical component of global technological, medical, and
environmental advances. Despite this ubiquity, many polymers are currently
designed and analyzed with only one specific application in mind. It can take
years to identify an existing polymer that would be appropriate for use in a
different application, especially if the chemical and physical properties
required for the new application are unknown. To help match polymer materials to
new applications, this proposal describes a synthetic platform that will enable
hundreds of thousands of materials to be screened simultaneously – a scale
orders of magnitude above current strategies for synthetic polymers and rivaling
technologies like Nobel prize-winning directed evolution. To facilitate high
throughput polymer screening, DNA will be used as a staple to bring together
multiple polymer blocks. The modular assembly strategy allows for few synthetic
pieces to lead to large libraries of hybrid block copolymers. The DNA staples
have also been designed to carry identifying information that can help decode
which polymer blocks have been stapled together, even in complicated mixtures.
Once polymer blocks have been stapled together, the resulting hybrid materials
can be screened for desirable properties (such as the ability to shield proteins
from harsh environments, which is useful for stabilizing protein-based drugs
like insulin), then isolated and identified using DNA sequencing strategies.
This project requires interdisciplinary inspiration and techniques, which is an
aspect of scientific achievements that is frequently overlooked in the
classroom. To address this disconnect, two education programs building on
current successful frameworks are proposed: (1) BioInspiring – on-site and
virtual activities connecting biology-inspired science to every-day items and
(2) Sci-athonU – a collaborative student competition to generate
interdisciplinary research proposals that target global challenges. The
objective of these educational programs is to increase access to STEM resources
that highlight communication and collaboration as critical elements of science.
This proposed research program has the long terms goals of revealing design
principles for polymers with sophisticated functions to advance national
medical, technological, and environmental goals, while providing novel
approaches to increasing the motivation and retention of students from groups
historically underrepresented in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decodable polymer libraries have the potential to
revolutionize the identification of structure-function relationships for
synthetic macromolecules. While the protein data bank (PDB) contains structural
information for almost 50,000 distinct proteins, there are significantly fewer
characterized materials within the diverse structure space of synthetic
macromolecules, leaving the identification of structure-function relationships
in its infancy. High-throughput experimentation has had a revolutionary impact
on biochemistry with RNA seq revealing real-time quantitation of protein
expression and directed evolution yielding unique protein structure-function
relationships. Despite the impact of these powerful combinatorial approaches,
high-throughput experimentation with synthetic polymers remains rare. With
current techniques, each polymer must be characterized in parallel, as there is
currently no strategy for the rapid identification of polymers isolated from a
mixture. Motivated by this fundamental gap, this work aims to use DNA “staples”
that encode the polymer composition throughout a block copolymer and to provide
proof-of-principle high-throughput assays characterizing polymer morphology and
protein stabilization. Synthetic strategies are proposed for the design of
linear, brush, and star-like polymer morphologies assembled with strategically
designed architectures, and sequencing protocols are proposed to identify
isolated polymers. The ultimate goal of this proposal is to provide a platform
that expands the capabilities of polymer characterization from hundreds to
thousands of polymers in a single experiment, enabling rapid identification of
novel relationships between polymer structure and advanced
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.