* 2045759
* Career: The Role of Tissue Mechanics in Brain Folding During Development
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Andrew Lawton, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 05/31/2026
* USD 487,675.00

The human brain has a beautiful folded structure which has long attracted
curiosity. Its complex folding patterns create more space for neural connections
and subdivide the brainâ€™s circuitry. Yet little is known about how these folds
are created or how they shape brain function. This project examines growth
rates, tensile forces, and material properties of the developing brain tissue
that interact to induce and shape the patterns of brain folding. The folded
mouse cerebellum will be used as the experimental system for studying these
mechanical aspects of brain folding. Mouse strains with different patterns of
cerebellar folding will be compared to determine how the tissue mechanics of
folding are regulated differently during development. Comparison with rat
cerebellar folding will additionally reveal how the mechanics are adjusted to
regulate folding pattern changes between species. The project will advance the
developmental and regulatory understanding of brain folding, and make
fundamental contributions toward understanding neural development, improving
tissue engineering, and elucidating the mechanisms underlying evolutionary brain
changes. This project includes a research-based course for undergraduate
students who will directly participate in the acquisition and analysis of the
proposed experiments and develop their public-facing communication skills.
Through a partnership with the local school district, this project will also
support junior high science educators and their students by refreshing teacher
science experience through hands-on participation, and the collaborative
development of supplemental curricula for junior high science
classes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research into the morphogenesis of the brain has
been limited due to an almost exclusive focus on the cerebral cortex, as well as
the difficulty of acquiring developmental data. This proposal will meet these
challenges by developing the murine cerebellum as a tractable model of brain
folding. Previously, the cerebellum has been shown to undergo differential
expansion at the time of folding initiation. Additionally, the cerebellum is
under tension and has an outer fluid-like layer. These tissue properties are
predicted to regulate folding as well as the partitioning of functional brain
circuitry. Differential expansion, the predicted tunable driver of folding
amount, will be analyzed in two- and three-dimensions in both wild-type and
mutant strains of mice, as well as in rats. Cerebellar tension (predicted to
decrease during folding progression) will be investigated with mechanical assays
that examine folding amount as well as the fibrous axonal and dendritic
components potentially mediating tension. The fluidity of cerebellar tissue will
be analyzed using live ex vivo imaging and pharmacological perturbations. These
experiments will demonstrate how tissue-specific forces are created and
regulated during development to shape the folding brain and produce the
variation seen within species, and how tissue mechanics are evolutionarily
modulated to set up the folding variation seen between species. More broadly,
the results of this proposal will provide insight into how emergent mechanisms
arise during development to impact neural tissue form and
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Organization Program in the Neural Systems Cluster, and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.