* 2045122
* CAREER: Decoupling Structure and Composition with Zintl Polymorphs
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Alexandra Zevalkink, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2026
* USD 466,205.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One of the most fundamental
challenges in the design of new functional materials is decoupling the role
played by the crystal structure from that of chemical composition. Polymorphism
– the ability of a compound to form two or more crystal structure types –
provides an attractive solution to this dilemma by enabling experiments in which
the crystal structure is the only variable. However, examples of polymorphs are
still relatively rare. This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, employs a systematic,
theory-guided approach to expand the current library of polymorphs among a
family of semiconductors known as Zintl compounds. Zintl compounds are best
known for their excellent thermoelectric performance (i.e., their ability to
convert thermal energy into electrical energy). This research explores several
different routes to discovering new Zintl polymorphs, including the application
of high pressure to control bond length and the use of high-throughput synthesis
to rapidly explore a wide phase space. PI Zevalkink posits that characterization
of the elastic properties of newly discovered compounds helps to shed light on
the relationship between crystal structure and bond stiffness, which in turn may
pave the way for targeted design of improved thermoelectric materials. This
research also provides training and mentorship for graduate and undergraduate
students who are involved in the synthesis and characterization of new
materials. This project leverages modern digital resources at MSU including the
Planetarium, Science on a Sphere at the MSU Museum, and the 360º room at the
central library to provide intuitive platforms for student presentations, to
develop introductory crystallography curriculum, and to create an interactive
outreach exhibit on thermoelectric materials. By involving students in the
development of new curriculum and in K-12 and community outreach, the
educational plan provides opportunities for college students to develop their
teaching skills using new technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the proposed
research is to develop a systematic, theory-guided approach to polymorph
discovery, with an emphasis on Zintl intermetallics, a class of thermoelectric
materials known for their complex, multi-component structure types. The
synthetic approach employs a suite of experimental strategies to achieve
polymorphism, including i) the application of high pressure to increase
coordination environment, ii) alloying to encourage superstructure formation,
and iii) high-throughput synthesis to explore the phase boundaries between
competing structures. The secondary goal of the proposed work is to exploit the
newly discovered polymorphs to develop structure-property relationships in the
realm of electronic and thermal transport. This project, which is supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research, emphasizes characterization of elasticity. Elasticity plays a central
role in material properties mediated by or limited by phonons, including thermal
conductivity (phonon velocities, phonon-phonon coupling strength), electrical
conductivity (electron-phonon coupling) and ionic conductivity. The elastic
moduli of solids are extremely sensitive to crystal structure and the nature of
chemical bonding. By leveraging newly-discovered Zintl polymorphs and recently-
developed orbitally-decoupled elastic tensor calculations developed by
collaborators, this project aims to unravel the role that structural features
such as polyanion connectivity, cation coordination and order vs. disorder play
in determining elastic properties. The proposed research aims to bridge the gap
between theory and experiment to provide a new perspective on the origin of the
divergent functional behaviors found in different Zintl structure
types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.