* 2045834
* CAREER: Towards a Theory of Robust Learning &amp; Control for Safety-Critical Autonomous Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Nikolai Matni, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Future autonomous systems, such as self-driving cars and agile robots, will be
tasked with performing sophisticated and complex tasks under continuously
evolving and uncertain conditions, using information gleaned from complex, high-
dimensional, rich perceptual sensing modalities (e.g., cameras). Due to this
ubiquitous uncertainty and complexity, feedback control loops are and will
continue to be pervasive in autonomous systems. Classical control theory
techniques require intricate and detailed models of dynamical systems, and
assume that information is provided by simple, single output sensing devices
(e.g., accelerometers), assumptions that clearly fail in the scenarios
envisioned for future autonomous systems. Conversely, while techniques from
machine and reinforcement learning can accommodate both uncertain dynamic
conditions and rich perceptual sensing modalities, they tend to either focus
solely on performance and ignore safety/robustness concerns, or if they do
address safety, are only applicable to a limited class of systems. Despite
recent progress in principled integration of learning and control, there still
exists a wide gap between the class of systems that can be certified as safe,
robust, and high-performing, and real-world autonomous systems. This project
aims to develop a research plan that builds the foundations of a novel theory of
robust learning and robust control that simultaneously addresses the challenges
of safety and performance across a wide range of safety-critical real-world
autonomous systems. The research outcomes of this project will be integrated
into a synergistic education plan which includes developing both graduate and
undergraduate courses at the University of Pennsylvania aimed at enriching the
curriculum for teaching autonomy and control systems to engineers. Publicly
available education platforms and outreach programs within the University of
Pennsylvania will also be leveraged to build a pipeline for STEM majors entering
college, to increase representation among underrepresented minorities, to
advance public communication around autonomy and control systems, and to
disseminate research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal argues that a
novel cross-disciplinary perspective on robust control and robust machine
learning is required to unlock the true potential of learning-based control in
safety-critical complex, dynamic, and uncertain scenarios. Thrusts will develop
novel robust learning-based control strategies that explicitly characterize and
account for the effects of uncertainty in the learning and control pipeline. The
first thrust focuses on learning to control an unknown dynamical system using
contemporary high-capacity models, such as deep neural networks, through a
synergistic integration of robust learning and robust control techniques aimed
at mitigating the deleterious effects of distribution shift on closed-loop
performance. The second thrust focuses on extending the robustness and stability
guarantees of control theory to systems with complex, high-dimensional sensing
modalities such as cameras, by developing tools that allow for such complex
perceptual sensors to be abstractly viewed as “noisy-virtual sensors” that are
amenable to traditional robust control methods. Finally, the third thrust
initiates a study of the fundamental limits of the robustness and sample-
complexity of learning-enabled controllers, using perception-based control as a
case study. Thus, through an interdisciplinary mix of tools from control theory,
machine &amp; reinforcement learning, statistical learning theory, and robust
optimization, this project will develop novel broadly applicable joint robust
learning and robust control tools that come with strong guarantees of
performance, robustness, safety, and sample-
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.