* 2045032
* CAREER: Combining Electrode Engineering with Electrochemical Modeling to Enable Atmospheric CO2 Capture
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* David Kwabi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2026
* USD 416,720.00

The capture of carbon dioxide (CO2) directly from the atmosphere is emerging as
a potential approach to climate change mitigation. However, the rapid separation
and purification of CO2 from air can be very energy-intensive because of its low
concentration (400 ppm). The development of highly energy-efficient CO2 capture
technology will enhance the sustainability, affordability, and commercial appeal
of capturing CO2 and converting it into useful chemicals and products. Most
incumbent CO2 capture technologies run on heat, which typically requires burning
fossil fuels. Heat-based CO2 capture methods also face a fundamental conversion
efficiency limit in using heat for the work of separation. In contrast, CO2
capture using electrical rather than thermal energy is attractive because it
does not face this efficiency limit. Moreover, it could be run using renewable
energy conversion technology, which is increasingly available and inexpensive.
This project will develop a new approach to energy-efficient CO2 separation that
uses electro-active organic molecules attached to carbon electrodes. Polarizing
these electrodes in an aqueous solution causes reversible changes in the pH of
the solution, which enables CO2 separation. CO2 will be selectively absorbed in
the form of carbonate ions under alkaline conditions and then released as a pure
gas under acidic conditions. Experimental and modeling techniques will be used
to understand how both the chemical composition of the electrode and its
integration into an electrochemical flow cell influence the rate and energy
efficiency of the overall separation process. Further, this project will engage
Michigan residents in informal discussions and hands-on scientific
demonstrations highlighting the need for and benefits of CO2 capture and
utilization technology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With support from both the
Interfacial Engineering and Electrochemical Systems programs, this project aims
to advance a new way of using carbon electrodes, chemically functionalized with
organic moieties, for energy-efficient electrochemical CO2 separation. Upon
electric polarization, these electrodes can either absorb protons from or
release them into solution, changing its pH, and thereby providing a mechanism
for reactive CO2 capture and release. The extent and reversibility of pH changes
that these electrodes can achieve are key factors controlling the energy
efficiency of the separation process. These factors strongly depend on the
strength of the electric field that the organic moiety experiences at the
electrode/electrolyte interface. A combination of electroanalytical and in
operando high-resolution x-ray spectroscopic techniques will be used to develop
a mechanistic understanding of proton transfer as the chemistry of the moiety
and manner of its installation on carbon vary. This knowledge will be exploited
to engineer electrodes that will concentrate CO2 from the air when deployed in
an aqueous electrochemical flow cell. Flow cell measurements will be used to
validate a physics-based model for the separation process; the model will offer
an understanding of how thermodynamic and kinetic losses dictate the overall
energy input and efficiency for a given separation throughput. The education
plan generates public exposure to the benefits of CO2 mitigation technology by
offering face-to-face exchange between the community and researchers through
discovery-based learning, informal discussion, targeted hands-on demonstrations,
and a research exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.