* 2045977
* CAREER: Understanding the Interdependence of the Microenvironment and Nuclear Organization in Stem Cell Aging
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Carlos Aguilar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2026
* USD 404,355.00

The dramatic increase in the elderly population presents new challenges for our
society, and a critical effector of healthy lifespan is functioning skeletal
muscle. Despite the significant personal and societal costs of age-related
muscle atrophy and weakness, only modest progress has been made in understanding
this degenerative process. One critical factor is a reduction in number and
function of adult stem cells with aging. Hence, a mechanistic understanding of
how muscle stem cells become dysfunctional in old age is needed. The research
objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to
establish systems to study how stem cells receive and store information in their
nuclei (which contain genetic information and controls and regulates cell
activities) during aging. The outcome will be enhanced understanding of the stem
cell aging process in a unified and controllable manner. The primary educational
objective of this project is to develop a series of stories that focus on
introducing concepts of stem cells and genomics to under-represented minority
(URM) students in K-3. These stories aim to increase scientific literacy and
reduce the language barrier for URM students to engage with STEM principles and
genomics at an early age, and positively portray underrepresented Minorities
using Integrative Genomics, Human stem cells, and TechnologY
(MIGHTY).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator's long-term research goal is to
develop and optimize technologies and therapeutics that prevent or delay age-
related declines in skeletal muscle function that occur in the elderly
population. A known critical contributor of sarcopenia (age-induced skeletal
muscle wasting) is muscle stem cell dysfunction, which is regulated by the
packaging of the genome in the nucleus. Thus, in keeping with the long-term
goal, this NSF CAREER project aims to elucidate the sensitive relationship
between nuclear organization and the stem cell microenvironment in aging using
in situ genome editing, microfluidics, biomaterials and integrative genomic
assays. The Research Plan is organized under two objectives. The FIRST Objective
is to demonstrate that muscle stem cell dysfunction observed in aging is driven
by 3D genome misfolding. An in-situ genome editing (CRISPR-Cas9) system in
muscle stem cells will be used to manipulate heterochromatin and hierarchical
nuclear organization. High-resolution 3D imaging coupled with epigenomic mapping
will be used to contrast the effects of these perturbations with muscle stem
cells isolated from different stages of life (youth, middle-age and old age).
Successful completion of these experiments will demonstrate how intrinsic
alterations through genome folding engender stem cell dysfunction and remodeling
of the microenvironment as well as expose the relative susceptibility of each
part of the genome to deleterious changes that occur in aging. The SECOND
Objective is to establish that the aberrant extracellular matrix produced during
aging engenders chromatin defects that regulate muscle stem cell expansion.
Envelope muscle stem cells on myofibers with engineered biomaterials that
replicate aspects of an aging endomysium will be used to assess the effect on
chromatin architecture and stem cell expansion. Extracellular matrix density,
elastic moduli, composition and structure surrounding muscle stem cells will be
varied to determine how different types of modifications converge onto nuclear
organization and impact clonal dynamics. Successful completion of these
experiments will reveal how muscle stem cells transduce alterations in their
microenvironment into chromatin remodeling during aging and how these
adjustments drive variations in proliferative behavior. The ability to make
meaningful connections between these innovative engineering systems and
critically important biological process in aging will facilitate construction of
a molecular-scale, integrated understanding of the stem cell aging process that
can help advance therapeutics, and fulfill knowledge
gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.