* 2045809
* CAREER: Towards Intelligent Learning Environments that Support the Practice of Programming
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Eleanor O'Rourke, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 05/31/2026
* USD 597,870.00

Technology plays an important role in modern society, shaping how people
socialize, learn, and work. As a result, programming skills are in high demand
across all sectors of the economy. While enrollments in university computer
science (CS) courses are growing rapidly, many students struggle to learn
programming and retention in the major is low. Learning to program requires
mastering practices like problem-solving, systematic debugging, and adaptive
planning. However, rising enrollments in CS classes make it difficult for
instructors to monitor student practices and provide feedback. Given that a
student’s programming process cannot be determined from the final solution,
instructors rarely have visibility into students’ programming practices. This
project leverages a unique opportunity to observe and support the programming
process automatically and aims to advance scientific understanding of the
programming process by building intelligent programming environments that assess
and adapt to students’ motivations and practices. As a CAREER project, it
employs integrated education and outreach efforts, to develop the theoretical
and technical foundations needed to develop and disseminate intelligent learning
environments that effectively support the practice of
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project explores and addresses
core challenges in promoting effective programming practices in introductory CS
courses. The PI’s prior work reveals that students often use programming
practices as signals of whether they are performing well. For example, many
students believe that planning and looking up syntax are signs of low ability,
even though experts consider these practices a natural part of programming.
Furthermore, these self-assessments have been shown to impact self-efficacy, or
a student’s belief in their ability to succeed. These findings introduce two
core challenges. First, students’ inaccurate expectations about programming may
lead them to avoid effective expert practices. Second, students may develop low
self-efficacy when they engage in these practices, a factor that can impact
course performance and the decision to major in CS. This project proposes a
general approach and set of techniques to address these challenges by (1)
developing behavioral models that automatically detect programming practices to
enable a large-scale study of student motivations and practices, and (2)
designing and evaluating interventions that provide personalized guidance to
help students develop motivation and effective practices. The proposed education
plan will expand the impact of the research through (1) online workshops for CS
instructors that focus on student motivation and practices, (2) new courses for
graduate students who plan to become CS instructors, and (3) research
opportunities for students who are underrepresented in
CS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.