* 2045129
* CAREER: Understanding the Drivers and Consequences of Personal Adaptation Behavior to Environmental Extremes
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2027
* Gabrielle Wong-Parodi, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2027
* USD 514,239.00

Escalating environmental extremes – weather and climate events that are extreme
in magnitude, frequency, and/or impact on communities – have been observed in
recent years and are predicted to increase over this century. These extremes
(e.g., wildfires, heat waves, storms, etc.) contribute to an estimated 150,000
deaths each year, and the World Health Organization conservatively projects they
will result in 250,000 deaths annually between 2030 and 2050. Addressing these
escalating environmental extremes will require personal and household adaptation
to reduce human suffering (e.g., chronic respiratory ailments due to wildfire
smoke exposure) and death (e.g., as a result of acute smoke exposure). The
unprecedented scope of extremes makes it difficult for people to adapt,
particularly for low-income persons of color (POC) who have access to fewer
resources. Effective, low-cost, easily-accessible decision support tools such as
those deployed through smartphone applications could play an important role in
helping people understand the escalating nature of extremes and motivate them to
adopt behaviors that result in improved personal outcomes contributing to
greater societal resiliency. Yet, little is known about how exposure experienced
as events unfold – unbiased by time or outcome knowledge – affects psychosocial
factors, adaptation behaviors, and personal outcomes, and how decision support
effects decision making in this context. The objectives of this Faculty Early
Career Development (CAREER) integrated research and education plan are to (1)
advance fundamental understanding of how decision support tools affect
adaptation behavior given psychosocial antecedents in the face of real-time
exposure to escalating extremes over time, particularly among low-income POC
populations, (2) advance the conceptualization and testing of environmental
extremes adaptation behavior models, and (3) transform how we train and educate
the next generation of behavioral decision scientists to co-produce and deploy
decision support tools with relevant stakeholders – especially among those low-
income POC populations that may benefit the most–to more effectively motivate
adaptation behaviors that yield desired adaptation
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives will be achieved by
conducting a longitudinal randomized controlled trial to determine whether a
“positive affect” or “social comparison” wildfire smoke intervention, delivered
via a smartphone app-based decision support tool, can effectively enhance
adaptation behaviors (face mask wearing, sheltering, home or workplace
improvements) and desired adaptation outcomes (improved health, adoption of
other adaptation measures such as fire protection) in the context of actual
exposure (volatile organic compounds, NO2, particulate matter) among
approximately 720 San Francisco Bay Area residents from low-income POC
communities over time. My educational objective will be achieved by developing
and testing a Research-Education-Practice curriculum that trains behavioral
decision science scholars on co-producing and deploying effective decision
support tools, and attracts and retains underrepresented minorities, low-income,
and first-generation students and young investigators. The proposed plan will
advance adaptation behavior models for environmental extremes, contribute to
effective policy-making environmental extremes adaptation, and contribute to the
training of the next generation of behavioral decision science
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.