* 2045246
* CAREER: AlGaAs-on-Insulator Integrated Quantum Photonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2026
* Galan Moody, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 03/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Quantum computing promises to transform society in all aspects, from the rapid
discovery of new drugs and vaccines to improving supply chain efficiency, real-
time optimization of transportation and navigation, and the secure storage and
transmission of personal information. While there are several contenders for the
physical implementation of quantum computers, integrated photonics is
advantageous for several reasons, including room temperature operation, device
scalability, and long-distance connectivity using light. Despite the remarkable
advances in integrated quantum photonics within the last decade, existing
photonic materials and devices have drawbacks and disadvantages that inhibit
further improvement in scaling and efficiency. This proposal addresses these
challenges through the development of a new quantum photonic platform based on
AlGaAs-on-insulator, which has desirable properties for chip-scale quantum
information processing with light, including ultra-low loss components that can
be directly integrated with ultra-bright quantum light sources. Through
integration-driven discovery, research and development of AlGaAs-on-insulator
quantum photonic devices will advance our understanding of the fundamental
limits within which we can encode, process, store, and transmit quantum
information. Interwoven with our research goals is a full-spectrum approach to
developing new pathways for a diverse and vibrant quantum-ready workforce that
spans K-8 learners and their families to high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students. The PI and his team will establish several new outreach
activities and training programs, including: a remotely accessible quantum
teaching lab, which will be offered to students enrolled at UCSB and Santa
Barbara City College (SBCC); a summer research internship for the cohort of
students at SBCC; a short-course Saturday series to bring regional high-school
students from under-represented communities on campus for an interactive quantum
learning experience with media arts and technology; and a new outreach program
for K-8 students and their families to learn about quantum science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This proposal addresses
the development of AlGaAs-on-insulator integrated quantum photonic devices,
which has not yet been explored for quantum information science and
applications, yet it has desirable properties for chip-scale quantum computing
including ultra-low waveguide loss, large second- and third-order optical
nonlinearities, high index contrast and tight modal confinement, negligible two-
photon absorption, ultra-bright entangled-pair sources, and direct integration
of active components. To establish AlGaAs-on-insulator into an ultra-efficient,
high-speed quantum photonic platform for measurement-based quantum computing and
quantum communications, the PI and his team will develop the essential
components for programmable quantum photonic circuits, including low-loss and
high-performance entangled- and squeezed-light sources, optical filters,
interferometers, modulators, pulse shapers, chip-to-fiber couplers, and
integrated single-photon detectors. This plan capitalizes on the PI’s expertise
in integrated photonics and quantum optics, advanced quantum photonic testing
capabilities in his lab, and the state-of-the-art clean room and nanofabrication
facilities at UCSB. The PI and his team will develop fault-tolerant schemes and
architectures for discrete- and continuous-variable quantum information
processing, which may enable orders-of-magnitude improvement in processing speed
and power efficiency compared to existing approaches. AlGaAs-on-insulator
quantum devices will address glaring technology gaps with existing photonic
platforms, filling a long-sought need for scalable, reconfigurable, and energy-
efficient quantum technologies in areas of critical need. The most intriguing
features of this platform—room-temperature operation, all-on-chip integration
pathways, intrinsic stability and scalability, and the large optical
nonlinearities and low loss at telecommunication wavelengths—will also lead to
innovative technologies for high-speed interconnects, quantum photonic
transceivers, and repeaters that are required to meet the increasing global
demands for high-bandwidth fiber and satellite communication networks. Such
technological advances will expand our nation’s global competitiveness in the
rapidly evolving and growing quantum and classical information
landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.