* 2045191
* Frustrated Metamaterials as Shape-Morphing Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Paolo Celli, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 12/31/2024
* USD 302,641.00

This grant will support research on the mechanics of frustrated mechanical
metamaterials and will explore their applicability as large-scale structures.
Metamaterials are assemblies of simple structural elements like beams and plates
that, in concert, yield extreme shape transformations and other unconventional
responses. Periodic metamaterials feature low-energy modes of deformation called
mechanisms. In the presence of non-periodicity, mechanisms are impeded by
incompatibilities between the deformations of neighboring units. These are
usually seen as a nuisance; in this project, they are instead embraced to
achieve functionality. Indeed, in two-dimensional systems, the geometric
“frustration” stemming from incompatibilities results in out-of-plane buckling,
and the initially flat system morphs (literally, pops-up) into a three-
dimensional shell-like object. This research will create knowledge on the origin
and manifestation of frustration in two-dimensional metamaterials and will
explore their applicability as large-scale deployable structures with the
following unique attributes: (i) they pop-up due to tensile (rather than
compressive) forces; (ii) they can be prestressed without ground anchoring;
(iii) they can be accurately deployed since the desired shape is encoded within
the flat precursor. The ideas within this project have the potential to
revolutionize how engineers think about designing deployable systems and
erecting lightweight freeform structures like gridshells, large domes, and pop-
up shelters. The educational activities, centered around the theme of shape
morphing and based on both curriculum development and undergraduate student
empowerment, will stimulate structural engineering students to embrace
creativity and to revisit their preconceived idea of structures as non-changing,
static entities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is
to provide a systematic understanding of geometric frustration in various non-
periodic metamaterial systems, and to exploit this knowledge to realize
innovative shape-morphing structures. The first step will be to elucidate the
in-plane prerequisites to frustration via theoretical, experimental, and
numerical means. Attention will be devoted to the interplay between the location
and magnitude of the actuation, the metamaterial’s architecture, and the
location of the compressive regions prone to buckling. Reduced-order numerical
models will be leveraged to predict out-of-plane shape transitions. Steps will
also be taken to formulate a mechanistic inverse design, i.e., to find the in-
plane architecture and the location and extent of the actuating forces necessary
to obtain a target three-dimensional shape. Finally, the principles of
frustration, initially studied via tabletop-scale prototypes, will be translated
to large scales. The deployability and load bearing capacity of metamaterial-
inspired frustrated structures will be investigated via experiments and
numerical simulations. A new course on shape-shifting is planned. Both
undergraduate and graduate students will be trained as the new generation of
"structures thinkers."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.