* 2045336
* CAREER: Building Hierarchical Polymers with Light to Unify Softness, Resilience, and Conductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Zachariah Page, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2026
* USD 372,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers have become ubiquitous in
our daily lives owing to their inherent low cost and tunable properties. Their
versatility is a direct result of their chemical composition and the way in
which the molecules are connected. However, current control over both
composition and structure pales in comparison to that found in natural systems,
which have an evolved hierarchical architecture tuned for specific functions. As
such, synthetic materials often interface poorly with biological ones,
precluding, for example, the ability to study and treat disease. This program
targets the preparation of soft and resilient (i.e., strong and stretchy)
polymers that mimic natural tissue (e.g., skin, heart, and lung), while
additionally imparting electrical conductivity to facilitate communication
between modern electronic devices and biological systems. Improving the
communication between devices and biology will allow scientists and doctors to
better study and control natural functions in an emergent area of research:
bioelectronics. The proposed materials build off a foundation of industrially
relevant polymers by introducing new molecular architectures to increase
softness for better interfacing with natural systems without compromising
strength. Moreover, low-energy visible light will be leveraged to define when
and where chemical reactions take place, enabling the fabrication of
hierarchical structures in a process that is amenable to future implementation
in 3D printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, to solve these challenging
interdisciplinary scientific problems requires a well-prepared diverse
scientific workforce, and diversification in STEM requires education and
engagement at an early stage of professional development. Therefore, as part of
this project a first-year undergraduate polymer research course will be
developed at the University of Texas at Austin, along with a hands-on polymer
activity for students at local middle/high schools in East Austin with large
populations of underrepresented groups. Overall, the proposed research serves
the national interest by promoting the progress of science through fundamental
discovery, educating the next generation STEM workforce, and facilitating the
development of advanced materials that will improve health and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complementary strategies to generating
hierarchical conductive polymers with tissue-like softness and resilience
(strength + elasticity) are described. While synthetic polymers have become
ubiquitous in our daily lives, control over their composition, structure, and
morphology pales in comparison to that found in nature, limiting functionality
and possible end-use applications. Softness and resilience are two mechanical
parameters expressed by a number of biological materials (e.g., skin, heart, and
lung tissue) to prevent rupture, yet harnessing these together synthetically
remains elusive. Moreover, communication through modern technology relies on
electronic transport, while biological systems operate via the movement of ions.
These mechanical and communication discrepancies have hampered the study and
control of biological processes via bioelectronics for medicine. To close the
technology-biology gap, a bottom-up approach using rapid spatiotemporally
controlled light-based polymerization chemistry to access materials with complex
architectures and tailorable mechanical and transport properties are proposed.
The materials sit in one of two categories: 1) ABA triblock copolymers and 2)
interpenetrating polymer networks (IPNs). Multiple levels of hierarchical
structure across length scales within these materials will provide the missing
links to unify softness, resilience, and conductivity, unveiling critical, yet
fundamental, structure-property relationships to inform further materials
optimization. Given the generality of block copolymers and IPNs, and emerging
interest in electronic/ionic transduction for bioelectronics and light-based
chemistry for 3D printing, the scientific discoveries from the proposed research
will lay a foundation from which a myriad of next-generation applications will
emerge (e.g., bioelectronics and soft
robotics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.