* 2045707
* I-Corps:  A customizable handheld bioprinter for the in situ deposition of self-healing and polymer-based hydrogels
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Amir Miri, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a surgical tool for delivery of soft implants and biomaterials
into wound sites and desired organs. Current approaches are limited by the
design of the biomaterial that results in inadequate stiffness and low adhesion
to host tissue and injections from a needle that are inadequate for large voids,
such as surgically-resected tumor regions. The proposed technology allows easy,
rapid and more controlled delivery of multi-component biomaterials for tissue
reconstruction surgery. It may minimize operative risks involved during complex
procedures, reduce susceptibility to infection, and decrease the duration of
anesthesia exposure. It may be translated into other clinical applications by
providing a rapid delivery of functional implants for all reconstruction
surgeries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will advance translation
of a customizable handheld bioprinter, which allows for the in situ deposition
of self-healing and polymer-based hydrogels to fabricate stable and functional
tissue implants. Such hydrogels are based on guest–host physical interactions of
a macrocyclic host and a complementary guest molecule. In addition, the proposed
technology uses UV crosslinking of methacrylate groups in the hydrogel for long-
term stability of the implant. The device is an additive manufacturing tool
based on a custom-made, endoscopic-sized, handheld bioprinter. This device
provides simultaneous extrusion of biomaterials into multi-layered concentric
layers of blunt needles where the needle lengths are selected to control
movement and dispensing over the structure bioprinted. Advantages of this
technology include a modular mixing chamber for blending of multi-component
biomaterials, a flexible, ergonomic handle that may be adopted to surgical
robots/tools, a significant level of control over deposition of multi-component
biomaterials over tissue sites, and a high-aspect ratio for hard-to-reach
organs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.