* 2045839
* CAREER: Development of New Plasmonic Electrochemical Microscopy Centered Techniques for Advancing Single Entity Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Yixian Wang, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 03/31/2026
* USD 474,995.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Dr. Yixian Wang and her group at California State University, Los
Angeles are developing new techniques to study the chemistry of single
nanoparticles, cells, cellular components, and molecules. The ability to
investigate the chemistry of these single entities is significant because many
complex systems consist of assemblies of individual parts that are not all
alike. Understanding the function or behavior of the entire system often
requires knowing how the individual components work. For example, it is
important to know how a single leaf works in order to understand how a tree
grows. Dr. Wangâ€™s new techniques address key challenges faced by researchers
studying the chemistry of nanoscopic particles using a specialized kind of
microscopy. The new techniques overcome problems caused by contamination and
other issues related to sample preparation, difficulty measuring especially
small entities, and poor sensitivity in measuring some chemical reactions. In
addition to cutting-edge research, the integrated educational activities of this
work help to improve the quality and accessibility of STEM learning through the
development of a new animation-based teaching module for undergraduate courses,
as well as the integration of independent research projects into the
undergraduate curriculum, and by engaging students from the local community
through one-on-one research mentoring and virtual learning
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single entity analysis is essential for
understanding the fundamental dynamics of real-world systems that are often
heterogeneous. Dr. Yixian Wang and her group are developing three new plasmonic
electrochemical microscopy (PEM)-centered techniques to improve the feasibility,
resolution, and sensitivity of PEM for single entity analysis and to advance
scientific progress in this field. Specifically, the research team is developing
(1) non-contact PEM for background-free single nanoparticle measurements and
contamination-free single vesicle sensing, (2) scanning probe coupled PEM to
allow both high temporal and spatial resolution sub-nanoparticle analysis, and
(3) dye-sensitized PEM to improve sensitivity in the chemical identification of
single vesicle contents. The integrated educational activities of the project
are designed to close learning gaps in undergraduate electrochemistry education,
broaden student participation in STEM research, eliminate achievement gaps among
diverse groups of students, and engage students from the local community in
STEM-related activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.