* 2045490
* CAREER: Exploring Luminescence in Low-Dimensional Halides
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* Bayram Saparov, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 04/30/2026
* USD 448,249.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Luminescent materials continue to
play a major role in modern society owing to their applications in the state-of-
the-art lamps, displays (e.g., TVs, monitors) and medical scanners, and to their
potential in the fields of optical devices and biomedicine. The importance of
luminescent materials has been recognized globally, designated by the United
Nations, 2015 was celebrated as the International Year of Light and Light-based
Technologies. To further illustrate this, it is estimated that energy-efficient
solid-state lighting (e.g., LEDs) could reduce lighting energy use by 75% in
2035. In this CAREER award, jointly supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Prof. Bayram Saparov and his
group aim to develop a new type of affordable, easy-to-prepare, earth-abundant
and robust luminescent materials based on inexpensive metal halides. The project
has a potential transformative impact on understanding of the links between the
light emission properties and atomic structures of metal halides. This, in turn,
will allow us to control and manipulate the materials chemistry of halides to
prepare custom design light-emitting materials with full range color-tunability.
In addition to brand new avenues for energy-saving solid-state lighting
technologies, this project will also provide an excellent platform for promoting
materials chemistry research and developing a diverse, competitive Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) workforce in Oklahoma through
our Research Experience for High School Students (REHSS) program. The REHSS
program will provide a real two-month research experience for Oklahoma high
school students; participants include remote rural schools that are primarily
serving minority communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All-inorganic copper halides have recently been
reported as excellent candidates for optical applications owing to their low
cost, earth-abundant chemical compositions, solution processability and record
high luminescence efficiencies. These copper halides have unique band structures
in which copper(I) orbitals dominate the states around the bandgap, which result
in poor tunability of their photoluminescence properties. With this CAREER
award, jointly supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in
the Division of Materials Research and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Prof. Bayram Saparov and his group will develop
new strategies to control the structures and light emission properties of copper
and silver halides through a fundamental understanding of chemical composition-
structure-property relationships in the proposed systems. Low-dimensional
crystal structures of the proposed halides exhibit narrow discrete energy bands,
strong charge localization and high exciton binding energies, characteristics
and should enable their performance as highly efficient light emitters. These
efforts will provide a core building block of a broader, synergistic research
and education program aimed at promoting materials chemistry research and
developing a diverse, competitive STEM workforce in
Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.