* 2045436
* CAREER: Privacy-Aware Collaborative Sensing and Control for Cloud-Enabled Automotive Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Zhaojian Li, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 04/30/2026
* USD 533,780.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will support
research that will contribute novel methodologies related to cloud-enabled
automotive vehicles, promoting both the progress of science and advancing
transportation safety and efficiency. With the advent of 5G technology, cloud
computing is expected to revolutionize automotive applications by providing “big
data” and real-time, high-fidelity computing capabilities. Despite its promise,
the use of cloud computing in automotive vehicle control and sensing still has
limited success due to concerns in communication privacy and real-time
constraints inherent to many automotive systems. This award supports fundamental
research that addresses the major challenges in cloud-based control,
collaborative sensing, decentralized optimization, and privacy preservation. The
new designs and methodologies will offer a transformative framework in cloud-
facilitated collaborative sensing and control that seamlessly integrate cloud
and vehicle resources to enable smarter, safer, and greener next-generation
automotive systems. This research is synergistic with key societal goals related
to developing efficient, secure, and safe transportation systems. Therefore,
results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy and life quality. This
research involves several disciplines including control theory, machine
learning, vehicle dynamics, and privacy preservation. The multi-disciplinary
approach also facilitates the participation of underrepresented groups in
research and positively impacts engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
cloud-facilitated collaborative sensing and control is expected to greatly
enhance vehicle control performance, and achieve improved safety, energy
efficiency, and ride comfort. In pursuit of this goal, four closely integrated
research objectives are planned: 1) Develop a novel privacy-preserving,
learning-based collaborative sensing framework to enable the exploitation of
multiple heterogeneous vehicles to iteratively improve the estimation of
important road information (e.g., black ice and pothole) while preserving
privacy; 2) Formalize and synthesize privacy-aware cloud-facilitated control to
seamlessly integrate cloud and onboard controls for enhanced performance without
leaking vehicle privacy; 3) Develop a computationally-efficient, privacy-
preserving decentralized control framework by explicitly exploiting the sparse
communication/constraint topologies in connected vehicles, and 4) Evaluate and
validate the frameworks through extensive simulations and experiments.
Collectively, advances from these research endeavors are expected to make cloud-
based vehicle controls practically viable, and it will create new accuracy-
friendly and computationally-efficient privacy mechanisms for time-sensitive
dynamical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.