* 2045340
* CAREER: Science and Education for Connecting Urban Irrigation Efficiency to Streamflow in Semi-Arid Cities
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Aditi Bhaskar, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 03/31/2023
* USD 286,307.00

Semi-arid U.S. cities are growing rapidly in regions where water is scarce. A
major challenge for environmental sustainability is to help semi-arid
communities thrive by ensuring that cities, agriculture, and the environment are
jointly water-secure. One successfully demonstrated option to meet growing water
demands with the same water supply is reducing urban water use through
efficiency. Urban lawn irrigation is now the primary target for reducing urban
water use, as it dominates annual water use in many semi-arid cities. Cutting
urban water use through irrigation efficiency could play a critical role in
water-scarce river basins, but is presently limited by the potential unintended
consequences of streamflow reduction from less runoff and groundwater flowing
into streams. If we transform semi-arid cities to use less water outdoors, will
urban streams run dry? Will major rivers flowing through semi-arid cities become
trickles, with all the associated damage to ecology, recreation, and downstream
water availability? The lack of fundamental scientific knowledge on how urban
irrigation affects streamflow has limited the implementation of water-efficient
urban irrigation systems in some parts of the semi-arid U.S. The purpose of this
work is to predict the effects of reduced urban irrigation on streamflow,
enhance the capacity of urban areas to manage scarce water resources, and
ultimately contribute to the goal of thriving, sustainable semi-arid
communities. The project will establish a mentoring program for underrepresented
minority students interested in water careers and engage these students in
hands-on urban water research. This project is co-funded by the Hydrologic
Sciences Program and the Environmental Sustainability
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reducing urban irrigation could play a critical
role in achieving water security and sustainability in river basins where water
is scarce. Urban irrigation may be reduced through smart, efficient irrigation
systems or lawn conversion to xeriscaping and impervious surfaces. This work
will quantify the present contribution of lawn irrigation to streamflow in
small, semi-arid urban watersheds. This will be achieved in the Denver,
Colorado, U.S. area by developing and applying a novel method combining water
isotopes as a tracer of tap water with water provider reports, and monitoring in
experimental watersheds. Then, using irrigation plots and integrated subsurface-
surface-land surface hydrologic modeling, this research will determine the
effects of reduced urban irrigation on semi-arid groundwater recharge and
surface runoff. Lastly, this work will evaluate the hydrologic significance of
present and reduced urban irrigation on streamflow in the semi-arid urban
corridor of a large river basin. This research will integrate tightly with an
education plan to diversify the urban water workforce in
Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.