* 2045681
* CAREER: New Classical and Quantum Algorithms for Quantum Dynamics of Molecular Collisions and Chemical Reactions at Ultralow Temperatures
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Timur Tscherbul, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2026
* USD 298,116.00

While the possibility of controlling chemical reactions with external
electromagnetic fields has fascinated scientists for decades, the experimental
demonstration of field-controlled chemical reactivity had to wait for the
development of ingenious techniques for cooling and trapping molecular gases at
ultralow temperatures. It is important to study how ultracold chemical reactions
occur in the presence of external electromagnetic fields because (1) such
studies could enable scientists to steer the outcome of chemical
transformations, and (2) the fundamental knowledge they provide could be used to
refine and perfect theoretical models of how chemical reactions occur in complex
molecular systems, potentially providing far-reaching benefits to society by
enabling the design of novel molecules and materials for catalysis,
photovoltaics, and energy storage and conversion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to address two major limitations in the field of ultracold reaction
dynamics concerning (1) the lack of a rigorous theoretical approach to account
for the effects of external fields and hyperfine interactions on chemical
reactivity at ultralow temperatures, and (2) the curse of dimensionality problem
due to the exponential increase of computational complexity with the size of the
reaction complex. To this end, the PI will develop a computationally efficient
quantum reactive scattering methodology, which will fully incorporate the
effects of external electromagnetic fields and hyperfine interactions. The
methodology will be applied to elucidate the mechanisms for controlling the
ultracold reaction of NaLi molecules with sodium atoms by an external magnetic
field. To address the curse of dimensionality problem, the PI will develop a
variational quantum scattering algorithm for solving molecular quantum
scattering problems on near-term noisy intermediate-scale (NISQ) quantum
computers. The education plan involves the development of a new Python-based
quantum theory course with a low barrier for entry for students with a limited
physics background, and the establishment of a partnership with the quantum
computing industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.