* 2045539
* CAREER: WolfPack: An Application-Network Co-Design Framework for Performance-Guaranteed Real-time Applications at the Network Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Ruozhou Yu, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2026
* USD 317,589.00

Distributed real-time applications constitute the core of many life-changing
technologies. To satisfy the real-time requirement of such applications, edge
computing provides a low-latency and high-throughput computing environment near
the end devices and users. However, the complex structures of modern
applications significantly hinder providing end-to-end real-time guarantee to
these applications, especially in face of the also complex structures and
dynamic nature of various edge computing networks. This project investigates the
joint optimization and configuration of edge applications and the edge network,
for providing end-to-end performance guarantee to modern distributed real-time
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this CAREER project aims to co-
design the provisioning of both computing and network resources in edge
computing, to provide end-to-end performance guarantee for a wide range of
applications and edge network scenarios under a general optimization framework
named the WolfPack. The project will focus on three complementary research
thrusts: (i) a general packing-based optimization framework for applications and
edge networks with arbitrary structures, (ii) a set of modeling and algorithmic
tools for handling risks and providing robustness in face of application and
network dynamics, and (iii) economic mechanisms for incentivized edge resource
provisioning with performance guarantees. Collectively, the outcomes of this
research will contribute to not only the core knowledge of edge resource
management and performance guarantee, but also the literature of
packing/covering optimization, truthful mechanism design, and optimization-based
system design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of this project will
empower life-changing real-time applications that benefit citizens and society,
including but not limited to smart city, connected industry, autonomous driving.
The research outcomes will be broadly disseminated through journal/conference
publications, tutorial papers, public talks, research seminars, and course
teaching. Research is closely integrated with education to advance the
curriculum of undergraduate and graduate education with renewed materials and
practical teaching tools, promote active STEM research by students in K-12
through postgraduate levels, and increase awareness and participation in
computing from female and underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All
research artifacts and outcomes of this project will be publicly available on
the project website (https://people.engr.ncsu.edu/ryu5/project_wolfpack.php).
The website will be actively maintained for at least the entire period of this
project (five years), and also routinely updated after the end of this project
to include further research advances following from this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.