* 2045643
* CAREER: Empirically evaluating the genomic consequences of assisted migration in heterogeneous environments
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Nicholas Kooyers, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2026
* USD 997,269.00

Responding to anthropogenic climate change is both a sociological and a
scientific issue. Current studies suggest that many species are now lagging
behind changing climatic conditions and are doing poorly relative to past
conditions. Determining which species are impacted, how fast species are
declining, and evaluating potential solutions to counter declines are key goals.
One potential solution is assisted migration, where individuals from a
geographically-distant population that are better adapted to the changing
conditions are intentionally introduced into a focal population. Assisted
migration is controversial because there are often unknown consequences when
introducing new variation into a population, and because it has largely been
untested via controlled experiments. This award experimentally addresses the
consequences of assisted migration in a widespread plant that is threatened in a
small portion of its distribution. Seeds and seedlings from populations already
adapted to contemporary conditions will be introduced into a subset of focal
populations. Comparisons of traits, genomes, and population success between
these experimental populations and nearby control populations will provide the
best empirical data collected to date on the efficiency and potential utility of
assisted migration. This award also addresses the need for greater public
understanding of climate change across the U.S. by providing secondary education
teachers with the skills, lesson plans, and information necessary to address
this issue in the classroom. This award funds the creation of a dynamic game-
like climate change outreach module, a graduate student-led science outreach
team to go into secondary education classrooms, and a seminar course for
aspiring STEM teachers to instruct teachers how to address contentious issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The assisted migration experiment awarded here evaluates
three main questions: how much introgression occurs across the genome following
the introduction and how long does it persist? Does introgression shift trait
distributions or enable transgressive phenotypes to emerge? Do introductions
improve fitness of the native populations in normal or extreme years? This
project addresses these questions by leveraging the genomic resources of a model
organism, Mimulus guttatus. Preliminary data indicate that elevation-matched
California populations have higher fitness than native Oregon Cascades
populations, and that Oregon Cascades populations are in danger of extirpation
in extreme climatic years. This project introduces California populations into a
subset of twelve populations that have been followed for the last three years.
The amount and timing of introgression following introduction will be surveyed
by using low coverage whole genome sequencing to track genetic variants specific
to the introduced populations over three years post-introduction. A multi-year
common garden experiment with seeds collected each year during the experiment
will be used to evaluate how phenotypes and fitness changes following assisted
migration. While this experiment provides important value to the conservation
community, it also will provide novel insights into how evolutionary forces
interact within a natural population to remove and maintain polymorphism on
rapid ecological timescales. This award funds training for five undergraduate
researchers and a graduate student recruited primarily through diversity
initiatives as well as public dissemination via established outreach events
targeting multiple age groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.