* 2045538
* CAREER: Reduced-scale Additively Manufactured Models for Quantifying the Behavior of Large Structural Steel Castings
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Ravi Yellavajjala, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2023
* USD 365,585.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support research to
extend the applicability of reduced-scale physical models to quantify the
failure behavior of full-scale structural steel castings under seismic loads.
The modular construction of steel structures using castings reduces the
structural weight, construction time, and erection costs. Steel castings also
offer exceptional architectural freedom and high seismic and blast resistance.
However, they are often large and geometrically complex, hence traditional
mechanical testing is not commonly feasible, which prevents structural engineers
from exploring their full potential. The outcome of this project will enable
engineers to perform multiple tests on scaled-models using testing laboratories
with limited capabilities instead of fewer tests on full-scale prototypes in
sprawling facilities with expensive equipment, providing a better understanding
of system-level behavior at a relatively meager cost. The research will also
facilitate the development of design guidelines for structural steel castings,
increase their market share, create new jobs in the US manufacturing sector, and
reduce the carbon footprint. As part of the grant, an extensive set of education
and outreach activities will also be pursed to increase the participation of
Native Americans in STEM disciplines and improve their retention and graduation
rates, including undergraduate internships, multi-day workshops, and
competitions and debates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Satisfying the geometrical and
material strength similitude requirements and deriving scaling relationships are
the two challenges that accurate reduced-scale physical models are required to
overcome. This research aims to quantify the fundamental scaling relationships
between strength, ultra-low cycle fatigue fracture (ULCF) initiation strain, and
life of additively manufactured, reduced-scale physical models and full-scale
steel castings subject to seismic loads. The approach is centered on the
additive manufacturing of reduced-scale models with the help of data-driven
process and build parameters and post-heat treatments to satisfy geometric and
material strength similitudes. It also comprises development of a deep neural
network framework to be trained with large quantities of fracture data,
numerically generated from realistic microstructures, to learn the damage
scaling relationship that will relate the fatigue fracture behavior of additive
manufactured models to full-scale steel castings. The experimental validation
plan includes characterization of the microscopic fatigue damage using x-ray
tomography and structural testing of two full-scale components. Overall, the
similitude theory based on mechanics, additively manufactured physical models,
and machine-learned scaling relationships will advance the use of reduced-scale
physical modeling beyond large deformations into the realm of fatigue
fracture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.