* 2045272
* CAREER: Understanding and Supporting Programmer Cognition
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Christopher Parnin, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 03/31/2023
* USD 52,334.00

Cognition is central to any programming task—from understanding and reading
source code, selecting programming abstractions and algorithms, and problem-
solving to debugging implementations. In the software industry, programmers are
faced with numerous challenges that stress the limits of human cognition,
leading to errors, lost productivity, and ultimately failed projects. For
example, programmers face an exploding array of choices in which languages,
platforms, and frameworks they choose to learn and build expertise—all of which
may become obsolete or irrelevant when switching to a new project or team. This
project’s goal is to understand programmer cognition through brain-imaging
techniques and low-cost, widely available, high-fidelity biometric sensors. The
anticipated result is the design of tools that more effectively support
programmers in working with complex code and acquiring expertise. Beyond the
general benefit of better-educated programmers, techniques for teaching computer
programming are important in particular because programming is a crucial skill
for a digitally literate society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past research on
programmer cognition has relied on psychological and observational experiments
using indirect techniques, such as comparing task performance or having
programmers articulate their thoughts in think-aloud protocols. To overcome
these limitations, the project will first establish a methodology for conducting
a series of brain-imaging studies to obtain brain-activation contrasts between
an experimental comprehension task and a control task. To study code complexity,
the project will use a parameterized analysis of code, where code is
systematically selected to contrast different complexity metrics. The project
will develop techniques for automatically reducing code complexity based on
discovered principles. To study programmer expertise, the project will use
brain-imaging techniques to identify brain regions associated with expertise,
identify any cortical differences, and examine any differences in neural
efficiency. Furthermore, the learning trajectories of programmers acquiring a
new skill will be used to understand the time course of knowledge acquisition.
From these studies, one is able to explain the neural mechanics of cognition in
programming and derive more effective mental representations, strategies, and
training techniques for rapid training of expertise. More generally,
understanding and supporting programmer cognition has broader impacts on
reducing frustration and dropout in newcomers and identifying unique support
needed for neuro-diverse populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.