* 2045016
* CAREER: Revealing the Connection between Pulsating Aurora and the Dynamics of the Inner Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Allison Jaynes, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 01/31/2026
* USD 444,386.00

Pulsating aurora occur in large patches across the sky, turning their lit-up
patterns on and off. This distinct type of aurora is produced through wave-
particle scattering in the equatorial magnetosphere. There are many questions
remaining about how this process occurs and how it is related to substorm
activity, which the project will address. The project will support research for
an early career female PI and outreach programs targeted at retaining women and
under-represented minorities in STEM fields, primarily through a Space Physics
&amp; Astronomy Research Kamp (SPARK) for local high school students and through
a peer mentorship and recruitment program called Prairie States Partnership in
Physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to address three open questions
related to pulsating aurorae: (1) What is the basic process that causes the
pulsations?; (2) How does the pulsating aurora process tie into substorm
activity and radiation belt/ring current dynamics?; and (3) What is the spatial
extent of pulsating aurora events and what conditions affect that extent? These
questions will be addressed through a creative use of machine learning, ground-
based imager observations, and spacecraft data during conjunction times. The
successful closure of these questions will represent a leap forward in our
understanding of pulsating aurora and magnetosphere-ionosphere
coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.