* 2045783
* CAREER: Towards a Principled Framework for Resilient, Data Efficient and Scalable Reinforcement Learning for Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Dileep Kalathil, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

The success of the traditional control system design depends crucially on the
availability of tractable system models with known parameters, well-understood
sources of uncertainty and clearly specified objectives. These assumptions are
no longer true in the emerging paradigm of intelligent and autonomous large-
scale engineering systems, such as next generation electricity systems. A data-
driven machine learning approach that takes advantage of large amounts of data
coming from such systems can provide a promising path forward. However, unlike
the remarkable successes of machine learning in classiﬁcation problems such as
image recognition, reinforcement learning (RL) that addresses the problem of
“learning to control” has seen achievements limited to more structured or
simulated environments, and its successes in real-world engineering systems are
not as prominent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; There are three critical issues that
significantly impede the success of RL in real-world engineering systems: lack
of resiliency, data efficiency, and scalability. This CAREER proposal develops a
principled approach for the RL-based design of control algorithms for large-
scale real-world engineering systems, by overcoming the fundamental challenges
of resiliency, data efficiency, and scalability. The main application domain of
interest is electricity systems, which guides the problem formulation and
solution approaches, and lends credence to the algorithms using real-world
examples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has an innovative education plan
that includes the ‘Aggie DeepRacer Project’ that follows an ‘experiential
learning’ approach for integrating the research in RL into the educational
curriculum. Mentoring students from underrepresented minorities through
collaboration with the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
program, and hosting teachers from low socioeconomic status schools with a high
percentage of minority students strengthens the project. Project outcomes
include development of activity-based learning modules for high school students
and presenting them at the Aggie STEM summer camp and Physics and Engineering
Festival. By developing a data-driven and learning-based approach for efficient
control of power systems, this project also contributes to reducing the cost of
fuel and operations, and hence signiﬁcantly increasing the reliability of the
overall energy system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.