* 2045541
* CAREER: Formal Verification of Performance Properties for Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Manos Kapritsos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 02/28/2026
* USD 329,469.00

n our daily lives we increasingly depend on computers: from our emails and our
work meetings, to social media and interacting with our friends and family. The
computer systems that provide us these services are not only vast in size, but
also complex and subtle. A single component being slower than expected can drive
the entire system into unpredictable and catastrophic behaviors that result into
the entire system being unavailable for long periods of time, disrupting all
services—human and automated—that depend on it. For the longest time, the
research community has been trying to understand the performance of these
complex systems in a best-effort way: deploying the system and observing its
behavior in a number of test scenarios. The complexity of these systems,
however, makes it impossible to thoroughly test everything that can go wrong.
Inevitably some corner case emerges which drives our deployed system to its
knees and we discover—too late—that our testing was not thorough enough. This
proposal puts forward a rigorous way of reasoning about the performance of our
systems: leveraging the recent advances in formal reasoning to allow programmers
to systematically develop rigorous guarantees about the duration and speed of
the system’s executions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to solidify the
foundation on which our future systems will be built. It uses formal reasoning
to provide guarantees—not expectations—about how our systems will behave in
practice. For the end users this means that the computer services they use every
day will be more cost-effective and more reliable. Achieving these benefits,
however, requires more than research. The proposal puts forth an educational
plan for bringing verification closer to practicality by introducing it to
current and future engineers by means of a new class on verification, an ongoing
verification summer school, and a book on how to apply formal verification to
real-world systems. Together, the research and educational objectives of this
proposal aim to make formal reasoning an integral part of computing. If the
everyday user is to put their trust in our computer systems, those systems need
to be more than just tested; they must be provably
correct.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.