* 2045611
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing East Antarctica’s Past Response to Climate using Subglacial Precipitates
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Emma Rasbury, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 84,825.00

Over the past century, climate science has constructed an extensive record of
Earth’s ice age cycles through the chemical and isotopic characterization of
various geologic archives such as polar ice cores, deep-ocean sediments, and
cave speleothems. These climatic archives provide an insightful picture of ice
age cycles and of the related large global sea level fluctuations triggered by
these significant climate rhythms. However, such records still provide limited
insight as to how or which of Earth’s ice sheets contributed to higher sea
levels during past warm climate periods. This is of particular importance for
our modern world: the Antarctic ice sheet is currently the world’s largest
freshwater reservoir, which, if completely melted, would raise the global sea
level by over 60 meters (200 feet). Yet, geologic records of Antarctic ice sheet
sensitivity to warm climates are particularly limited and difficult to obtain,
because the direct records of ice sheet geometry smaller than the modern one are
still buried beneath the mile-thick ice covering the continent. Therefore, it
remains unclear how much this ice sheet contributed to past sea level rise
during warm climate periods or how it will respond to the anticipated near-
future climate warming. In the proposed research we seek to develop sub-ice
chemical precipitates—minerals that form in lakes found beneath the ice sheet—as
a climatic archive, one that records how the Antarctic ice sheet responded to
past climatic change. These sub-ice mineral formations accumulated beneath the
ice for over a hundred thousand years, recording the changes in chemical and
isotopic subglacial properties that occur in response to climate change.
Eventually these samples were eroded by the ice sheet and moved to the Antarctic
ice margin where they were collected and made available to study. This research
will utilize advanced geochemical, isotopic and geochronologic techniques to
develop record of the Antarctica ice sheet’s past response to warm climate
periods, directly informing efforts to understand how Antarctica will response
to future warming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts to improve sea level
forecasting on a warming planet have focused on determining the temperature, sea
level and extent of polar ice sheets during Earth’s past warm periods. Large
uncertainties, however, in reconstructions of past and future sea levels, result
from the poorly constrained climate sensitivity of the Antarctic Ice sheet
(AIS). This research project aims to develop the use of subglacial precipitates
as an archive the Antarctic ice sheet (AIS) past response to climate change. The
subglacial precipitates from East Antarctica form in water bodies beneath
Antarctic ice and in doing so provide an entirely new and unique measure of how
the AIS responds to climate change. In preliminary examination of these
precipitates, we identified multiple samples consisting of cyclic opal and
calcite that spans hundreds of thousands of years in duration. Our preliminary
geochemical characterization of these samples indicates that the observed
mineralogic changes result from a cyclic change in subglacial water compositions
between isotopically and chemically distinct waters. Opal-forming waters are
reduced (Ce* &lt;1 and high Fe/Mn) and exhibit elevated 234U/238U compositions
similar to the saline groundwater brines found at the periphery of the AIS.
Calcite-forming waters, are rather, oxidized and exhibit δ18O compositions
consistent with derivation from the depleted polar plateau (&lt; -50 ‰).
234U-230Th dates permit construction of a robust timeseries describing these
mineralogic and compositional changes through time. Comparisons of these time
series with other Antarctic climate records (e.g., ice core records) reveal that
calcite forming events align with millennial scale changes in local temperature
or “Antarctic isotopic maximums”, which represent Southern Hemisphere warm
periods resulting in increased Atlantic Meridional overturing circulation.
Ultimately, this project seeks to develop a comprehensive model as to how
changes in the thermohaline cycle induce a glaciologic response which in turn
induces a change in the composition of subglacial waters and the mineralogic
phase recorded within the precipitate archive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.