* 2045861
* CAREER: Tools for building online services that hide metadata
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Sebastian Angel, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 02/28/2026
* USD 362,243.00

Online services track users and analyze their behavior to improve their products
and monetize their services. Despite the benefits of collecting user
information, data breaches and insider attacks have disastrous consequences. For
example, the Ashley Madison breach highlights the danger of a leaked social
graph (and what it implies about users’ relationships). Indeed, metadata (who,
what, when, etc.) can be sensitive, but building services that are oblivious to
certain information (e.g., which movies users watch, which messages are “liked”,
or the social graph) poses significant technical and financial challenges. This
project takes a provider-centric view to hiding metadata and sees companies not
as adversaries, but as partners committed to safeguarding users’ information,
provided that the necessary mechanisms are reasonable in terms of costs,
features, and assumptions. Grounded by the needs of companies, this project
designs algorithms, tools, and infrastructure to help services continue to work
without accessing or collecting certain metadata (e.g., the social graph),
limiting the harm of data breaches and insider
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project improves widely applicable
cryptographic primitives by making them more efficient; extends them with access
control and accountability features so privacy is not at odds with
functionality; supports private user feedback necessary to improve services
(e.g., train spam filters); and makes the release of source code optional. This
project also designs the first decentralized and verifiable ad exchange platform
that allows users to receive targeted ads without violating their privacy. This
platform will supplement other revenue sources to ensure the sustainability of
metadata-private online services. Finally, the topics of this project cover
critical and timely social issues such as privacy, fairness, and their impact on
the financial stability of businesses. These concepts will be transitioned to
the classroom through a new in-depth capstone course, yearly workshops, and
dedicated chapters in existing systems and security
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.