* 2045012
* CAREER: Understanding the Formation Mechanism of Binary SAMs to Create an Experimental Phase Diagram
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Lynna Avila-Bront, College of the Holy Cross
* Continuing Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 04/30/2026
* USD 417,396.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. L. Gaby Avila-Bront of the
College of the Holy Cross is using a microscope capable of visualizing
individual molecules to understand the fundamental driving forces that determine
how a mixture of different molecules bound to a surface forms a two-dimensional
pattern. Although surfaces modified with molecular patterns find many
applications including serving as chemical and physical sensors, it is currently
not possible to precisely control the composition of a molecular pattern
composed of dissimilar molecules on a surface. Furthermore, prior to mixing,
there is no knowledge of what two-dimensional patterns may form, or what new
properties of the surface will be observed. Even though the behavior of mixtures
has been thoroughly investigated in three-dimensions, the picture is not
complete because current treatments do not properly consider chemical processes
that occur on surfaces. This presents a challenge for understanding how
molecules mix on surfaces, and predicting the pattern of a mixture of molecules
on a surface. Successfully addressing these issues could provide scientists with
unprecedented top-down control over surface modification with molecular
patterning. All of the research in this lab is conducted and driven by
undergraduate students. These students will conduct the experiments, analyze and
interpret the data, and will be encouraged to present their findings at
scientific conferences, while working closely with Dr. Avila-Bront to produce
manuscripts for publication. In doing so, the students are developing and honing
their problem-solving skills so that they can transfer these skills in the post-
graduate fields of their choice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
work is to understand the mechanism of two-dimensional mixing processes and
construct the experimental phase diagram of two-component (binary) self-
assembled monolayers (SAMs). An experimental phase diagram of a binary SAM would
enable the enrichment or separation of two-dimensional materials based on
thermodynamic conditions, as well as the design of surfaces with deliberate
preformed patterns. SAMs of organothiol compounds on noble metal surfaces are
model two-dimensional systems that have been extensively characterized and
utilized in numerous applications. However, as SAM functionalities have been
extended, central questions about the mechanism of SAM phase behavior remain
unanswered. An experimental phase diagram for a binary SAM has never been
reported because it is very difficult to control the composition of a binary
SAM. Therefore, this project begins by creating a library of binary monolayers
composed of aliphatic and aromatic organothiols on the (111) surface of gold.
The structure of the SAM is to be molecularly resolved using STM (Scanning
Tunneling Microscopy) in ambient conditions, and contact angle measurements will
be made to quantify the ordering properties of the SAM. Once this library is
established, a model binary monolayer of known composition will be constructed.
The composition of the monolayer will be interrogated using X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy and reductive desorption. An experimental phase diagram will then
be constructed by correlating the phases present in this model binary monolayer
to the chemical composition of the monolayer at different temperatures. The
accuracy of the resulting phase diagram will be tested by using it to predict
the monolayer structure of novel SAMs. The broader impacts of this work will
include the training and mentoring of undergraduate students in chemical
research. In addition, Dr. Avila-Bront is establishing a community outreach
program and expanding remote outreach to elementary schools--including a program
where undergraduate students work with elementary students on science-fair
projects-- with virtual workshops aimed at encouraging critical assessment of
science in the popular media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.