* 2045035
* CAREER: The Evolution of Water Bear Resilience
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Jason Pienaar, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2022
* USD 719,242.00

Many terrestrial tardigrade (aka waterbear or moss piglet) species live in the
thin, temporary films of water surrounding moss plants with which they share the
remarkable ability to survive near complete desiccation. Furthermore, in their
desiccated states, tardigrades can withstand the temperature extremes and
ionizing radiation typically found in Space. This project investigates how both
tardigrades and the mosses they inhabit are able to tolerate periodic
desiccation and aims to understand how traits important in desiccation tolerance
have evolved in both groups. This CAREER project offers exceptional
opportunities for student engagement in research and aims to train diverse,
budding scientists in integrative and collaborative biodiversity research to
increase retention of students from groups typically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines. The project also aims to increase K-12 and community participation
in science. Understanding the diversity of mechanisms that organisms such as
tardigrades and mosses have evolved to deal with drying, from the molecular
level through to ecological interactions with other organisms, has practical
implications for understanding and managing desiccation resistance in crops and
other organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In-depth molecular studies reveal
tremendous genetic variation underlying desiccation resistance in different
tardigrade lineages but the phenotypic and ecological interactions generating
desiccation-resistance traits have received scant attention. The central
research question of this proposal asks how interaction and coevolution with
moss hosts drive functional desiccation-resistant trait evolution in terrestrial
tardigrades. The project integrates within-species genomic, biochemical,
cytological, and morphometric analysis of the joint tardigrade / moss
desiccation response with across-species phylogenetic comparative analysis to
discover how tardigrade functional desiccation resistance traits evolve in the
context of their moss habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.