* 2045285
* Seismic and aseismic slip in faults with rock gouge using a 3D laboratory earthquake setup: the effect of fluid injection rate
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Ares Rosakis, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 452,600.00

Fluids play a key role in earthquake source processes. A large body of
observations has shown the close connection between fluids and faulting. This is
observed in natural events and in earthquakes induced by human activities, such
as carbon sequestration, geothermal energy extraction, and wastewater disposal
associated with oil and gas extraction. Here the researchers investigate the
relation between fluid injection and the resulting seismic response. This
response ranges from slow aseismic slip (no earthquake) to unstable seismic slip
(earthquake). They use a highly instrumented laboratory setup comprising fault
analogs which allow 3-D visualization of fault responses. Time sequences of
unstable slips are captured by a high-speed camera. Fluid injection rate and
pressures are recorded at the fault interface. The state-of-the-art bench top
experiments contribute to the fundamental understanding of the role of fluids in
faulting. They provide critical experimental measurements for the validation of
3-D numerical codes modeling fluid induced seismicity. The project provides
support for an early-career scientist, graduate and undergraduate students, and
fosters outreach toward high-school and middle-school students and their
teachers. Its outcomes improve earthquake hazard assessment, notably related to
human activities. The project is co-funded by both the Geophysics program and
the Tectonics program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, the laboratory experiments
produce frictional ruptures triggered by highly controlled fluid injection in
3-D specimens. The simulated fault can host a range of rupture behavior, ranging
from slow slip all the way to fully dynamic response. Dynamic ruptures
spontaneously propagate along a frictional interface with slip rates of the
order of 0.1-10 m/s; this range is highly relevant to natural earthquakes. 3-D
specimens and setup allow testing the hypothesis that low vs. fast injection
rate can result in stable vs. unstable slip behavior. The experiments feature
rock gouge interfaces embedded in specimens made of a polymeric material, poly-
methyl-methacrylate (PMMA). This material is readily available in bulk form and
makes possible the production of 3-D samples. Using polymers as analog materials
yields several advantages, including their small nucleation sizes for unstable
slip, and transparency, which are here essential. The ability to closely monitor
the fault behavior at a high level of detail enable the team to explore and
quantify the connection between slow slip and dynamic
rupture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.