* 2045634
* CAREER: Support our Troops: Re-storying student veteran and service member deficit in engineering through professional formation and community engagement
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Angela Minichiello, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2026
* USD 340,246.00

The persistent scarcity of U.S. engineers from underrepresented groups,
including women, racial and ethnic minorities, and persons with disabilities,
complicates the nation’s ability to tackle 21st-century engineering challenges
and lead innovation in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
globally. Our nation’s military veterans and service members deeply reflect
these groups and represent a robust and diverse community of highly trained and
skilled residents who, through their military affiliation, possess substantial
opportunities for education-related financial support. Despite their strong and
tangible potential for strengthening and diversifying the engineering workforce,
military-connected students remain overlooked and understudied in higher
education research, generally, and engineering education research, specifically.
Focused on the development of U.S. military veterans and service members as
engineers, this project will support the National Science Foundation (NSF)
Professional Formation of Engineers program and contribute to NSF’s efforts to
broaden participation in engineering, promote re-entry of women and women
veterans into the STEM workforce, and provide alternative pathways for veterans
into STEM-related industries. This project will advance NSF program goals by
generating new knowledge about how student veterans and service members
experience engineering education and by producing innovative and inclusive
programs, web-based resources, and trainings aimed at improving the
participation and persistence of military-connected students in engineering
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this CAREER project are to 1)
characterize the community cultural wealth of student veterans and service
members (SVSM) and critique the educational structures impacting their
participation and persistence in engineering, 2) construct a SVSM identity
model, and 3) conduct an asset campaign to cultivate broad awareness of SVSM
community cultural wealth, infuse asset-based counter narratives into dominant
educational discourses of deficit and deviance about military veterans, and
dismantle structural inequities that inhibit the participation, persistence, and
professional formation of military-connected students in engineering. The
project will enable a theoretically rich, contextualized, and longitudinal
qualitative research plan to tell, share, and examine narratives of experience
with diverse, military-connected undergraduates over a five-year project period.
The project will engage military-connected undergraduates enrolled in
engineering programs across five public universities and community colleges, two
of which are emerging Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs). Using a relational
ontology and viewing narratives of experience that are situated in time, place,
and social milieus as research phenomenon and research method, the project will
be guided by two research questions: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) How do SVSM
participate and persist in undergraduate engineering education? &lt;br/&gt;2)
How do SVSM produce engineering identities during their undergraduate
engineering education? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address critical
gaps in the research literature about asset-based frameworks and targeted
professional identity development supports for SVSM in engineering. Project
outcomes are transformative in that they will 1) add to and refine an emerging
Veteran Critical Theory through in-depth accounts of the community cultural
wealth of military-connected students and provide counternarratives that redress
current discourses of veteran deficit and deviance in education, 2) add to
current theoretical understandings of the professional formation of engineers by
proposing a model of student veteran and service member engineering identity
development, and 3) advocate for military-connected students across key support
communities at five partner institutions and nationally online. Sustained
project impact will occur through the broad dissemination of tested educational
resources, including accessible military-connected student peer ally and
professional mentorship programs and sensitivity- and awareness-trainings and
online resources for engineering administrators, faculty and
staff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.