* 2045808
* CAREER: Integrating Neoecological and Paleoecological Approaches to Exploring the Effects of Climate Change on Arthropod Diversity and Community Structure
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Angelica Gonzalez, Rutgers University Camden
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 03/31/2026
* USD 798,488.00

Changing temperature and precipitation patterns are affecting the structure and
function of ecological systems worldwide. Most studies to date have focused on
individual species responses to environmental change, but evidence for the
direction and magnitude of whole-community responses, over long temporal
windows, remain mostly unknown. This research will integrate paleoecology and
modern ecology to study the long-term dynamics of arthropod communities across
changes in precipitation, the major environmental driver structuring desert
systems. This research will focus on plant and animal remains preserved in
fossil and contemporary rodent middens (debris piles at nest sites) in the
Atacama Desert in Chile. Rodent middens in arid environments preserve detailed
information on soil arthropod communities and environmental conditions over the
last 50,000 years. The integration of paleoecology and modern ecology will
broaden our understanding of mechanisms shaping past and present biodiversity.
Past and contemporary mechanisms underlying biodiversity change will then be
used to predict the effects of future precipitation change on arid land soil
communities. In addition, the project will provide many research and training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a postdoctoral
fellow. US undergraduates will also have the opportunity to participate in a
field-based Desert Ecology course in Chile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will use a unique and underutilized paleobiological archive to provide
insights about the resistance and resilience of arthropod soil communities to
changing environmental conditions. By integrating paleo and modern ecological
data from rodent middens with isotope geochemistry, this project will test
hypotheses focused on: (i) disentangling soil arthropod diversity patterns
across temporal and spatial scales; (ii) mechanisms underlying community-level
responses to changes in precipitation; and (iii) the magnitude and direction of
biases in the paleoecological record. The latter is a crucial prerequisite for
understanding past, present, and future community-environment relationships. The
integration of data within and across temporal scales (contemporary, historical,
and paleo), and using this data to predict changes in ecological communities,
requires development of clear protocols and metrics. Hence, this project also
aims to create a toolbox for ecological analyses in middens that mitigates some
current limitations of midden data (e.g., temporal discontinuity and mixing,
taphonomy). This toolbox will be applicable to a broad range of geographical
questions and transferable to other midden reconstructions, such as those in the
Sonoran Desert. Understanding long-term variation in biodiversity patterns and
ecological communities along environmental gradients may allow responses of
complex systems to changes in climate across spatial and temporal scales to be
predicted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.