* 2045033
* CAREER: Controlling Responsive Biointerfaces by Understanding Elastin Self-Assembled Monolayers
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2025
* Julie Renner, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2025
* USD 305,788.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of next-
generation health monitoring and treatment devices requires an ability to design
biomaterial interfaces with predictable properties, and an effective workforce
to make discoveries and propel technological advances. This project will address
these needs by 1) developing a fundamental understanding of peptide-based self-
assembled monolayers and designing these interfaces to have desired biomaterial
properties; and 2) helping to create a diverse workforce with expertise in
biomaterials. The fundamental knowledge in peptide self-assembled monolayers
gained in this project can help speed the development of implantable
technologies for monitoring and treating non-communicable diseases, which
currently cause more than 60% of annual worldwide deaths and trillions of
dollars in economic losses. Specifically, this project will impact the fields of
drug delivery, sensors, and capture-release applications. In addition, an
innovative education program is being developed which uses peptides as a
platform to increase high school, undergraduate, and graduate students’ self-
efficacy in areas related to engineering and design, and positively impact
attitudes toward social responsibility at the university level. Self-efficacy is
a metric positively related to academic achievement, persistence, and engagement
in academic work. Graduate and undergraduate students will learn industry-
relevant project planning skills through a hands-on peptide engineering project
and then, in a unique service learning experience, lead high school students in
related projects. This effort is in partnership with a local high school where
over 90% of the students are from underrepresented minority groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
objectives of this project are to 1) develop models that predict the properties
of peptide self-assembled monolayers; and 2) increase self-efficacy in
performing engineering tasks across a diverse group of high-school,
undergraduate and graduate students. The research program will focus on
fundamental understanding of peptide self-assembled monolayer transition
temperature, which controls stimuli-responsive behavior; effective surface
coverage, which controls access to the substrate; and self-assembled monolayer
kinetic assembly, which controls these biomaterial properties. Elastin-derived
sequences will be studied because elastin is known to have stimuli-responsive
properties and has been proposed for a broad range of biomaterials applications.
Currently, there are no established models to predict elastin self-assembled
monolayer responsive behavior, effective surface coverage, or kinetic assembly.
This project will fill these gaps in scientific understanding by using a
combination of peptide design and techniques such as quartz crystal microbalance
with dissipation monitoring, cyclic voltammetry, and time-resolved attenuated
total reflection surface-enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy. The research
program will be coupled with new interactive service learning initiatives that
will engage students at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. A
unique undergraduate-/graduate-level project planning learning module will be
innovated to encourage students to use their peptide engineering knowledge to
create pedagogical content for an outreach program with East Cleveland female
high school students to teach valuable research and engineering skills. Student
self-efficacy will be measured at all levels using validated survey instruments
to assess the success of the education programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.