* 2045675
* CAREER: Understanding Effects of Surface Coverage and Catalyst Composition on Vinyl Acetate Synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Prashant Deshlahra, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2026
* USD 537,020.00

The majority of chemical processes worldwide utilize catalysts that promote the
efficient manufacturing of chemicals and fuels, while also lowering energy costs
and environmental footprint. Advances in catalyst technology depend, in turn, on
understanding how a catalyst’s performance is determined by the properties of
its surface and of the reacting molecules. This project focuses on developing
such understanding for the catalytic reaction involved in the synthesis of vinyl
acetate (VA). VA is a high-value chemical produced in large volumes by the
coupling of ethylene and acetic acid molecules on expensive palladium-based
catalysts. It is an important component of many polymers and consumer products.
However, current VA manufacturing processes have several limitations. The
project addresses those limitations through research aimed at developing more
efficient catalysts consisting of atomically dispersed precious metal atoms on
inexpensive copper matrices. The project integrates research with educational
and outreach activities aimed at middle- and high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High surface coverages prevail in many catalytic
reactions at practical conditions. Rigorous incorporation of the effects of
coverage in the analysis of experimental data, as well as incorporation in
simulation models, is challenging, however. Thus, few studies exist focusing on
the design of catalysts to operate efficiently under high-coverage conditions.
Coverage plays an important role in VA synthesis via oxidative coupling of
acetic acid and ethylene. In this reaction, crowding of the surface with acetate
species promotes C-O coupling and inhibits dissociative steps in ways that
influence both reactivity and selectivity. Mechanistic understanding of this
reaction has emerged from surface science and density functional theory (DFT),
but essentially all past work has focused solely on supported palladium (Pd) or
palladium-gold (PdAu) catalysts that are unstable at practical conditions
without alkali stabilizers that tend to deplete over long times. This project is
aimed at, (i) understanding (using kinetics and DFT) the mechanistic aspects
pertaining to steady-state catalysis, (ii) assessing how the very different
strengths of lateral interactions for active atoms dispersed in an Au versus Cu
matrix influence rate and selectivity, and (iii) leveraging such insights to
design more efficient VA synthesis catalysts. The project builds on preliminary
experimental and computational results for monometallic Pd catalysts obtained by
the investigator in collaboration with colleagues at his institution. The Pd
work has provided significant insights on how coverages impose changes in rate
liming steps when reactant pressures change in steady-state catalysis. DFT
studies will build on these insights and probe, on a range of single atoms
dispersed on Cu and Au matrices, how (i) enhanced lateral interactions imposed
by the smaller lattice constant of Cu can promote C-O coupling, and (ii) how
combined effects of coverage and composition influence catalytic performance.
These results will further guide the preparation and structural-functional
characterization of single atom alloy catalysts with potential for better
activity, selectivity, and stability in VA synthesis catalysis. The data
generation, catalyst characterization, and analysis methods employed in the
study – combined with the resulting insights from VA synthesis - will carry over
to other catalytic reactions that operate under conditions of high surface
coverage of adsorbed species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.