* 2045570
* CAREER: Understanding Chemical, Structural and Redox Properties of Disordered Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Feng Lin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2026
* USD 410,627.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research, advances fundamental insights into eventually designing higher energy,
higher power, and more stable rechargeable batteries to meet the demand of the
rapid-growing electric vehicle and energy storage market. Energy storage is a
vital technology to enable the widespread adoption of renewable energy and to
accelerate the technological advancement towards negative CO2 emission. The Li
ion battery technology represents one of the most important energy storage
technologies. Further development of Li ion batteries calls for more fundamental
studies that can reveal reaction mechanisms and inform the design of new
materials. Despite many years of materials development, most commercial Li-ion
batteries still rely on several cathode materials that are derived from
intercalation materials discovered in the 1980s. In these conventional
materials, there are defined pathways for Li ions to transport. Recently, there
have been exciting discoveries in new battery materials with disordered Li ion
transport pathways. Unfortunately, these materials exhibit inferior battery
performance compared to conventional materials, although theoretically they
should provide much higher capacity. This project uses advanced experimental
methods to develop fundamental understanding of electrochemical processes in
these new disordered materials. The successful outcome of this project will
establish a knowledge base for further improving these materials. This project
also seamlessly integrates research with educating the future workforce for the
United States. It provides learning opportunities for elementary students with
dyslexia in Southwest Virginia. Dyslexic students, an underrepresented group in
STEM fields, can be enormous intellectual assets as history, for example in the
field of battery research, has taught us. Separately from this effort, the
CAREER project also establishes a sustainable educational program between
Virginia Tech and national labs, allowing undergraduate students to perform
research in national labs. Overall, through this CAREER project Prof. Lin
educates several underrepresented minority students, helping them to excel at
performing scientific research and to become future leaders in the energy
storage field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research,
investigates the structure-property relationship for an emerging family of
advanced battery materials. The hypothesis underlying the various research
objectives of this project is that Li-rich disordered rocksalt oxides, with a
globally disordered Li percolating network and combined cationic/anionic redox
activities, can potentially increase battery energy density far beyond what is
delivered by conventional layered cathodes. However, so far their irreversible
chemical and structural transformations during electrochemical cycling have
impeded their practical applications. Prof. Lin and his research group carry out
holistic fundamental studies to understand how the chemical, structural, and
redox properties transform at multiple length and time scales, during materials
synthesis and under electrochemical operating conditions in order to resolve
these daunting challenges. The project employs experimental methods, including
synchrotron X-ray techniques and electrochemical diagnostics, to accomplish the
following objectives: (1) probing and controlling the evolution of local
coordination environment and global average phase during mechanosynthesis, (2)
investigating the redox chemistry as a function of chemical composition, local
coordination environment, global phase characteristics, and electrochemistry,
and (3) quantifying the multiscale evolution of local coordination environment,
global average phase, and redox chemistry upon prolonged electrochemical
cycling. Taken together, results from these studies provide mechanistic insights
into and advance the electrochemistry of disordered rocksalt
oxide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.