* 2045894
* CAREER: Control of a Long and Curved String for Deep Underground Exploration
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Xingyong Song, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 646,088.00

The research funded by this Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER)
grant will contribute new fundamental knowledge related to modeling and control
of a large-scale system with a long, curved string-like geometry. This will lead
to advances in deep underground directional drilling systems impacting national
strategic areas including energy, the environment and outer space exploration.
In energy, it will enable automated directional drilling for enhanced geothermal
energy systems and unconventional natural gas production. This will
significantly reduce the cost of energy production of renewables and clean
energy, and more importantly, can reduce environmental impact and enhance
production safety. In environmental research, the project will address a
critical technical barrier to accessing ancient ice cores in the South Pole, to
evaluate large-scale climate patterns and predict future climate changes such as
the evolution of global warming. In outer space exploration, it will build the
fundamental foundation to control a drilling robot to reach potential signs of
microbial life and water resources on Mars, to fulfill the ultimate mission of
the Mars exploration. Directional drilling control in these applications is
challenging, because potentially undesirable working conditions due to
vibrations and wellbore formation interaction in the deep underground are
difficult to avoid. Existing studies on the directional drilling control cannot
ensure avoiding these undesired operating conditions. The geological challenge
and the need for a more environment-friendly production process together urge
safer, deeper, more accurate and reliable drilling process. Along with the
research, this project will encourage controls engineering among
underrepresented student groups through new curriculum development, teacher
education, remote lab facilities development and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to create
a new framework of controlling a large-scale system with a long, curved string-
like geometry to avoid undesired operating conditions for deep underground
exploration. The outcome includes a novel control-oriented model by leveraging
the unique string geometry, and a new method for state-barrier avoidance control
that can address complex barriers. For modeling, a new hybrid scheme that can
integrate an analytical approach with a numerical solution is researched , and
can achieve both computation-efficiency and high fidelity to enable control
design. For control, a novel method that resolves the barrier avoidance in a
cascade fashion is researched. This method enables addressing state barriers
with complex shape in a systematic way for the first time, and can broaden the
range of applications of state-barrier avoidance control to more types of
barriers and systems (especially with high order
dynamics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.