* 2045803
* CAREER: Contextually Informed Autonomous Robotic Surgery
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Michael Yip, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 02/28/2026
* USD 647,400.00

Timely and widespread access to medical care has become one of the greatest
societal concerns today, pushed to the forefront by the Covid-19 outbreak.
Exacerbating the problem is that there is a growing shortage of general surgeons
in the US, and hundreds of rural hospitals are projected to close in the coming
years. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project produces much-
needed research towards realizing autonomous surgery in the future to address
these broad societal issues of healthcare access and equity challenges.
Specifically, the project involves taking a big step of realizing autonomous
surgical robots is imbuing them with knowledge of human anatomy and physiology
in a transcribed form that can be leveraged by artificial intelligence for
performing procedures autonomously. As part of the project, an educational plan
that integrates closely with the research plan is planned. An interactive
lesson-game for high school students is to be developed, and an experience in a
classroom setting is planned in which they will explore programming and biology
in a video game. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the overall goal of this
project, dense and reduced-order models for representing multimodal, deformable
tissue environments with semantic attributes will be investigated and neural
networks to approximate the forward and inverse problem. An anatomical roadmap
is defined that presents the human body as a semantic navigation problem, and
local context can be leveraged to perform semantic localization and environment
mapping. For semantic localization, theory and strategies for leveraging
semantic labels in deformable scenes and methods will be defined, utilizing
geometric priors and active manipulation to identify features and classify scene
objects. Finally, given contextually informed observation models, anatomical
context may be used to evaluate and optimize safe plans and robust trajectories
as well as higher-level decision making such as behavior trees. The educational
activity involving teaching students about programming and biology will focus on
teaching anatomical context from a biological perspective and basic sequential
logic from a block-programming perspective. As part of an interactive lesson,
the activity includes a hands-on programming portion that involves building an
autonomous agent to solve an educational surgical simulator videogame. Following
the interactive lesson, survey data on their perceptions regarding STEM and the
potential interdisciplinary nature of biology and computer science will be
collected and parsed. Then, by making the activities open-sourced and
incorporating our lessons learned, we aim for our videogame to reach
underrepresented minorities and provide them an opportunity to experience the
broader, multi-disciplinary opportunities that computer science, engineering,
and biology have to offer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program,
jointly managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and
Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.