* 2045046
* CAREER: Developing Wavefunction-based Quantum Chemistry for Solids
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* James Shepherd, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2026
* USD 648,345.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) Dr. James Shepherd of the University of Iowa will
be developing high-accuracy ground-state wavefunction electronic structure
methods for the prediction of bulk properties of solids. Novel quantum materials
have the potential to drive technological change due to the unique properties
they possess as a result of the specific nature of their electronic structure.
Examples of these materials include catalysts and semiconductors. When
computational chemists are able to faithfully model the electronic structure of
these compounds, they can contribute to the rational design of materials
alongside experimentalists. The Shepherd research group is pursuing tools that
enable quicker and more accurate such calculations. These tools are expected to
advance our theoretical understanding of how electrons interact in solids. The
Shepherd research group is also developing a course-based undergraduate research
program using an evidence-based design philosophy. This program will train
undergraduate STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) majors in
the computer-aided design of new materials commensurate with the uptick in
interest in computationally guided materials design in academia and industry.
Additionally, the program will seek to improve retention of students in STEM
majors, especially of those students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Dr. James Shepherd and his
research group at the University of Iowa are working to improve high accuracy
computational chemistry methods, such as coupled cluster theory and full
configuration interaction quantum Monte Carlo. The widespread adoption of these
methods is prevented by finite size errors, which arise from trying to simulate
real systems with a limited number of atoms. The Shepherd research group is
systematically studying the physical origin of these errors; removing these
errors for wavefunction-based quantum chemistry; and leveraging these
technologies to study catalyst and semiconductor
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.