* 2045313
* CAREER:  Engineering Self-Assembly of Recombinant Fusion Proteins for Bottom-Up Construction of Protein-Powered Synthetic Protocells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Yeongseon Jang, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2026
* USD 429,321.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project aims to develop a
synthetic protocell constructed of protein building blocks. Synthetic
protocells, or primitive versions of cells, can serve as simple, precursor
models to living cells and can advance understanding about the basic rules of
life. The research objective for this project is to develop design strategies to
control the properties of new classes of protein-powered synthetic protocells.
The proposed protocells will be created by self-assembly of engineered proteins,
resulting in cell-like structures exhibiting specific activities. Ultimately,
the synthetic protocells will serve as smart, autonomous cell-like particles
that can be used for a wide range of applications from protein delivery systems
to micro-bioreactors. This research project will be coupled with educational
efforts to provide hands-on learning opportunities to underrepresented students
at different levels and to develop academic curricula on the self-assembly of
recombinant fusion proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
CAREER project is to create a new class of synthetic cells composed of
functionally folded, globular fusion proteins with controlled structural,
mechanical, and biological properties. The globule-leucine zipper-elastin like
polypeptide (GLE) fusion protein complexes to be studied serve as basic building
blocks to make globular protein vesicles (GPVs). The biophysical properties of
protein building blocks will be engineered to control the self-assembly and
function of GPVs. This project combines vesicle assembly of diverse GLE
proteins, with precise control over vesicle mechanical and structural
properties, and de novo protein synthesis inside GPVs to mimic essential
cellular functions including self-growth and cascade reactions. The specific
objectives are to 1) elucidate the physicochemical role of globular proteins in
vesicle self-assembly, 2) understand the structure-property-performance
relationships of GPVs to engineer basic cellular membrane functions such as
deformability and fusion dynamics, and 3) functionalize GPVs through cell-free
protein synthesis and enzymatic cascade reactions towards an autonomous
synthetic cell. Recombinant protein technology, thermodynamics of block
copolymer assembly in dilute solutions, and soft materials engineering and
characterization tools will be applied to achieve these
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.