* 2045306
* Promoting Aspirations in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics through Youth and Family Engagement
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Eugene Judson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,275,097.00

A primary focus of this project at Arizona State University is to broaden
participation of refugee communities in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT). Since
1975, 3.3 million refugees have been admitted to the United States. Arizona
State University, in partnership with three Maricopa County community colleges,
and five ethnic community-based organizations comprised of former refugees
(Burundians, Congolese, Iraqis, Somalis, and Syrians), will engage refugee
students and their parents in innovative project experiences and activities. The
project will engage 200 youth in grades 7-12 and their parents in project
activities that will include (a) families participating in an eight-session
college knowledge program, (b) youth participating in e-mentoring with science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) professionals; (c) families
visiting college campuses, and (d) youth creating digital stories that reflect
their STEM aspirations. The conceptual framework and digital storytelling
reinforce the belief that STEM/ICT interests and identity can be enhanced when
students are embraced and empowered by their native cultural stories. The
project will yield a series of role model videos that highlight the stories of
former refugees who are now working as STEM professionals in the United States.
This will support the inclusion of students with refugee backgrounds into STEM
career pathways. The goal of the project is to improve STEM/ICT career
aspirations among students of refugee backgrounds and to improve STEM/ICT
familial career aspirations among refugee parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the project are to (a) develop strong levels of college social and
STEM capital; (b) improve self-efficacy as it relates to participating in STEM
career path activities; (c) improve STEM identity, interest, and aspirations;
and (d) improve value and expectations for success associated with STEM careers.
Project effects will be evaluated via three research branches: (1) understanding
project effects on Possible Selves and Social Cognitive Career Theory variables,
(2) identifying interactions of culture and gender with STEM, and (3) examining
alignment of personal narratives and cultural master narratives regarding what
it means to become, and how to become, a STEM professional in the United States.
The project uses a mixed research design involving surveys, interviews, photo
elicitation, and critical discourse analysis. This project will align with the
societal goals of promoting STEM and developing a STEM-ready workforce. This
project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.