* 2045454
* CAREER: Designing a Synthetic Nucleolus for Cell Free Biocatalysis
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2027
* Lorraine Leon, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2027
* USD 358,909.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop new
biomaterials incorporating enzymes. Enzymes are functional proteins that act as
a catalyst for chemical reactions in nature. They have the potential to make
fuels, pharmaceuticals, and fine chemicals in efficient, selective, and
ecofriendly ways compared to current industrial methods based on petroleum. The
full power of enzymes has yet to be unleashed on chemical manufacturing because
in nature enzymes work with other enzymes in complex networks, under mild
conditions, that are incompatible with industrial processes. This proposal
investigates the fundamental science of how new biomaterials can be used to
create useful multi-enzyme systems like those in nature. In addition,
biomaterials education of K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students is
integrated throughout this proposal through the development of bilingual
(English/Spanish) experiences and content aimed at increasing Hispanic
participation in science, technology, engineering, and math
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzymes
can synthesize chemical products in efficient, selective, and ecofriendly ways
compared to the current dominant method: petroleum-based synthetic chemistry.
However, the full power of biocatalysis has yet to be unleashed due to
inadequate methods of integrating multienzyme pathways outside of cells into
chemical manufacturing. Nature has efficient strategies to control multienzyme
reactions using spatiotemporal regulation. For instance, intracellular
structures like the nucleolus, which are liquid droplets consisting of multiple
phases, confine different enzymes in each phase to assemble the ribosome. The
nucleolus is able to function in the complex interior of the cell by
sequestering the necessary components and excluding others. In addition, the
nucleolus can then dynamically assemble and disassemble when needed in different
stages of the cell cycle. If the structure of the nucleolus can be mimicked and
used to perform multienzyme reactions outside of a cellular environment, this
would transform chemical manufacturing by providing higher yields and reducing
cost and waste. This proposal investigates the fundamental biomaterials science
required to recreate the structure and mimic the function of the nucleolus. A
library of peptide based complex coacervates, that form liquid droplets similar
to the nucleolus, will be designed with varying interfacial tensions and
encapsulation selectivity. This library will be used to evaluate the conditions
needed to achieve stable multiphase coacervates and measure diffusion of
additives within and between the phases. Finally, the function of different
synthetic nucleoli will be tested using an enzyme cascade reaction and
correlated to the material properties of the phases. Throughout this proposal
the science of "biomaterials phase separation" will be used to increase the
participation of Hispanic students in STEM careers. Key to this effort is the
development of an experiential and bilingual (English/Spanish) summer program
for ages 10-13 geared to improve science communication at home, a key indicator
of choosing STEM careers. This program is paired with a bilingual social media
campaign introducing "biomaterials phase separation" science to teenagers and
coursework and laboratory experiences for undergraduates and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.