* 2045343
* CAREER: Characterizing the rates and patterns of mutation and recombination in Old and New World monkeys
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Susanne Pfeifer, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 01/31/2026
* USD 1,177,451.00

Genomes – the blueprints of life – evolve over time. Underlying this
evolutionary change are spontaneous mutations in the germline (egg and sperm
cells) that are passed on to the next generation. In addition, during the
creation of germ cells, variations present in a parent's maternally and
paternally derived chromosomes are shuffled into novel combinations by a process
called recombination. For nearly a century, we have known that rates and
patterns of mutation and recombination vary markedly across the tree of life –
yet, we still know surprisingly little about the underlying causes. By
performing a series of comparative genomic analyses, this research aims to
identify genomic features and quantify evolutionary processes that are driving
these changes across the primate clade. Gaining a better understanding of these
processes is of fundamental importance, not only mechanistically, but also
clinically, as deleterious mutations and aberrant recombination can cause
abnormalities that lead to genetic disease and developmental disabilities. The
educational arm of this project focuses on multiple activities to teach the
elementary skills of bioinformatics and computational genomics by offering i) a
course-based undergraduate research experience (CURE) that actively engages
students in explorative original research, ii) mentored research opportunities
in the PI's lab, and iii) coding workshops for female-identifying and non-binary
high school students, groups traditionally underrepresented in this field. To
increase public engagement with science, this project will additionally
construct citizen-science activities and develop outreach materials to promote
scientific literacy among K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to characterize the extent and time-scale at which changes in the
rates and patterns of mutation and recombination have evolved across the primate
clade by implementing a streamlined comparative genomics analysis pipeline. To
this end, the project takes advantage of both publicly available data and newly
generated genomic resources for great apes as well as Old and New World monkeys
to i) characterize the variation in mutation rate among families and between
species, ii) quantify male mutation biases and parental age effects in the
species, iii) improve our understanding of the influence of life history traits
and sexual mating systems on mutation rate in primates, and iv) infer
recombination rate variation across primates. The gained knowledge will enable
the evaluation of competing evolutionary models aiming to explain the
heterogeneity observed amongst primates, and elucidate the underlying
population-level and genetic factors at play, ultimately leading to an improved
understanding of the chronology of primate evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.