* 2045976
* CAREER: Distributed Protocols and Primitives Optimized for RDMA Read/Write Operations in Data Management Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Roberto Palmieri, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 04/30/2026
* USD 310,558.00

The proliferation of the Internet enables the delivery of widely used services
to millions of users every day. One of the biggest challenges in designing the
system software that supports these services is engineering the components of
the software infrastructure to scale to handle extremely large workloads. Remote
Direct Memory Access (RDMA) is an important technology to improve achievable
scalability. RDMA allows servers to access remote server memory without
interrupting their execution resulting on more efficient communication and the
ability to serve massive numbers of user requests. This project studies
synchronization. Synchronization is a barrier to scalability as it entails
significant additional computation in order to coordinate among multiple
entities but is mandatory to ensure data integrity. In particular,
synchronization typically requires two-sided communication where the remote
machine responds to data access requests. This proposal investigates one-sided
RDMA-optimized high-performance synchronization techniques and will demonstrate
how they can be realized in easy-to-use abstractions to develop infrastructural
system software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this project are
techniques that allow both specialized and non-expert programmers to build
services that can exploit RDMA to handle millions of user requests without
sacrificing performance. By leveraging the infrastructural software delivered as
a result of this project, developers can focus most of their work on the core
business logic of the service. The principles and findings of the project
contribute to a twofold goal. First, they form a solid foundation to instruct
future generations of developers who yearn for delivering services that target
society at large. Second, they abstract away the challenging details, allowing
programmers to leverage the project's solutions regardless of their technical
depth in the realm of RDMA and synchronization. This not only simplifies the
implementation of large high-performance services, but also evens the playing
field between those who have the resources to tackle complex problems, and those
who do not. These research outcomes will be formalized in teaching material and
tools for graduate and undergraduate courses and K-12 activities through a broad
education plan designed to encourage students towards computer science study
with a path towards graduate study and to broaden participation and increase
diversity in computer science, especially for women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.