* 2045542
* CAREER: The Atmospheric Energy Variability of Tropical-Extratropical Interactions Associated with the Madden–Julian Oscillation and Equatorial Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Naoko Sakaeda, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 652,041.00

Organized tropical convection can produce modes of variability on the
intraseasonal timescale. Two prominent tropical modes are the Madden-Julian
Oscillation (MJO) and the convectively coupled equatorial waves (CCEWs). They
can generate disturbances that influence the extratropical atmosphere (i.e., the
mid-latitude storm track and extreme weather events). Conversely, midlatitude
atmospheric disturbances can propagate into the tropics to influence the MJO and
CCEWs. This project aims to improve our understanding of the tropical-
extratropical interactions associated with the MJO and CCEWs. Emerging results
have the potential to improve subseasonal-to-seasonal prediction, enhance the
nation’s capability for weather forecasting, and advance our understanding of
climate change. The project activities include the training of underrepresented
students in research and broadening interests in atmospheric science among K-12
students in Oklahoma. These activities will inspire the next generation of
diverse scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying mechanisms of the
tropical-extratropical interactions associated with the MJO and CCEWs are still
unclear. The main research goal is to understand the physical processes
underlying these interactions from the energetics perspectives. The project
intends to reveal (1) the atmospheric energy variability associated with
tropical-extratropical interactions, (2) the role of energy exchanges among
weather-to-climate timescales, and (3) how much of the tropical and
extratropical kinematic and thermodynamic variabilities are sustained by their
interactions. The investigator will analyze reanalysis and satellite data using
various diagnostic techniques to understand the mechanisms that maintain global
energy anomalies associated with the MJO and CCEWs. The project will integrate a
K-12 summer in-person course that blends art and science to educate about the
global atmospheric circulation including tropical-extratropical interactions.
The developed educational activity modules will be shared online and through
K-12 teacher training workshops. These research and educational activities serve
as the foundation of the investigator’s career-long vision to advance and
broadly disseminate the knowledge of tropical-extratropical
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
division of Atmosphere and Geospace Science (AGS) under the Climate and Large-
Scale Dynamics (CLD) program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.