* 2045382
* LTER: The Changing Nature of Cities: Ecological and Social Dynamics in the Minneapolis-St. Paul Urban Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2027
* Xue Feng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2027
* USD 3,563,100.00

While cities often conjure images of buildings, parking lots, and streets, they
are also home to diverse kinds of nature, in parks, yards, gardens, lakes,
streams, and the like. This diverse urban nature is important habitat for many
types of plants and wildlife, and is affected by a variety of stressors, ranging
from toxic pollutants, to pests, habitat fragmentation, and climate change.
Urban nature, in all its diversity, is also critically important to urban
residents, providing numerous potential benefits, ranging from aesthetic and
health-related, to climate control and recreational opportunities. However,
these benefits are not equally accessible to everyone. This project will explore
how urban residents and urban nature interact with one another and respond to
ongoing rapid environmental and social change. The ultimate goal is to figure
out ways that environmental outcomes can be improved for all people living in
the city. Researchers will work with education specialists from the Bell Museum
to help middle school students and teachers learn and teach about science, using
their own schoolyards as natural classrooms. Researchers will also nurture new
university-community partnerships to better understand the factors contributing
to social disparities in human relationships with urban nature and to learn
about approaches to address those disparities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Minneapolis-St. Paul (MSP) Urban Long-Term Ecological Research Program (LTER)
aims to determine the long-term coupled dynamics of urban nature and the urban
social system in the face of rapid environmental and social change. The project
examines this coupling across organizational scales of urban nature from diverse
organisms in habitat patches, to stream and stormwater drainage networks, to
landscapes with abundant surface water. The project likewise examines human-
nature coupling at multiple scales in the urban social system, from diverse
individuals acting in groups in numerous municipalities to complex governance
systems and institutions at the metropolitan region. Specifically, the research
addresses how biodiversity at the organism to habitat patch scales, and habitat
fragmentation and connectivity mediate long-term responses of ecological
structure and function to urban stressors such as toxins, pests, pathogens, and
climate change. The research further explores how configuration and connectivity
of urban nature habitat patches and impervious cover at the drainage network and
landscape scales influence long-term hydrology, urban climate, and water
quality. Researchers will determine how ecological, hydrological, and climate
processes of urban nature create benefits and burdens for diverse human
communities over time, and in turn how governance, policy, and practice can
change to improve equity of urban nature decisions. Finally, the project will
explore how the long-term process of growing inclusive relationships, especially
with communities of Black, Indigenous, and other People of Color, for knowledge
creation and practice, change scientific and community outcomes in the urban
ecosystem. By advancing understanding of how pollutants, biodiversity, land
cover, habitat fragmentation, and drainage network properties affect urban
nature processes in the face of environmental and social change, research will
test whether ecological theories developed in non-urban ecosystems can predict
patterns and processes in highly modified and managed urban systems. The project
will shed light on patterns of social disparities in human relationships with
urban nature and how such disparities can be addressed through institutional and
policy change and greater inclusivity in long-term
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.