* 2045880
* Collaborative Research: Moving Beyond the Margins: Modeling Water Availability and Habitable Terrestrial Ecosystems in the Polar Desert of the McMurdo Dry Valleys
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Eric Sokol, Battelle Memorial Institute
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 03/31/2024
* USD 60,308.00

Part I: Non-technical description: &lt;br/&gt;Water is life and nowhere is it
more notable than in deserts. Within the drylands on Earth, the Antarctic
deserts, represented in this study by the McMurdo Dry Valleys, exemplify life in
extreme environments with scarce water, low temperatures and long periods of
darkness during the polar winter. There is a scarcity of methods to determine
water availability, data necessary to predict which species are successful in
the drylands, unless measurements are done manually or with field instruments.
This project aims to develop a new method of determining soil moisture and use
the new data to identify locations suitable for life. Combining these habitats
with known species distributions in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, results from this
project will predict which species should be present, and also what is the
expected species distribution in a changing environment. In this way the project
takes advantage of a combination of methods, from recent remote sensing
products, ecological models and 30 years of field collections to bring a
prediction of how life might change in the McMurdo Dry Valleys in a warmer, and
possibly, moister future climate. This project benefits the National Science
Foundation goals of expanding fundamental knowledge of Antarctic biota and the
processes that sustain life in extreme environments. The knowledge acquired in
this project will be disseminated to other drylands through training of high-
school curricular programming in Native American communities of the SouthWest.
&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical description: &lt;br/&gt;Terrestrial environments
in Antarctica are characterized by low liquid water supply, sub-zero
temperatures and the polar night in winter months. During summer, melting of
snow patches, seasonal steams from glacial melt and vicinity to lakes provide a
variety of environments that maintain life, not yet studied at landscape-scale
level for habitat suitability and the processes that drive them. This project
proposes to integrate remote sensing, hydrological models and ecological models
to establish habitat suitability for species in the McMurdo Dry Valleys based on
water availability. The approach is at a landscape level in order to establish
present-day and future scenarios of species distribution. There are four main
objectives: remote sensing development of moisture levels in soils, combining
biological and soil data, building and calibrating models of habitat suitability
by combining species distribution and environmental variability and applying
statistical species distribution model. The field data to develop habitat
suitability and calibration of models will leverage a the 30-year dataset
collected by the McMurdo Long-Term Ecological Research program. Mechanistic
models developed will be essential to predict species distribution in future
climate scenarios. Training of post-doctoral researchers and a graduate student
will prepare for the next generation of Antarctic scientists. Results from this
project will train high-school students from native American communities in the
SouthWest where similar desert conditions exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.