* 2045866
* CAREER: Whatâ€™s salt got to do with it? Linking the variability of mixing to exchange flows in real estuaries
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Lauren Ross, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2026
* USD 402,866.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estuaries are among the most
productive ecosystems and maritime commercial centers in the world. In
estuaries, the exchange between the ocean and the river water is fundamentally
important to the physics and circulation as well as biogeochemical processes
such as nutrient fluxes, hypoxia and contaminant transport. This makes the
understanding of mixing and exchange flows vital to predicting the impact of
anthropogenic change and climate change on estuarine systems and their ecology.
The literature of flow exchange in estuaries focuses on partially mixed
estuaries or simplified coastal morphometries. Much remains unknown regarding
estuaries with complicated topography (irregular bathymetry, convergent width,
headlands, and constrictions) over a wide range of stratification conditions.
This CAREER project provides an organized pathway for a more comprehensive
understanding of land-sea connections and exchange of fresh and salt water, as
well as material transport under varied conditions, in varied settings. The PI
will document and interpret spatial and temporal variations in mixing and
exchange flows in Reloncavi Fjord in Chilean Patagonia (stratified), the
Penobscot Estuary on the northeast coast of the USA (partially-mixed to salt-
wedge) and the Gironde Estuary on the southwest coast of France (well-mixed to
partially-mixed) using in-situ collected data and numerical model simulations.
This approach leverages her recent research on the Gironde, Penobscot, and
Patagonian Fjords. New knowledge from this CAREER project is an essential
building block for better understanding how land-based freshwater flows affect
exchange flows, determining timescales for transport of water borne materials
such as pollutants, larvae and harmful algal blooms, and will allow for policy
makers to use these findings to make science-based decisions. The results of
this research will be shared with Maine-eDNA Track 1 EPSCoR researchers to help
inform their Thematic Goal of improving surveillance and early warning systems
for harmful or shifting taxa as they emerge in coastal waters in the northeast
USA. High school citizen scientists will help measure partially mixed estuaries
and the PI will work with students and teachers to develop applied
mathematics/science lesson plans for grades 9-12. These lessons will highlight
differences among the three estuaries, explain simple tidal and volume
conservation theory, and introduce data visualization tools. Lesson plans will
be shared with high school science and mathematics teachers in Maine, the US and
internationally through community presentations, a tri-lingual project website
and other outreach mechanisms. Through these activities, the PI will help
prepare the future workforce to execute informed policy decisions regarding
estuarine and coastal environments. The strategic selection of study areas on
three continents will promote place-based and global perspectives, helping all
project participants embrace cultural and social diversity in science and
engineering education. The PI proposes to amplify a focus on STEM literacy and
interest of women, and related recruitment in STEM applied research disciplines
as a means of broadening participation in the estuarine science and engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan will characterize the along-
channel structure of mixing and exchange flows in tidal estuaries of varying
stratification. Previous work has shown that the dynamics driving exchange flows
and mixing can have unexpected complexity and that tidal, density and wind
forcing can be central to their development. However, much of this work has
focused on volume averages of mixing and exchange flows or has considered
spatial variations of these processes only in partially mixed estuaries. This
project will address the gap in knowledge of how spatial and temporal variations
in mixing alters exchange flow regimes in estuaries that are not partially-
mixed. Spatial and temporal variations of fresh and saltwater mixing defined by
the dissipation of salinity variance will be hydrodynamically linked to exchange
flows quantified as total exchange flow (TEF) and Eulerian exchange flow (EEF).
This coupling will provide a basis for characterization of the estuarine
parameter space. This will help estuarine researchers around the world better
plan field campaigns and establish appropriate methodologies for understanding
mixing and exchange flows in estuaries, and thus material
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.