* 2045332
* CAREER: Unearthing the Role of Belowground Biology in Biosphere-Atmosphere Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) Exchange
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2027
* Laura Meredith, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2027
* USD 356,961.00

Volatile organic compounds (VOC) are emitted into the atmosphere through natural
and anthropogenic processes and play an important role in air quality and
climate. One significant natural source of VOCs is from plants yet understanding
how respective soils contribute to VOC emissions remains elusive. The
overarching research goal of this study is to unearth microbial processes of VOC
cycling below ground that describe how a changing climate may affect VOC
emissions. Interdisciplinary expertise in atmospheric chemistry and ecosystem
science is secured through collaborations, and necessary infrastructure is
available at the University of Arizona to carry out essential field and
laboratory studies. This plan provides opportunities for students to learn and
engage in research and education across disciplinary boundaries and anticipates
to directly impact ~100 students over the five-year project. This project was
co-reviewed and co-funded by the Atmospheric Chemistry (ATC) Program in the
Division of Atmosphere and Geospace Sciences and the Ecosystem Science (ES)
Cluster in the Division of Environmental Biology.&lt;br/&gt;Research objectives
focus on identifying, separating, and constraining VOC metabolism in soil, and
specifically: (1) identifying and collating microbial and root pathways that
drive VOC metabolism in soil; (2) separating belowground root-microbe
interactions governing VOC cycling in soil; and (3) constraining belowground VOC
cycling from gene to ecosystem scales. New measurements of VOC production and
consumption by microbial isolates are performed in controlled experiments in
laboratory soil columns and at field scale in Biosphere 2. VOC metabolic
pathways from diverse data streams are gathered in a new Microbial Volatilome
Database. To distinguish root-derived contributions to net soil VOC exchange 13C
stable isotope pulse labeling is implemented with online 13CVOC measurements.
Finally, new soil surface and subsurface VOC data is collected in a controlled
ecosystem drought experiment to advance soil VOC process models and scale
belowground VOC cycling from genes to the ecosystem. Results will aid in
understanding belowground drivers of VOC biosphere-atmosphere exchange that will
improve projections of atmospheric impacts and biological feedbacks of
VOCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.