* 2045169
* CAREER: Amplification-Coupled Solid-State Nanopore Digital Counting based a Versatile Platform for Point-of-Care Nucleic Acid Testing
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Weihua Guan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This CAREER project supports an integrated research and education approach to
address the fundamental and applied challenges in solid-state nanopore-based
single molecule counting platform towards the fully integrated point-of-care
nucleic acid testing. This project is motivated by a growing demand for
decentralized nucleic acid testing for applications ranging from infectious
disease, food safety to homeland security. In recognition of using nanopore as
simple as a single molecule counter and the fact that target nucleic acids can
be sensitively and specifically replicated in numbers during the amplification
reaction, this project seeks to develop a solid-state nanopore-based point of
care nucleic acid testing device in which sample preparation is fully
integrated. The proposed research activities will be synergistically integrated
with educational activities to provide hands-on based education to inspire and
train future STEM leaders and to increase public awareness of biosensing devices
and their societal impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research objective
of this proposal is to explore a highly sensitive nanopore digital counting
paradigm for point-of-care nucleic acid testing. Due to its potential for
minimization and integration, solid-state nanopore sensing is a rapidly evolving
field. Considerable effort has been made for developing various applications.
However, translating solid-state nanopore sensors to practical settings has seen
limited progress as compared to their biological counterparts adopted in the DNA
sequencing, mainly due to the challenges in reproducible size control,
introducing specificity, prolonged sensing time at low analyte concentrations,
and the lack of integrated sample preparation. The proposed work aims to address
these issues and explore a fully integrated solid-state nanopore digital
counting paradigm towards nucleic acid testing at the point of need. The
research activity will address four research aims regarding the sensing
kinetics, nanopore fabrication, cartridge and system integration, and
validation. This research is multidisciplinary in nature and spans the range
from fundamental to applied research, with low- and high-risk components.
Together, they constitute a complete research program to advance and translating
the solid-state nanopore sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.