* 2045327
* CAREER: Inference of Gene Regulatory Networks and Cell Dynamics That Control Stem Cell Fate
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Adam MacLean, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 02/28/2026
* USD 339,543.00

Stem cells are responsible for producing and maintaining organs throughout our
lifetime. Stem cells differentiate into mature cells through the process of stem
cell fate decision-making: in most cases, we cannot yet explain or predict this
process. This project will develop mathematical models to understand how stem
cells make fate decisions. The models will describe the dynamics of stem cells
as well as the gene dynamics occurring inside cells and the higher-level
coordination that occurs between the many cells of a tissue. The PI will take
the novel approach of using publicly available genomics data to inform models of
two organs: the blood (hematopoietic) and kidney epithelial systems. The
research outcome will be an ability to predict and explain stem cell fate
decisions: knowledge that will bring us one step closer to being able to build
new organs. The educational objective of this project is to train a new
generation of scientists to be equally skilled in biological and quantitative
thinking. This will be achieved by developing new curricula for undergraduate,
middle/high, and elementary level students, closely coupled to the research
goals of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop models to
explain how stem cell differentiation is coordinated and maintained in complex
signaling environments. Stem cell differentiation is controlled by cell-internal
gene regulatory networks as well as signals from the microenvironment and cell-
and tissue-scale effects. Predictive models of stem cell differentiation must
take into account the dynamics occurring on all of these biological scales. Stem
cell states (both homeostatic and perturbed) in two systems will be studied:
hematopoiesis and kidney epithelia. For each system, publicly available single-
cell genomics data will be leveraged to infer regulatory networks across
transcriptional-to-cellular scales. This will be achieved via three scientific
objectives: 1) Develop Bayesian inference methods to learn single-cell
regulatory networks; 2) Investigate stem cell lineage dynamics via dynamical
systems modeling and parameter inference; 3) Predict tissue-scale responses to
stimuli through multiscale modeling. The resulting models will give fundamental
new insight into how stem cells function, and may reveal shared regulatory logic
of signaling pathway motifs across different organs. The educational goal of
this project is to train a new generation of scientists to be simultaneously
literate in mathematical and life sciences. This will be achieved in
collaboration with the USC Joint Educational Project via two educational
objectives: 1) Develop a curriculum for local elementary schools to diversify
participation in and spark enthusiasm for mathematics and biology; 2) Develop a
quantitative biology undergraduate course with a service-learning component in
middle/high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.