* 2045433
* CAREER: Sea Level and Topographic Evolution (SLATE): Exploring the feedback between sea level and sediment redistribution
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Ken Ferrier, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 07/31/2026
* USD 398,273.00

Sea-level changes are of wide interest because they affect flood hazards,
reorganize coastlines, influence volcanic eruptions, and reflect changes in
climate. The proposed work will remove a barrier for understanding sea-level
change by developing a new model that captures the effects that sediment
redistribution and sea-level change have on one another. This will provide a new
tool for understanding the controls on sea-level change and flood hazards near
large rivers, which are home to many coastal cities, of relevance to NSF’s
Coastlines and People (CoPe) initiative. These efforts will be paired with four
education and outreach tasks focused on sea-level change, including the
development of a new university course on sea-level change, training of students
in pedagogy and mentorship, public outreach through the University of Wisconsin
Geology Museum, and a five-year outreach program to K-12 students from
underrepresented groups in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to improve our understanding of the feedback between sea level and sediment
redistribution. Although it has long been known that sea level and sediment
redistribution influence one another, the quantitative strength of this feedback
remains a matter of contention. The proposed work is aimed at closing this
knowledge gap through the development of a novel model that couples Earth’s
topographic evolution to sea-level change. This will be used to explore the
controls on the sediment-sea level feedback by quantifying the sensitivity of
sea-level changes to marine sediment transport, the sensitivity of lowland
rivers to sea-level change, and the effects of sediment redistribution on
estimates of global mean sea level and global ice volume at the Last
Interglacial period, an analogue for modern climate. This will clarify the
sensitivity of sea-level change to sediment erosion and deposition—a common
feature of Earth’s coasts—and provide a basis for improving projections of
future sea-level change. This will support education, outreach, and diversity
initiatives through the training of two PhDs students, the mentoring of
undergraduate students, and a new five-year outreach program with K-12 students
from underrepresented groups in STEM. The project is co-funded by the
Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics Program and the Marine Geology and
Geophysics Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.