* 2045319
* PurSUiT: Collaborative Research: Accelerating Lineage Discovery to Document Neotropical Fern Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Alejandra Vasco, Botanical Research Institute of Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 07/31/2025
* USD 644,927.00

Understanding the diversity and distribution of species on Earth is important
for many reasons, but the process of documenting and describing biodiversity
often cannot keep up with the rate of habitat loss and the extinction of
species. This is especially true in tropical regions of the world, where the
number of undescribed and poorly known species is highest and biodiversity is
most severely threatened. This research aims to contribute to documentation of
Earthâ€™s plant diversity by studying the diversity of ferns in Colombia, one of
the most species-rich countries on Earth. In this work, the researchers will
document fern diversity by conducting surveys in remote parts of the country
that have been poorly explored by scientists, as well as studying specimens of
ferns in museum collections. This project will improve our understanding of how
many fern species exist in Colombia, where they occur, and how many of them are
threatened with extinction. This project will also result in the description of
species that are new to science and provide insights into the origins of plant
diversity by reconstructing the evolutionary history of ferns through analysis
of DNA sequences. An important contribution of this work will be the creation of
a freely accessible online database that will organize data on ferns in Colombia
and help future researchers to study these plants. This project will also
provide training for two graduate students and more than a dozen undergraduate
students in biodiversity research and will improve scientific collaboration.
Findings of this research will be shared with the public through partnerships
with schools, freely available online videos, and displays at a botanical garden
in the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will document
diversity of ferns in Colombia through a unified taxonomic and evolutionary
context using a multi-faceted approach. First, gaps in the current understanding
of species distributions in Colombia will be addressed through field expeditions
to understudied regions of Colombia that are predicted to harbor high levels of
fern diversity, complemented by targeted study of herbarium specimens at major
herbaria. Second, in order to improve accessibility of data on Colombia ferns,
resources for an existing online database will be bolstered, producing a data-
rich, publicly available, specimen-driven taxonomic resource for fern diversity
research in the American tropics. This resource will include a searchable
specimen database, multi-entry keys to families and genera, and specimen-driven
national and regional checklists. Third, to better understand Colombian fern
diversity within an evolutionary context, genomic resources will be generated
for all fern species in Colombia, including a DNA and leaf-tissue bank for all
collections, ploidy estimates, and target capture sequence data to conduct
comprehensive phylogenomic analyses. Finally, these data will be integrated to
detect and describe yet-overlooked diversity, including complete taxonomic
treatments for four prominent and complex genera.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.