* 2045576
* CAREER: Randomness in Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Eshan Chattopadhyay, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 01/31/2026
* USD 343,688.00

The use of randomness is ubiquitous in computation, with applications ranging in
many areas such as algorithm design, cryptography, and distributed computing.
While in some areas, such as cryptography, not much can be done without
randomness, in other areas such as algorithm design, it is not clear if there is
a fundamental reason that randomness should be useful. Further, in applications
where randomness is crucially important, it is often the case that one needs
access to purely random bits but natural sources of randomness are typically
defective. Thus, while many applications heavily rely on randomized techniques,
there are many important questions related to the power and requirement of
randomness, as well producing high quality randomness that we still do not
understand. The major research agenda of this project is to further our
understanding on these broad directions (which are central questions in the area
of pseudo-randomness) using exciting recent progress. The project also features
activities designed to increase the fraction of undergraduates from
disadvantaged backgrounds choosing computer science as a
major.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research goals of this project can be
broadly classified into the following two directions: (i) Unconditional de-
randomization: A central question in complexity theory is if randomness is
necessary in efficient computation. There are longstanding conjectures and
conditional results that indicate that one can derandomize efficient computation
(i.e., remove the use of randomness without paying much in efficiency). A
central goal of this project is to push the state-of-art in several important
directions that include (unconditionally) derandomizing algorithms that use
limited memory, and various sorts of circuit families that have been beyond
reach so far. The investigator plans to tackle these problems by leveraging
multiple new approaches that have surfaced recently such as exploiting Fourier
analytic structure, and new frameworks of de-randomization based on recent
notions such as fractional pseudorandom generators, and pseudorandom pseudo-
distributions. (ii) Extracting pure random bits from defective sources of
randomness: Complementary to the above direction, the area of randomness
extraction focuses on producing purely random bits from low quality sources that
occur in nature. There has been remarkable recent progress in this area, and the
important research goals of this project include constructing better extractors
in realistic models of defective random sources and in the presence of
adversaries, with applications to cryptography, and investigating the use of
such extractors in unconditional de-randomization pursuits listed
above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.