* 2045517
* CAREER: Modeling the role of blood and lymphatic vessels in adipose tissue
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Evangelia Bellas, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2026
* USD 397,141.00

In the past twenty years, our understanding of adipose (fat) tissue has been
transformed. We now realize that adipose tissue is a complex endocrine (hormone
producing) organ capable of regulating whole body homeostasis, i.e., provide the
stability and constancy needed to function properly. Obese adipocytes (fat
cells) expand from three to six times their original volume, while blood vessels
do not grow with the expanded tissue. Lymphatic vessels, whose main function is
to return tissue fluids (primarily lymph) back to the blood, are thought to have
an increased role in supporting the tissue; however, no laboratory model exists
to study these interactions outside of a body. To address the need for such
models, this CAREER project seeks to build a biomimetic (biology mimicking)
model of vascularized adipose tissue with a lymphatic component that will be
used to explore the impact of transport between blood, lymph, and adipose tissue
on the development of obesity. The educational objectives of this project are to
(1) initiate a science communication workshop to help trainees improve
communication skill sets and to educate others on the racial and healthcare
disparities associated with obesity; and (2) develop a gallery of failed
experiments to provide an informal setting to help trainees change the narrative
from perceived failure to an opportunity to explain interesting findings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s underlying research goal is to change
the current approach to adipocyte and adipose tissue (AT) research in three
different ways: (1) move from 2D studies in culture models to functional 3D in
vitro models with human cells, (2) move away from the “adipo(cyte)-centric” view
of AT that does not account for the tissue complexity in vascularization,
matrix, among other factors, and (3) move from static models to models that
acknowledge that tissue is constantly expanding and breaking down to account for
changing adipocyte volumes. Towards this goal, this CAREER project aims to build
a biomimetic, vascularized "fat-on-a-chip" model to explore the impact of
transport between blood, lymph, and AT on development of obesity using human-
derived cells. This model will answer the overarching scientific question of how
lymphatic remodeling and function are altered in an obese adipose tissue
microenvironment by enabling quantification of both adipocyte and lymphatic
vascular function from two important angles: (1) functional, which includes
metabolic outcomes and barrier function under flow and (2) structural, which
includes matrix and vascular remodeling. Since the system is amenable to
gene/protein expression assays, confocal microscopy and soluble factor sampling,
the project is also expected to reveal mechanistic insights. The Research Plan
is organized under three objectives: (1) Develop, characterize, and validate a
microphysiological model of AT with lymphatics, benchmarking to human AT samples
while evaluating the effect of static versus flow conditions on vessel barrier
function, cell-cell junctions, and fluid accumulation; (2) Develop an obese
model of AT containing lymphatic vessels to assess the impact of obese cues on
lymphatic remodeling and lymphangiogenesis, which will be accomplished by
exposing the model to hypoxia (1% O2) using primary adipocytes and endothelial
cells from healthy and obese subjects; and (3) Explore the role of the matrix
properties on lymphatic remodeling and function. In summary, this reductionist
in vitro model of adipose tissue will provide a foundational platform for
vascular research, obesity research and therapeutic
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.