* 2045262
* CAREER: NMR of the Solid Electrolyte Interphase on Li Metal Anodes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Lauren Marbella, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2026
* USD 510,139.00

Lithium metal batteries are expected to enable high energy density applications
in electrified transportation and grid storage. However, lithium metal
components suffer from severe interfacial instabilities, leading to efficiency
losses and serious safety concerns. In the region between the negative electrode
and the liquid electrolyte, a solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) is produced by
the spontaneous breakdown of electrolyte compounds. The SEI in lithium metal
batteries is hypothesized to play a key role in lithium deposition but is
challenging to assess with traditional materials characterization methods. In
this proposal, we use nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopic techniques
to create a molecular-level description of the chemical reactions that occur at
lithium metal interfaces to ultimately mitigate the formation microstructures
for safe and efficient battery operation. This research program is strongly
coupled with educational activities to bridge gaps in NMR training through a
hands-on “In Situ NMR of Energy Materials” workshop aimed at local researchers
and industry partners. These efforts are complemented with plans to broaden the
participation of underrepresented and underprivileged women in undergraduate
research through a partnership with the Science Pathways Scholars Program at
Barnard (women's college). We will leverage connections within the community to
host a TEDx conference to improve NMR education for the general public and
generate excitement for aspiring youth and their families by highlighting the
use of NMR for vaccine development, energy storage, disease treatment, and the
arts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to use NMR
spectroscopy to elucidate the chemical mechanisms underpinning SEI formation and
function, and to use that knowledge to achieve the desired smooth Li deposition
in Li metal batteries. The key challenge in obtaining this information is that
the complex SEI structure evolves during Li deposition/dissolution and is easily
disturbed when removed from its native operating environment. In order to
overcome these issues, we propose to use a combination of solution and solid-
state NMR, together with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to provide a
comprehensive assessment of the composition, arrangement, and dynamics of the
SEI that forms on the surface of Li metal anodes. In situ NMR/MRI provides
accurate chemical, spatial, and temporal information on multiphase interfacial
phenomena to elucidate the role of electrolyte decomposition, anode/cathode
crosstalk, and ion transport on lithium deposition behavior. Assignment of the
interfacial chemistries and transport phenomena that dictate the formation of
electrochemically inactive Li will allow us to describe, at the molecular-level,
chemical mechanisms underpinning low Coulombic efficiency. We will also educate
students and industrial researchers on in situ NMR methods using cost-effective
electrode fabrication techniques and widely available electrochemical and NMR
equipment so that they can go beyond current, “black box” approaches to collect
and analyze data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.