* 2045379
* SBIR Phase I:  Point-Of-Use Nano-Mosaic Filter Technology for Lithium
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Sheeba Dawood, MINERVA LITHIUM LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is in the development of an efficient, rapid, and cost-
effective point-of use technology to recover lithium from brine resources.
Current brine operations are capital intensive and incur significant lead time
(2 years) with low recovery (30%) for producing high-grade lithium. The proposed
technology targets two-fold reduction in operation cost, high lithium recovery
(90%), and reducing extraction time from 2 years to less than 24 hours.
Contributing to the world-wide Total Addressable Market (TAM) of ~$992 billion,
this technology will impact the global lithium market, growing at an estimated
compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 1.9% for energy storage, electronic bikes,
electrification of tools, and other battery-intense applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1
project proposes to develop a point-of-use nanomembrane filter for lithium
extraction from non-traditional water resources. The proposed filter utilizes a
robust, porous, and surface charged tailored sorbent of a novel coordination
polymer framework prepared from an abundant natural polyphenol. The sorbents
possess molecular sieving ability, tailorable pore size up to the pore dimension
&lt;2 nm, and functional coordination sites for high binding affinity for
lithium ions. The novelty of the innovation over current technologies (e.g.,
solar evaporation and ion-exchange techniques) is nano-based filter technology
with selective affinity for lithium, enabling rapid and efficient extraction and
recovery of lithium. The research objective is to demonstrate the proof-of-
concept for recovery within 24 hours as either lithium chloride or lithium
carbonate with targeted recovery efficiency and conversion &gt;90% in a
subsequent step. The project includes: (1) Fabricating the membrane from the
molecular sieves, (2) evaluating the lithium sieving performance, recovery, and
conversion, and (3) fabricating a prototype filter unit. These developments will
directly address current limitations in extraction time and efficiency, cost,
recovery efficiency of lithium, and environmental impact of solar evaporation,
ion-exchange and solvent extraction, and osmosis membrane
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.