* 2045804
* CAREER: Co-evolution of Machine Intelligence and Continuous Information
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Rui Li, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 05/31/2026
* USD 285,637.00

The real world is complex and constantly changing. Information becomes
progressively available over time via continuous stream of noisy data. For
example, molecular biology databases are always updated with various new gene-
protein relationships (e.g., gene regulations, genetic interactions) validated
in wet lab experiments. High-energy experiments in astro-particle physics give
rise to large amounts of data in the form of continuous high-volume streams.
Interpersonal interaction behaviors (e.g., facial expressions, gestures) contain
rhythms that are not only correlated in time but also exhibit phase
synchronization in an ongoing flow of mutual influence. In order to fully
exploit these non-stationary streams of data online and in real-time, this
project aims to build machine intelligence capable of quantifying uncertainty,
constantly accommodating new information, and consolidating previously acquired
knowledge in the meantime. The project is specifically motivated by applications
to computational biology, astro-physics, and human interaction behaviors, and
will result in innovative online inference methods that are broadly applicable
across data-intensive domains. Furthermore, this research will support the
interdisciplinary development of a diverse student body of disability, women,
and minorities, and the development of graduate-level machine learning courses.
The outreach work will contribute to increasing partnerships between academia
and industry, and increasing public scientific
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research objective is to create a
unified dynamic statistical inference framework based on Bayesian nonparametrics
to jointly update deep neural network parameters, adapt neural architectures,
and consolidate acquired knowledge. The investigator highlights three inter-
related projects that significantly advance this research agenda: (1) neural
parameter online inference: design and develop online inference algorithms to
recursively update posterior distributions of neural network parameters with
continuous data stream, (2) neural architecture online inference: create
modeling and computational methods to enable deep neural architectures to
automatically go through a qualitative growth to accommodate progressively
available information from new data as they are streaming, and (3) dynamic
knowledge distillation: design and develop modeling methods to merge old
knowledge with new one while both neural parameters and architectures are
evolving to extract statistical structures from heterogeneous data stream. These
research aims will be complemented by multidisciplinary collaborations to
rigorously validate and generalize the framework. This research will lead to
efficient statistical online inference methods for the whole information
integration and data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.