* 2045671
* CAREER: Convergent molecular mechanisms regulating dormancy in Vibrios
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Salvador Almagro-Moreno, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 04/30/2026
* USD 473,058.00

Under unfavorable conditions such as starvation or antibiotic exposure, numerous
microorganisms enter dormant states that facilitate their survival. Dormant
bacterial cells have been linked to the failure of antibiotic therapy, food-
related outbreaks, and environmental disease transmission. Despite the
prevalence and biological significance of dormant states, several aspects of
these critical phenomenon remain obscure. In this research project, the
regulatory networks controlling bacterial dormancy and environmental conditions
driving this phenomenon will be investigated. In this research project, Vibrio
cholerae, the causative agent of cholera, will be used as a model system to
study the role of a transcription factor, ToxR, in dormancy. However, the
experimental approaches and potential findings will be applicable to numerous
microorganisms that form these types of dormant cells. Results from this
proposal may have major public health and economic implications as these cells
are typically resistant to antibiotics and are a major source of food and water
contamination. A major integrated education initiative, the Synergy Scholars
Program, will foster the retention of underrepresented students in Biomedical
Sciences at University of Central Florida, a large Hispanic-Serving Institution
by creating a supportive community that revolves around the mentoring of
scholars. A bridge program for students from the Universidad Interamericana de
Puerto Rico (Aguadilla) to perform research at UCF in areas covered in this
proposal and an updated course on “Bacterial Stress Responses” at UCF that will
include topics from this proposal such as bacterial dormancy will be
implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project focuses on the
convergent regulatory networks controlling bacterial dormancy and how diverse
environmental conditions drive this phenomenon. Aside from sporulation, there
are two major states of dormant bacterial cells, persisters and viable but non-
culturable (VBNC). Persister cells are typically selected after antibiotic
exposure, whereas VBNC cells arise in natural environments due to exposure to
biotic and abiotic factors. In spite of these differences, there are major
overlaps between the two states. In this research project, the hypothesis that
VBNC entry and persister cell formation are initiated by distinct stimuli but
converge into common regulatory pathways will be tested using Vibrio cholerae as
a model system and the master regulator ToxR. The main hypothesis will be tested
in three independent but complementary aims: aim 1 will address how common
aquatic abiotic and biotic drivers synergistically regulate VBNC in a ToxR-
dependent manner via the stringent response; aim 2 will define the roles of ToxR
and the cell envelope stress response in the regulation of persister cell
formation; and, aim 3 will examine the role of a ToxR-regulated small RNA in the
convergence of these dormant phenotypes. Overall, the use of genetic tools in a
tractable model system and the integration of data on the regulatory networks
and environmental conditions will provide insight into the dynamics of dormant
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.