* 2045258
* CAREER: Single Particle Visualization of Chemical Processes During Multimetallic Nanocrystal Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Taylor Woehl, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 656,326.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation, Taylor
Woehl at the University of Maryland-College Park will conduct fundamental
research on the chemical processes involved in the synthesis of metal
nanoparticles, small particles one billionth of a meter in size containing a
mixture of different metals. Metal nanoparticles have potential applications as
chemical sensors, optical materials, and catalysts in accelerating chemical
reactions. A better understanding of the synthetic processes is important for
controlling the properties of metal nanoparticles. Students working on this
project will gain experience synthesizing and characterizing nanoparticles using
state of the art instruments. This CAREER award will support The Nanoscience in
Science Fiction (NS2F) program, which will introduce high school students that
would not normally seek out extramural STEM (science, technology, engineering
and mathematics) activities, including those from under-represented minority
groups, to concepts in nanoscience through the window of science fiction. The
program aims to improve science literacy of high school students and provide
them with positive science role models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
Dr. Taylor Woehl and his team will establish methods to controllably drive
solution chemistry with electron beam radiolysis to probe the reaction
intermediates formed during solution phase synthesis of multi-metallic
nanoparticles from metal thiolate precursors. Correlative liquid phase electron
microscopy and mass spectrometry will be used to delineate and visualize
molecular and nanoscale reaction intermediates, including metal-ligand
complexes, metal nanoclusters, and crystal nuclei, on the single entity scale.
Through these experiments, the research team aims to elucidate reaction
mechanisms connecting molecular scale (e.g., nanocluster chemistry) and
nanoscale chemistry (e.g., crystal nucleation and growth) and to develop new
nanocrystal formation theories to account for ‘non-classical’ effects that will
enable harnessing reaction intermediates to control the properties of
multimetallic nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.