* 2045550
* CAREER: Computational design of sustainable hydrogenation systems via a novel combination of data science, optimization, and ab initio methods
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Srinivas Rangarajan, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 398,806.00

Sustainable, safe, and process-intensified hydrogenation technologies are
essential for distributed, small-scale, and on-demand manufacturing of chemicals
and fuels from shale gas and biomass, upgrading carbon dioxide to useful organic
chemicals, and upcycling plastic waste. New technological developments in this
area would contribute to increasing international competitiveness of the U.S.
chemical manufacturing industries and meeting relevant U.N. goals on sustainable
development. A promising chemistry to this end is catalytic transfer
hydrogenation (CTH), a process that is carried out using hydrogen donors instead
of pure molecular H2, thereby offering a safe, H2- and potentially CO2-free
hydrogenation technology. A critical step towards deploying CTH is to optimally
design the underlying process, a challenging task because atomic-scale
information such as reaction thermodynamics, pathways, and rates have
implications at the microscopic (e.g., product yield) and macroscopic levels
(e.g., process economics). The research vision of this project is to develop and
apply novel computational tools, in synergy with experiments, to design CTH
processes by integrating information and decisions across the different size
scales. In parallel with this research, the educational vision of this project
is to promote computational thinking and programming literacy at various levels
of STEM education. These two skills are well-recognized as being essential for
the next generation of science and engineering innovators to tackle emerging
grand challenges in the energy, health, and environmental
spheres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal specifically aims to
computationally design a vapor-phase transition-metal catalyzed CTH reaction
system of a model oxygenate, viz. acrolein, which is the smallest molecule
having both C-C and C-O unsaturation; as such, it can be considered a model
representative of biomass-derived molecules and functionalized intermediates in
the chemical industry. Designing the acrolein CTH reaction system ultimately
requires identifying the optimal donor-catalyst combination that maximizes the
yield of a desired product, e.g., hydrogenation selectivity of acrolein to
propanal versus propenol. To this end, a novel computational framework that
integrates density functional theory (DFT), informatics, machine learning, and
several other process systems engineering computational methods including
nonlinear optimization and advanced data sampling via reinforcement and transfer
learning, will be developed as part of this research to (i) build Gaussian
Process surrogate models, (ii) formulate and solve coverage-cognizant
microkinetic models, and (iii) solve reaction system optimization problems. This
framework will allow the PI to address a critical gap in the fundamental
mechanistic elucidation and multiscale design of acrolein CTH reaction systems
and thereby identify the optimal donor-catalyst combination from a
representative subset of donors and transition metal catalysts. A well-
integrated educational program will be developed to target different age groups
at Lehigh University and the broader Lehigh valley. This includes engaging high-
school and undergraduate students in cutting-edge research at the intersection
of data science and catalysis, developing online interactive visualization-based
modules to explain high-school science and undergraduate engineering concepts
via enquiry-based learning, and developing and offering an interdisciplinary
elective to train chemical engineers in the burgeoning area of data science and
machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.