* 2045009
* CAREER: Enhancing Trust-Driven Human-Autonomy Interaction: Modeling Trust Dynamics and Supporting Trust Calibration
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Xi Jessie Yang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 04/30/2026
* USD 549,826.00

This project aims to tackle a fundamental question at the heart of human-
technology partnership: How can designers facilitate the establishment of
appropriate trust in technology? Advanced technologies such as autonomous
vehicles and collaborative robots are entering every sector of the economy and
will fundamentally alter the way people live and work. However, realizing the
full economic, safety, and health potential of these technologies is only
possible if people establish appropriate trust in them. This project aims to
understand and model the formation and evolution of trust, and to develop
adaptive autonomy that facilitates the establishment of appropriate trust. The
project advances STEM education and workforce development by nurturing the next
generation of scientists in human-autonomy interaction, and by developing
outreach activities for K-12 students with an emphasis on increasing
participation of women and underrepresented minorities, and for working
professionals aimed at helping them adapt to the future workplace wherein humans
and autonomous agents will increasingly work as a team.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research work has three main thrusts: (1) modeling
temporal dynamics of trust formation and evolution; (2) estimating a person's
trust in autonomy from behavioral and physiological information; and (3)
developing methods that enable the autonomous agent to adapt its behavior and
guide a person toward a more desired level of trust required for successful
operation. The project will conduct multiple human-in-the-loop studies on a
platform with humans interacting with autonomous drones in several situations,
including search and rescue where a sequence of tasks and decisions are
required. Based on the data, trust dynamics models, trust inference algorithms
and adaptive methods will be built, tested and
validated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.