* 2045271
* CAREER: A Research and Educational Framework for Incorporating Spatial Heterogeneity into Social Network Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Clio Andris, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 07/31/2026
* USD 381,617.00

Social networks are representations of the relationships between individuals or
groups, ranging from household ties in an isolated village to billions of online
social media connections. Analyzing these structures can tell us who is well-
connected, who is important in the network, and more advanced structural
properties like how information will flow through the network. Yet, these
analyses are typically conducted without references to where the network is
located in geographic space. Mapping the locations of the people or
organizations (nodes) in a social network and the relationships between them
(edges) allows us to measure new properties such as obstacles to meeting,
important nearby facilities, and paths of knowledge and information flow across
space. Using models, technologies and methods from Geographic Information
Science (GIS) and Social Network Analysis (SNA), the project will create a
public Spatial Social Network (SSN) data repository that includes SSNs from a
wide variety of subjects including epidemiology, sociology, anthropology,
history, political science, organization science, and public health. In addition
to the data, the project will develop new models and statistical tests to help
better understand these networks. To help promote and communicate the study of
SSNs, the investigator will lead the development of educational and research
infrastructure through software, tutorials, curriculum guidance and the support
of an online community of SSN researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty
Early-Career Development (CAREER) award will support the investigation of how
the features of the built environment and physical environment play a role in
how social networks form and develop, and the relationships that ensue within
the provisions of geographic space. The investigator will fuse both SNA and GIS
principles by measuring node and graph properties, and linking these properties
to environmental features for simultaneous assessment (e.g. hot spots and
network centrality). She will compare real SSNs to simulations of those networks
based on principles of movement, distance decay, city formation and the urban
hierarchy, as well as social network characteristics such as preferential
attachment, structural holes and small-world models. This research will show how
choices in scale, scope, sampling, and simplification affect statistical
results, and design best practices for analyzing and modeling social networks in
geographic space. The project will contribute to improving models used in the
physical sciences by incorporating features of places, land use, topography,
points of interest, administrative districts, population density, and
transportation features. This project also emphasizes the visualization of SSNs
on maps, which helps both exploratory spatial data analysis and engagement with
a broad audience. The expected outcomes are innovative methods for testing how
social networks interact with their surroundings, and a new understanding of how
and why individuals or groups form relationships with one another in the context
of their surroundings and provisions of the built
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.