* 2045718
* CAREER: Non-Adiabatic Effects in Dense Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Thomas White, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 01/31/2026
* USD 450,079.00

This CAREER award supports exploration of some of the most extreme states of
matter we know to exist in the universe and can probe in a laboratory setting.
All visible matter is made up of two components, heavy nuclei surrounded by much
lighter electrons. The slow-moving nuclei are often assumed to respond weakly to
the electrons hurtling around them. This premise is the cornerstone of modern
simulation techniques in both physics and chemistry. However, extreme
environments, such as in the center of planets and stars, create incredibly hot
dense matter. This results in fast-moving electrons that begin to strongly
interact with the slow-moving nuclei, challenging previous assumptions. This
award supports experimental work at some of the world's largest lasers,
including the National Ignition Facility - the world's most energetic laser. The
harsh astrophysical conditions will be recreated on Earth to measure the nuclei
dynamics in regimes where data is scarce. Measurements of fundamental
quantities, including particle diffusion and sound speed, will be used to
validate state-of-the-art quantum mechanical simulations. The project will help
train the next generation of scientists by offering education and research
opportunities to the global plasma community. The education and outreach will
focus on providing underrepresented students access to and training in high-
performance computing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulations of dense
plasmas typically employ the adiabatic approximation, usually justified through
the disparate energy scales of the electron and ion motion. The electrons are
assumed to instantaneously adjust to the ion fields, while the ions are confined
to a single adiabatic surface. Recent approaches that go beyond this
approximation have led to significant differences in the predictions of plasma
properties, with a dearth of experimental measurements preventing discrimination
between competing models. This research program will employ a new experimental
platform, developed for the Omega and NIF laser facilities, to perform the first
measurement of diffusion in the warm dense matter regime. This platform will
employ Fresnel Diffractive Radiography, a novel diagnostic technique for laser-
driven X-rays that measures the slow, diffusion-driven changes in density
gradients with exceptional spatial resolution. The experimental work is
supported by predictions of the diffusion coefficient using new advanced
simulations that incorporate the electron dynamics within a complex, quantum-
mechanical framework. These simulations will be conducted by undergraduate
students and performed with support from the University of Nevada, Reno High-
Performance Computing team. The primary research goal is to clearly discriminate
between plasma models with fundamentally different approaches to non-
adiabaticity. This project is jointly funded by the Division of Physics and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.