* 2045182
* CAREER: Determining the Metabolic Organization and Enzymology of the Fundamentally Important Flavonoid Biosynthetic Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Daniel Owens, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 02/28/2026
* USD 571,401.00

Metabolism, or the set of chemical reactions that occur inside cells that
sustain life, is typically represented in a linear fashion, with inputs and
outputs of each reaction considered independent of the spatial arrangement of
enzymes that govern those reactions. A primary objective of this work is to
expand the view of metabolism beyond current linear two-dimensional models to
more holistic three-dimensional representations. A metabolon is a group of
enzymes that organize in three dimensions by interacting together to generate a
“machine” that can direct flow and influence the path through the overall
system. Determining metabolon formation provides fundamental information on how
different compounds are produced in living organisms and gives insight into how
to manipulate these systems to improve the production of compounds of interest.
This work focuses on using orange (Citrus sinensis) to determine metabolon
organization of the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway, which can be utilized for
human benefit. The Broader Impact of this works includes the intrinsic nature of
the research on flavonoids, which have important health and nutritional
qualities. Additional work with students will include opportunities to become
involved in the research itself and outreach efforts will teach students how to
grow their own food. The activities will include a focused effort to include
Pacific Islanders who are underrepresented in science. It is hoped these
activities will capture the interest of young people due to the hands-on
components and expose them to mentors who are currently successful in science
and agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research objective for this
project is to determine the metabolic organization and enzymology of the
flavonoid biosynthetic pathway in orange. The central hypothesis is that
accumulation of flavonoid end products in orange depends upon formation of a
metabolon. The rationale for the proposed research is that a determination of
the enzymology and metabolic organization of the orange flavonoid biosynthetic
pathway will identify targets for improving the content and quality of flavonoid
metabolites for applications beneficial to humanity. These objectives will be
achieved by identifying structure-function relationships of metabolon enzymes
involved in biosynthesis of orange flavonoids, and determine the organization of
enzymes comprising flavonoid metabolons of blonde and blood varieties of orange.
The work expands from prior use of the model system Arabidopsis thaliana by
employing the fundamentally and agriculturally important species orange, which
allows analysis of differences in metabolon formation between species that
accumulate early and late flavonoids. Glycosyltransferase enzymes will also be
studied as they contribute to the production of the majority of flavonoid
compounds which accumulate in vivo but are currently
understudied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.