* 2045087
* CAREER: Human motion driven capillaric circuits for skin-mountable biosensors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Ismail Araci, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2026
* USD 413,517.00

Musculoskeletal disorders, the leading cause of disability in the world, have
been on the rise due to the aging human population and the main course of action
in response to these conditions is improving the availability and efficacy of
physical rehabilitation. Continuous monitoring of specific human movements using
wearable devices would enable tracking of therapy progress, thus increase
patient compliance and education in addition to enabling clinical studies
investigating the relationship between rehabilitation exercises and health
outcomes. The goal of this CAREER project is to develop a skin patch
incorporated with a capillaric circuit that functions as a micropump driven by
human movement, which is an attractive approach for this purpose as it allows
unique functionalities by combining fluid physics with wearables and human
biomechanics. To inspire a broad range of students to study in STEM fields, the
bioinspired device design and simple fabrication methods available in the PI’s
lab will be used to produce educational kits for teaching human physiology and
device physics to high school and college students, and teachers will be trained
through a collaboration with the Santa Clara County Biotechnology Education
Partnership program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s primary research
goals are directed toward the development and application of implantable and
miniaturized micro/optorfluidic technologies for biology and medicine. Toward
this goal, this CAREER project aims to develop a bioinspired capillaric sensor
patch for detecting skin strain-field (SSF) configurations correlated with a
specific motion (e.g., facial or shoulder rehabilitation exercises etc.) Though
skin-mounted microfluidic wearable devices for sweat and strain sensing have
attracted significant attention, human movement has not been considered as the
source of functionality in a microfluidic wearable device. In this project,
human skin biomechanics as a driving force for microfluidics will be
investigated using digital image correlation (DIC) and the skin strain field
(SSF) to measure a large range of movements. Capillaric sensor networks with
electrical and image-based readouts will be designed for real-time wireless data
transfer and fluidic data storage, respectively. Ultimately, the interaction of
the complex mechanical stimuli and the capillaric network components will be
represented as a signal with elastomeric and dilatometric modes, which will
significantly reduce the energy consumption and computational power required for
complex movement analysis. For the time-dependent and multiplexed nature of the
SSF, a computational method is needed for designing capillaric circuits for
performing the desired analog and digital signal processing operations in the
fluidic domain. A microfluidic computer-aided design tool that models the
capillaric circuit as an electrical circuit will be developed to find the device
parameters. In addition to the device physics, this project will investigate the
development of new manufacturing techniques for large-area skin-conformal
microfluidic devices and stable electrode-ionic liquid interfaces. These will
serve towards the advancement of capillaric sensors for wearable technologies.
An imperceptible skin-mountable patch that wirelessly transmits the number of
repetitions of the physical rehabilitation exercises with the correct form and
intensity to a master node (e.g., smart-watch or -phone) will be developed and
these devices will be validated on volunteers in consultation with the Stanford
Rehabilitation Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.