* 2045104
* CAREER: Geometric Function Theory in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Ming Xiao, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2026
* USD 155,069.00

This CAREER award will support the PI's investigations of various geometric and
analytic problems in several complex variables and Cauchy-Riemann geometry. The
objective of the research is to further the present understanding of geometric
function theory in several complex variables, as well as its connections with
aspects of algebraic geometry, complex geometry, dynamical systems and physics.
The project will develop new methods and provide interesting research topics for
graduate students and postdocs. The PI will organize a series of educational
activities for students of different academic levels, as well as secondary
school educators. This includes a reading and research program for high school
students, a learning and teaching program for high school teachers, and an
undergraduate summer school program. The PI will encourage the participation of
people from underrepresented groups and underserved school districts into these
activities. The programs will also provide pedagogical training opportunities
for graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bergman kernel and metric will
play a prominent role in the research. In particular, the geometry of open
complex spaces will be investigated in terms of their Bergman kernels and
metrics. The PI will also conduct research on the regularity and rigidity
problems of Cauchy-Riemann and holomorphic mappings that naturally arise in
several complex variables, complex geometry, and arithmetical algebraic
geometry. The methods in the research will incorporate techniques from partial
differential equations, algebra, and differential geometry, in addition to
complex analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.