* 2045674
* CAREER: A Systems Biology Approach to Determine How Information from the Cellular Environment is Transduced to the Circadian Clock.
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Jennifer Hurley, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 02/28/2026
* USD 477,352.00

This Faculty Early Career Development project will determine the underlying
mechanisms that regulate the integration of environmental signals into the
circadian clock. Organisms have widely-adapted a highly conserved process to
anticipate our 24-hr planetary cycles, termed circadian rhythms, making them a
fundamental “rule of life” on planet Earth. Circadian rhythms are controlled by
a molecular “clock” that tunes organismal physiology to time a wide variety of
cellular functions. Understanding how this clock times physiology is vital as
the dysregulation of circadian rhythms can impact a wide array of critical
biological functions in most organisms. Though the clock mechanism was presumed
to be buffered against changes in an organism’s environment, contemporary
research shows that environmental fluctuations can alter circadian regulation at
the cellular level through as yet unknown mechanisms and the goals of this
research are to identify how environmental signals are incorporated into the
circadian timing of a cell. This project will also use the circadian clock to
educate future scientists at the college and pre-school levels in the scientific
method. As the creation of experimental and computational biological data has
surpassed the education of biological researchers in data analytics, the
principal investigator will implement a biological data analytics program at the
undergraduate level to develop an understanding of how data analytics can solve
biological problems. These undergraduate researchers will then work with the
Rensselaer Science Ambassadors to reach out to local preschools to teach young
children about the scientific method using the growth and tracking of sunflower
movements as a model of the circadian clock in an effort to increase STEM
interest in underserved communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives of this project are to use computational and molecular approaches to
identify and validate the mechanisms by which environmental signals are
integrated into the circadian programing of cellular physiology. The molecular
clock that drives circadian rhythms has been long believed to be buffered from
environmental insult, theoretically acting as a fixed switch that turns a
specific set of genes on during the day and off again at night. Contrary to this
theory, recent data has shown there is flexibility in circadian regulation,
demonstrating that environmental signals can be transduced into the clock’s
control of transcript and protein levels. However, there is no mechanistic
comprehension of how systemic integration of environmental signals into
circadian molecular programing occurs. The data that the investigators have
gathered on transcripts and proteins over circadian time from the model organism
Neurospora crassa, along with the computational algorithms that they have built
to analyze this data, suggest potential mechanisms for the integration of
environmental signals into the circadian clock. Therefore, the scientific goals
of this proposal are to utilize novel computational approaches to predict
specific points at which environmental signals are integrated into circadian
transcriptional and translational programming. The investigators will then use
this exquisitely tractable circadian model organism to biochemically validate
these predictions. This research will contribute to the understanding of how
environmental signals are integrated into circadian regulation, which will serve
as a model for signal integration in other cellular regulatory systems. This
project will also develop novel computational tools with which to study many
types of oscillations across research systems. This award was co-funded by the
Cellular Dynamics and Function and Systems and Synthetic Biology clusters of the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.