* 2045925
* CAREER: Reconfiguring Life: Care and control in bioengineering
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Emma Frow, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 169,586.00

This proposal was funded in part by the Ethical and Responsible Research
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is growing interest in promoting responsible
research and innovation around new biotechnologies, with the aim of fostering
more socially robust and inclusive technologies. This CAREER project focuses
specifically on the role of care in responsible innovation for bioengineering.
It documents the growth and development of "biofoundries," a new type of
facility for high-throughput design and genetic engineering being built in
academic and industry settings. Biofoundries are working to make bioengineered
molecules, materials and organisms for a wide range of research and industry
sectors, and are positioning themselves as being able to make significant
contributions to a more bio-based economy. This research uses qualitative and
ethnographic methods to trace the "politics of care" in biofoundries at
different scales: identifying the many ways care is manifest in the day-to-day
practices of setting up and running a biofoundry, as well as the broader values
guiding investment in and governance of biofoundries. These findings are being
used to design and test tools to help biofoundry practitioners and undergraduate
biomedical engineering students reconceptualize care and responsibility in more
explicit and intentional ways. The long-term goal of these efforts is to help
transform the culture of bioengineering education and practice towards more
inclusive and sustainable outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using qualitative data
collected through interviews, site visits and participant-observation, this
project has three objectives: (1) to trace care practices in the building of
high-throughput facilities for genetic engineering, (2) to examine the broader
social and political contexts within which these facilities are being built, and
how these are shaping visions of governance, and (3) to develop experimental
tools and practices for re-shaping governance in and of biofoundries. This
project builds on growing interest in practices and politics of care by science
&amp; technology studies (STS) scholars, in this case making connections with
work on the governance of emerging technologies to advance theory and practice
of governance. Research findings will generate a rich portrait of changing
practices, relationships and accountabilities in a contemporary, high-stakes
bioengineering venture. This project will deepen the methodological toolbox of
existing responsible research &amp; innovation initiatives, by developing
interventions centered specifically around care. It also contributes to ongoing
methodological discussions regarding the role of STS in engaging with and
shaping emerging technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.