* 2045738
* REU Site: Advanced Manufacture of Novel Materials and Bio-Nano Applications
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Subha Kumpaty, Milwaukee School of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/29/2024
* USD 414,893.00

This three-year summer REU renewal Site at Milwaukee School of Engineering
(MSOE) will involve a broad mix of students to conduct research in advanced
manufacture of novel materials and bio-nano applications in a strongly mentored
environment. MSOE 3D Printing complements metal laser-wire deposition at Midwest
Engineered Systems and collaboration with Northwest University’s Neuroimaging,
provides opportunities for students to gain insight into customer discovery and
exploration that culminate in unique solutions. All projects focus on impacting
society by improving life standards through human health and efficient,
sustainable systems. The REU team hopes that the diverse cohort - from primarily
undergraduate institutions - will get to meet and present at a national
conferences on undergraduate research. The Site provides a unique perspective on
state-of-the-art 3DP research to all participants. New features of this site
include the current participants being mentored by prior REU participants in
Ph.D. programs and beyond, and being provided with opportunities to engage in
K-12 outreach activities through the MSOE STEM Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
technically diverse group of eight undergraduate students per year will
participate in transformative problem solving of interdisciplinary projects
involving additive manufacturing research at Milwaukee School of Engineering
Rapid Prototyping Center, its Bioprinting lab and its synergistic centers of
collaboration with industry and other institutions. The projects are uniquely
poised for cross-pollination and customer discovery and creativity. With the
unprecedented technological advances in 3DP affecting our daily lives, along
with its features such as accuracy, reduction in development and delivery time,
and reliability, it is becoming cost-effective because of the advancement of
materials. Students will receive a career-enriching experience from a well-
established and well-run program culminating in a national conference
presentation and a strong desire to pursue a graduate degree. MSOE-REU has
served as a research incubator for several first-generation and underrepresented
students, especially from primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs). This
renewal site will build on previous success motivating participants to pursue
continued education and careers in science and engineering. Not only does this
project feature geographical diversity and technical diversity of the
participants, but it has also embedded transformative research potential in many
applications of 3DP with strong collaboration from both academia and industry.
All projects impact society in improving life standards − human health and
efficient, sustainable systems. New features of this site include the current
participants being mentored by prior REU participants in Ph.D. programs and
beyond, and being provided with opportunities to engage in K-12 outreach
activities through the MSOE STEM Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.