* 2045848
* CAREER: Brain Imaging Genetics via multimodal modular structure querying
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Liang Zhan, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 06/30/2026
* USD 295,815.00

Brain imaging genetics, which integrates the merits of brain imaging
technologies and genetic data, has the potential to improve our understanding of
the human brain. Recent studies have shown that brain imaging genetics is a
powerful tool to discover the polygenic contributions for brain disorders and
quantitatively characterize the neural systems affected by risk gene variants.
This project will develop a series of novel computational tools to address the
critical challenges and bottlenecks in current brain imaging genetics research,
and will directly impact biomedical informatics, brain research, and data
science. The success of this project will be used to develop new curriculums
that incorporate research into the classroom and provide students from under-
represented groups with opportunities to participate in biomedical and machine
learning research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main challenges in current brain
imaging genetics are as follows. First, most existing brain imaging genetics
studies assume the linear relationship between genes and imaging features.
Considering the high dimensionality of brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
data and genetic data, this linearity is too simplistic. Second, traditional
brain MRI research is suboptimal in characterizing brain dynamics because they
usually focus on scalar statistics, which reduce the complex brain imaging data
to a one-dimension and discard important informative brain network structures.
In this project, we choose the brain modular structure as the feature
representations. These kinds of representations can better describe the
intermediate scale of brain network organization, rather than any global or
local scales. The brain modular structure provides a promising bridge as the
intermediate neuroendophenotype with a smaller dimension and a more focused
objective to link genotypic and phenotypic traits. Moreover, how to derive the
modular structure from multimodal data has not been well addressed. This project
will provide efficient and biologically meaningful tools to map polygenetic
components to phenotypes with the aid of brain modular features. The successful
development of these new tools will have an immediate and strong impact on brain
research, network science, and machine learning. Moreover, this project offers
multidisciplinary training opportunities for trainees at all levels from K-12 to
postdoctoral levels. Outcomes will be openly disseminated in peer-reviewed
articles, outreach programs, and in the form of code/data repositories to
maximize impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.