* 2045985
* CAREER: General-Purpose Stochastic Computing for Ultra-Low-Power Hardware Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Joshua San Miguel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 02/28/2026
* USD 322,178.00

Technology trends are moving towards a future of ultra-low-power computing where
everything (whether it be a ring on a finger or even an implant in the body)
becomes capable of some form of smart processing. However, such a future cannot
be realized with the traditional processors used in today's tablets and
smartphone devices. While typical computers operate at power budgets of 10s-100s
of watts, ultra-low-power devices would need to be able to operate at as low as
10s of milliwatts. And despite orders of magnitude less power, such devices
would need to have the same compute capabilities and general programmability to
support complex tasks such as data analytics, machine learning and wireless
communication that are essential for these applications. In other words, even if
it becomes possible to make the processor hardware ultra-low-power, these
devices would be unusable if software developers are not able to write efficient
programs that can run on these devices. This proposal makes the case for
stochastic computing (SC), an unconventional approach for designing ultra-low-
power systems. Instead of reading and writing data in binary, SC reads and
writes in unary, where data is encoded as probabilities instead of standard
digital numbers. This unconventional computing style allows SC to perform
computations with circuits that are orders of magnitude smaller than their
binary counterparts. For example, a multiplier circuit shrinks from 100s of
logic gates down to a single logic gate in SC. Though promising, building
processors using SC is no simple feat for a couple of reasons. First, there is a
general lack of standard toolchains publicly available for designing, simulating
and comparing SC circuits. Second, prior SC works are mostly case-by-case,
proposing circuits that only work for specific applications and lack sufficient
programmability for software developers to write useful
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this project is to lower
the barrier-to-entry for non-expert developers to consider adopting SC in their
systems. The PIs aim to develop and standardize an open-sourced framework, named
UnarySim, for rapidly designing and evaluating SC systems. Leveraging the PIs'
preliminary work on building efficient SC circuits, the project will culminate
in the design of the first general-purpose, programmable SC processor that can
support a variety of ultra-low-power applications. If the proposed research is
successful, it can help proliferate the budding SC community and make SC a
practical (and competitive) option in the tech industry. The broad goal of this
proposal is to realize the potential of ultra-low-power computing, making it
possible to perform unprecedented computing tasks at the cost (and size) of a
dime. This can open the door for important new applications such as smart
pacemakers, wearables, augmented reality and precision agriculture, to name a
few. The insights gained from this research will be publicly disseminated in
scientific venues and integrated into curricula to teach young students about
power-saving principles and their impact on the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.