* 2045600
* CAREER: Reionization 2020: Fast Radiative Transfer Simulations for the Era of JWST and Extremely Large Telescopes
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Anson DAloisio, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 06/30/2026
* USD 628,507.00

During the Epoch of Reionization the first galaxies formed and the hydrogen gas
between them was ionized. Dr. D’Aloisio and his group will develop software to
simulate this epoch to better understand star formation in the earliest
galaxies. Dr. D’Aloisio and a team of undergraduate students will build a radio
telescope for astronomy education and outreach. They will host workshops for
middle school students. The students will use the telescope to observe radio
emission from clouds of atomic hydrogen gas in the Milky Way and will be guided
through the analysis and interpretation of the data. This authentic experience
is designed to foster a life-long interest in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Flexible Radiative Transfer code (FlexRT) will be an open-source fast adaptive
ray tracing radiative transfer code. FlexRT will be optimized for parameter
space studies with up to 1 cubic Giga-parsec volume and will use a dynamic sub-
grid model to capture the effects of intergalactic absorption. The team will
investigate how the properties of reionization-era galaxies relate to their
cosmological environments, and how intergalactic absorption systems regulate
reionization’s global morphology and evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.