* 2045597
* CAREER: Transactional Memory for Distributed Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Gokarna Sharma, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 01/31/2026
* USD 313,247.00

A major challenge in concurrent programming is concurrency control: (i) how to
coordinate accesses to memory locations shared among concurrently executing
tasks and (ii) how to ensure that the computation is correct. The traditional
approach is to use barriers and locks but they have several drawbacks that
discourage non-expert users from writing concurrent programs. This project
explores the recently emerged paradigm of transactional memory. This project
explores this new paradigm in the context of the increasingly popular
distributed multiprocessor systems, where concurrent tasks interact by sending
messages to each other. This project establishes both theoretical as well as
practical foundations. The specific goals on the theoretical foundations include
developing a comprehensive set of techniques leading to impossibility results,
lower bounds, and scheduling algorithms with provable performance guarantees.
The specific goals on the practical foundations include developing a system,
called GraphTM, that is robust enough to evaluate the designed algorithms
against a wide range of benchmark applications. Previously, this paradigm was
studied mostly in the context of the symmetric multiprocessor systems, where
concurrent tasks interact through reading and writing the same main memory. The
main difference is the non-uniformity in memory access latency in the
distributed multiprocessor systems. This non-uniformity is vital and affects not
only the total execution time of all concurrent tasks but also other related
network parameters such as communication cost and congestion. Therefore, the
technical merit of this project is based on enhancing understanding of the
effects of non-uniform latency in concurrency control through the development of
new tools and techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this project
will have impacts on the principles and practice of concurrent programming. Due
to recent architectural and computational trends, each new generation of
multiprocessor systems is having an increasing number of cores. Therefore, being
able to program with concurrency will be an important and necessary skill in the
future. The transactional memory paradigm is conceptually simple and it will
encourage non-expert users in writing concurrent programs, reaching beyond the
current use of concurrent programming only among expert users. Moreover, some
results of this project will be a part of courses the PI teaches. The developed
system will be made publicly available. The research results will be
disseminated through presentations in major conferences, workshops, and
seminars. Additionally, this project will mentor and educate K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students in concurrent programming, including
female, minority, and first-generation computer science students. Finally, the
PI will participate in outreach events individually and in collaboration with
K-12 science experience, summer undergraduate research experience (SURE), and
choose Ohio first (COF) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.