* 2045854
* CAREER: Accountable Democracy: Mathematical Reasoning and Democratic Processes in America
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Alma Steingart, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2026
* USD 407,721.00

In recent years, it has become increasingly apparent that computational
techniques are deeply embedded in every stage of the American democratic
process. Prominent examples include computational redistricting and the
increased use of statistical analysis in polling and forecasts. This project
will historicize the role of computers, as well as algorithmic thinking and
mathematical rationales, in the constitution of American representative
democracy in the twentieth century. Even before digital computers and automated
decision making became prevalent, controversies about mathematical definitions
of “fairness,” “bias,” and “discrimination” abounded in American life, and
nowhere were these ideas debated more forcefully than in the realm of democratic
decision making. Focusing on congressional apportionment, the census,
proportional voting, congressional redistricting, polling, and forecasts, this
project investigates how changing computational practices, from statistical
modeling to computational geometry, have insinuated themselves into the most
basic definitions of “fairness” in the American electorate in the twentieth
century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applying theoretical insights from Science and
Technology Studies, this project will integrate archival research and oral
histories in order to investigate the extent to which ideas about what
constitutes “bias,” “fairness,” and “discrimination” are determined by
mathematical and computational metrics as well as by legal, legislative, and
social ones. This research will therefore elucidate how technical and social
definitions of fairness are entangled in computational and mathematical ways of
thinking. Furthermore, it will reckon with the public understanding of science
and, in particular, the public understanding of mathematics and statistics.
Finally, it will extend the study of how scientific expertise is received and
adjudicated when the expert’s skill is a method (e.g., statistics), rather than
a subject matter (e.g., climate change, DNA fingerprinting). The project will
increase public engagement with science and technology by unpacking and clearly
outlining the ways in which mathematical and computational claims to knowledge
have at times obscured political and social agendas. One of the primary goals of
the project is to understand how mathematical claims to truth are adjudicated
not only in the courts, but also by the general public. Some of the debates that
will be examined, like the one regarding census adjustment, are highly technical
in nature. Examining the successful (as well as unsuccessful) strategies that
U.S. journalists and the public have developed to communicate and disseminate
these complex issues is crucial to contemporary society, when so many aspects of
daily life are governed by technically intricate, if not entirely opaque,
computational systems. As data analytics become increasingly foundational to how
Americans engage with the most basic constitution of democracy, it is of the
utmost importance to publicly disseminate information and toolkits to help
citizens evaluate such claims and their assumptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.