* 2045767
* CAREER: Hydrodynamics of Adaptive Lifting Surfaces in Unsteady Flows: An Integrated Experimental and Analytical Study
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Samik Bhattacharya, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 503,557.00

Unsteady flow fields are common in many underwater applications, such as during
high sea conditions, in a propeller wake, during cooperative swimming or during
tides, and waves. In such environments, hovering, station keeping, or performing
any other dynamic maneuvers become extremely difficult for traditional
autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) because they are typically designed with
rigid hydrofoils within a fixed operational envelope. However, aquatic swimmers
can aptly morph their fins and tails to control unsteady forces across all
positions and orientations. Engineers can design highly maneuverable next-
generation AUVs with bio-inspired morphing hydrofoils which can mimic such
performance. But a major bottleneck has been the lack of knowledge of unsteady
hydrodynamics that govern the fluid-structure interaction of such morphing
lifting surfaces. Therefore, the principal aim of this project is to provide a
deep understanding of the unsteady hydrodynamics of adaptive lifting surfaces.
This project will also promote advanced education of marine hydrodynamics and
underwater robotics amongst students at all level, including outreach activities
at the Orlando Science Center and the Orange County Public
Library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to develop new
research and educational paradigm that will reveal and generalize the physics of
morphing lifting surfaces to optimize its performance while encountering
transient wake-inflow conditions. An integrated experimental and analytical
approach is proposed to study the non-linear fluid-structure interaction (FSI)
of adaptive lifting surfaces in such unsteady flows. The central hypothesis is
that shape morphing can dynamically balance the unsteady loads on such adaptive
lifting surfaces by selectively tuning the hydro-elastic response in a transient
wake-inflow. The specific objectives are: (a) Unravel the complex non-linear FSI
response of adaptive underwater lifting surfaces in a range of unsteady flows;
(b) Decipher the spatial and temporal features of the vorticity dynamics and
surface pressure through the time-resolved realization of the 3D flow-field and
surface pressure; (c) Discover the changes in the above non-linear FSI response
when the dynamically deforming lifting surface is subjected to a spatially
varying inflow caused by periodic vortical disturbances; (d) Develop analytical
models by significantly advancing the existing potential-flow-based
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.