* 2045308
* Hominid Dental Metagenomes for Pathogen Evolution Research
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Cecil Lewis, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2024
* USD 497,304.00

Dental cavities and periodontal disease, both major oral health problems in
todayâ€™s world, are caused by opportunistic bacterial pathogens found in the
mouth. This project focuses on the evolutionary history of these pathogens,
examining how the genomes of oral pathogens differ across a comparative sample
of primate species, and, within humans, how they are impacted by changes in
dietary practices, geographic space, and time. Through this comparative research
and the study of oral pathogen genomes recovered from ancient human populations,
this project advances knowledge about pathogen evolution in humans over
thousands of years and provides further insight into the relationships between
host behavior and pathogen evolution. The project benefits from a team-science
approach that involves close collaboration, as well as academic attribution, for
descendent communities of the ancient human populations being studied. Project
findings are communicated to these communities through public talks focusing on
the impact of oral disease, contextualized by microbiome research. The project
also contributes to the professional development of researchers through online
workshops focusing on ancient microbiome data analysis, supports open science by
publication in open-access journals and sharing data through public
repositories, and promotes the broader participation of women in STEM through
student training and mentoring activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transition
from a hunter-gatherer to an agricultural lifestyle, as well as the advent of
industrialization, are thought to have increased the prevalence of oral disease
in humans. However, the way that these transitions affected oral pathogens at a
genomic level, especially in terms of their diversity and virulence, have not
been fully characterized. Additionally, the broader primate comparative context
of oral pathogen diversity is not well understood. In this project, the
investigators reconstruct oral pathogen genomes from dental calculus, a
calcified form of dental plaque. Dental calculus is known to preserve
biomolecules for thousands of years and provides a wealth of information
regarding the host, oral bacteria, and diet. Calculus samples are collected from
museum specimens of nonhuman primates (chimpanzees, gorillas, and orangutans),
and from ancient human populations from the continents of Africa and the
Americas. From both continents, samples are retrieved from the same geographic
location but from time periods associated with different dietary strategies
(hunter-gatherer versus agriculture). The investigators use state-of-the-art
ancient DNA protocols, metagenomic sequencing, and target enrichment strategies
to generate high-quality genome data for oral pathogens found in these samples.
These genome data provide a nuanced understanding of the evolutionary
relationships between oral pathogen strains affecting different host species,
and how oral pathogen strain diversity and genomic architecture have changed
over time and space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.