* 2045760
* CAREER: TUNING QUANTUM STATES OF MAGNETIC TOPOLOGICAL SYSTEMS WITH PRESSURE
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Wenli Bi, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2026
* USD 401,081.00

Non-technical abstract: Quantum magnets are promising platforms for quantum
computation and future green technologies. As an emerging and dynamically
evolving research area, adequate understanding of fundamental physics and design
principles of these materials are still lacking. The goal of this project is to
use external pressure as a control parameter to reveal complex quantum phases
and advance our understanding and control ability of the emergent phases. The
studies provide insights to further synthetic efforts of novel quantum
materials. The integrated education and outreach activities focus on bridging
the gap of STEM workforce education in Alabama by (i) directly training next
generation scientists at multi-scale facilities with a focus on women and
underrepresented minorities, (ii) enhancing STEM research and education capacity
in Alabama through organizing Lecture Series on Modern Synchrotron Techniques
and Applications, (iii) contributing to the UAB physics-STEM Teaching and
Learning Incubator program to enhance state-wide high school science teacher
training, and (iv) promoting awareness in STEM career pathway and interest in
scientific discovery in general public and disseminating scientific discoveries
to broad audience through volunteering at McWane Science Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: Intrinsic magnetic topological
materials exhibit exotic topological quantum phenomena with great potential
applications in future quantum computation and spintronics. Using external
pressure as a tuning knob, the project targets to experimentally discover novel
quantum phenomena, realize ideal magnetic Weyl state in real materials, and
unravel the interplay of magnetic structure, crystal symmetry, and topological
states in representative magnetic Dirac materials. The research employs a suite
of cutting-edge experimental techniques, including the state-of-the-art
synchrotron-based spectroscopy, scattering, and diffraction techniques, and lab-
based transport and magnetization techniques combining with diamond anvil cell
and piezoelectric uniaxial strain cell. The comprehensive experimental results
aim to benchmark theoretical models for treatment of interplay of many-body
physics and topology. The fundamental understanding of the emergent properties
helps to harness the magnetic topological materials for future
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.