* 2045478
* CAREER: Whole-Kernel Analysis Against Developer- and Compiler-Introduced Errors
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Kangjie Lu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 188,254.00

An operating system (OS) kernel is the heart of a computer system. It controls
virtually everything in the system and thus is the most important part of the
system. Modern OS kernels have become extremely large and complex, containing
tens of millions of lines of code. As such, they tend to have a large number of
errors that are introduced by not only developers but also compilers. Kernel
errors are particularly security-critical because a single error in the kernel
may break the whole system. Therefore, detecting and eliminating errors in OS
kernels is imperative. This is however very challenging because OS kernels are
full of hard-to-analyze code artifacts, and the errors take diverse forms and
are hard to be specified for detection. This project aims to combat both
developer- and compiler-introduced errors by proposing a set of new approaches
and techniques, and by realizing them in a precise, whole-kernel analysis
system. The project is expected to improve the security of widely used computer
systems, to protect user data and privacy, and to advance the knowledge in the
fields of security, systems, compilers, and software engineering. In addition,
the resulting system will be integrated into educational tools to help raise
student awareness of errors and also to improve their skills in writing secure
and correct code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is structured into three
research thrusts. (1) Enabling precise whole-kernel analysis with foundational
techniques. This project first aims to tackle multiple important problems, such
as the prevalent hand-written assembly and the monolithic nature, that have been
impeding precise whole-kernel analysis. (2) Detecting semantic errors and even
insecure function designs through multiple new peer-checking techniques. These
techniques minimize the needs for the challenging semantic understanding and
error specification in detection, and expect to turn peer-checking into a
powerful and generic error-detection approach. (3) Discovering and eliminating
compiler-introduced security errors. Compilers tend to focus on semantic
correctness but overlook security states, leading to security errors. This
thrust aims to create a new memory model to capture security states, and a new
oracle to determine security errors introduced by compilers. In addition to
detecting errors, the generic approaches and techniques of this project would
also advance future research on the analysis and protection of computer
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.