* 2045579
* Compact Optomechanical Seismic Sensors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/18/2020,12/31/2022
* Felipe Guzman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 12/31/2022
* USD 230,929.00

This award supports research in gravitational wave detector instrumentation and
it addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
This award sponsors the development of novel compact seismic sensing
technologies that provide highly sensitive observations of slow seismic
phenomena on platforms under extreme conditions such as low pressures (vacuum)
and low temperatures (cryogenics). In this project, parameters of sensitivity
and bandwidth will be studied to develop optomechanical seismic sensors that are
compatible with and can be installed in future gravitational wave observatories,
such as LIGO Voyager. Seismic sensors are used to measure external disturbances
acting on the platforms and provide signals than can be used to stabilize them.
Moreover, the research conducted in this project will advance the development of
technologies that enable further advancements relevant to other scientific and
technological areas such as seismology, geodesy, precision measurements of
vibrations, generally inertial sensing and inertial navigation, where highly
compact form factors and high sensitivities can be advantageous. This award will
support the participation of this research group in activities of the
international LIGO Scientific Collaboration and the gravitational wave community
at large; also providing for students to be trained in precision measurements
and STEM areas, and helping to educate the local community in the new area of
gravitational wave astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop
highly compact monolithic optomechanical seismic sensors for ground-based
gravitational wave observatories, such as LIGO, as an alternative to current
solutions. LIGO currently uses commercial seismometers that are not readily
compatible with vacuum or low temperature environments and are physically large
- approximately 15 kg and 30 liters. Inertial sensors capable of operating in
these conditions are required for future gravitational wave detectors, such as
LIGO Voyager, and need to be developed, which is the goal of this project. In
addition, the research plan envisions the development of an optomechanical
seismic sensing instrument that will serve as a test platform to assess relevant
sensor parameters to guide the technology development and help study their
performance at low frequencies - from 10 mHz to slightly above 10 Hz. These
results will outline the path for the development of cryogenic- and vacuum-
compatible optomechanical seismic sensors for future generation gravitational
wave observatories and will be relevant to many other STEM
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.