* 2045444
* SBIR Phase I:  A Physics Guided Machine Learning Framework for Monitoring Rivers using Satellite Imagery
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Ankush Khandelwal, TERRA COVER, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2022
* USD 255,880.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to provide near-real time information of changes in the spatial
extent (flood mapping) and flow of rivers (water resource management) to
insurance, energy, and agricultural stakeholders. Effective management of water
resources and associated risks has become a major challenge for society. Floods
are common disasters around the world and droughts lead to major disruptions to
economies and a loss of life. This project will leverage artificial
intelligence, and peta-bytes of satellite imagery to implement a physics guided
data-intensive approach for advancing global hydrological modeling. The project
will provide efficient and accurate imagery-derived observations of water
dynamics in rivers at relatively low computational cost (compared with ground
sensors) in a user-friendly web environment. This will be a significant step
towards improving the modelling and forecasting of water resources around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project aims to develop advanced artificial intelligence techniques to track
surface water changes in rivers across the globe using vast amounts of satellite
imagery. While conventional artificial intelligence techniques are purely driven
by data, the proposed technology incorporates known physical laws into these
algorithms. This physics guided approach makes these techniques much more robust
to atmospheric disturbances (clouds, shadows, haze, etc.), and enables
synergistic use of imagery datasets at different resolutions which are two major
issues with satellite imagery analysis. Furthermore, the proposed uncertainty
quantification techniques will enable domain experts to incorporate their local
knowledge about river flows into the framework to refine
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.