* 2045610
* CAREER: A cross-scale, data-efficient approach to understanding plant hydraulic regulation using optimization and maximum entropy
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Xue Feng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 03/31/2026
* USD 676,261.00

Plants affect water, carbon, and energy cycles by using water and carbon dioxide
(CO2) to photosynthesize and grow. CO2 enters plants through small openings on
leaves, called stomata, while water is taken up by roots in the ground and
transported to the leaves by plants’ vascular systems. How efficiently the plant
stomata and vascular systems work to supply water and CO2 to the plant – through
a process called plant hydraulic regulation – depends on a range of
environmental conditions (e.g., dryness in the soil and in the air) and plant
characteristics. This project will use the mathematical optimization of plant
performance to understand how hydraulic regulation impacts stomatal openings (at
the leaf scale), carbon use and storage (at the whole-plant scale), and the
spatial distribution of plant types (at the ecosystem scale) over different
timescales of environmental variation. New insight into how plants cope with
variation in environmental conditions can be used to more accurately incorporate
plant hydraulic regulation into modeling frameworks, which would allow more
accurate predictions of global water, carbon, and energy cycles. Additionally,
this project aims to promote systems thinking in the general public and in
middle school, undergraduate, and graduate students. The project plans to
develop and implement interactive exhibits at the Bell Museum and classes at the
University of Minnesota that integrate Earth system science and environmental
engineering, both using the context of plant water use in variable
environments.&lt;br/&gt;This project uses optimization and maximum entropy to
improve the understanding and prediction of plant hydraulic regulation at the
leaf, plant, and ecosystem scales. At the leaf level, optimal stomatal
conductance will be derived such that it maximizes cumulative carbon
assimilation over a season, subject to competition and carryover costs. At the
whole-plant level, optimal plant carbon allocation will be derived such that it
maximizes cumulative net carbon gain over multiple years, subject to legacy
effects of drought. At the ecosystem level, the composition of plant hydraulic
traits will be derived such that it maximizes the information entropy of the
resulting trait distribution, representing the most likely trait configuration
under environmental constraints. The educational products from this project will
include an interactive makerspace exhibit and summer camp module for middle
school students at the Bell Museum, as well as new course modules for
undergraduate and graduate students to adopt interdisciplinary practices for
environmental engineering and complex environmental
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.