* 2045685
* CAREER: Toward a Comprehensive Generalization Theory for Deep Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Tengyu Ma, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 02/28/2026
* USD 321,676.00

The advancement of deep learning, the technique of training artificial neural
networks to make predictions, has led to recent breakthroughs in many areas of
artificial intelligence, such as computer vision, natural language
understanding, and robotics. A major challenge in deep learning is ensuring
accurate predictions on unseen scenarios. This project plans to tackle this
challenge via theoretical analysis and its empirical evaluation. The project
aims to contribute to the fundamental understanding of deep learning and inform
the practical advancement of deep learning, improving its reliability,
efficiency, and risk management in data-hungry and risk-sensitive applications.
An education plan is integrated into this project --- the investigator will
develop new courses, mentor students, organize workshops, and work with high-
school teachers on developing high-school AI courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to build a comprehensive generalization theory for deep neural
networks, which covers the technical question of implicit regularization effect
and the broad concepts of out-of-domain generalization and the estimation of
generalization errors. This project has three major components. The first thrust
is to characterize the optimizers’ implicit regularization effect for complex
models. Leveraging the theoretical insights, the investigator will make implicit
regularization more explicit, stronger, and customizable to datasets to improve
generalization. The second thrust is to theoretically study the out-of-domain
generalization in settings with an increasing level of differences between the
training and test environments by a growing level of exploitation of unlabeled
data and their properties. Finally, the PI will study estimating the
generalization errors, which is crucial for quantifying the risk before
deploying machine learning models in risk-sensitive applications such as
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.