* 2045871
* CAREER: Microplastics in snow-dominated environments - sources, transport, and fate
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Monica Arienzo, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 450,427.00

The accumulation of plastic debris is an increasing concern for the environment
following decades of global plastic production. Microplastics (plastic particles
less than 5 millimeters) have received increased scientific attention as they
have been found around the globe, including recent studies which have shown
microplastic contamination in remote locations. However, questions remain about
the sources, transport, and fate of microplastics deposited in the environment.
The goal of this study is to measure the amount and type of microplastics
deposited in snow and snow-fed water resources in the Sierra Nevada of
California and Nevada. Measurements will be used to assess the sources of
microplastics to the remote environment and the downstream fate of microplastics
in important water resources. The research findings will be integrated into a
middle school mobile teaching kit. The mobile teaching kit will include a series
of lessons surrounding the topics of hydrology, microplastics, anthropogenic
pollution, and water quality, with the objective of enhancing an interest in
science at the middle school level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microplastics have been
observed throughout the environment, however, questions remain about the
sources, transport, and fate of microplastics, particularly in remote
environments. Through a combination of field and laboratory-based studies, the
proposed research aims at assessing: (1) spatial variability of microplastics in
snow from headwater basins; (2) deposition and subsequent vertical distribution
of microplastics in the snowpack during accumulation and melt; and (3) fate of
microplastics as they move downstream toward snow-fed water resources. With a
focus on snow and water resources in the Sierra Nevada of California and Nevada,
the proposed work will develop methods for microplastic isolation and detection,
conduct spatial and temporal sampling of snow, snowmelt, air and water, and
apply infrared microscopy and Pyrolysis-GC/MS for characterization of type and
amount of microplastics. The study will improve our understanding of sources to
remote locations, microplastic transport in snow-dominated systems, and
downstream contamination. It will further generate data that can be used to
better understand human impacts to freshwater resources beyond the Sierra
Nevada, including other snow-dominated environments around the globe. The
project will support training of two PhD and several undergraduate students and
will develop a mobile teaching kit to provide educators with appropriate tools
for exposing middle school students to microplastics, environmental science, and
hydrology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.