* 2045263
* CAREER: Beyond differential expression: quantifying transcriptional dynamics and testing for adaptive value of transcriptomic responses at low temperature
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Gregory Ragland, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2026
* USD 536,727.00

Many organisms change their physiology in response to changing environments, a
phenomenon known as plasticity. Some of these changes can be beneficial, helping
an organism to persist in unfavorable conditions. But other changes may be
costly or damaging and may eventually lead to death if conditions are harsh
enough. In common types of experiments that measure physiological plasticity, it
is often impossible to identify which changes are beneficial, and which are not.
This impedes understanding the physiological mechanism that may facilitate or
limit responses to changing environments. This research explores how exposure to
low temperatures affects transcription, a critical step in the process of
synthesizing new proteins. By comparing low temperature responses of temperate
fly species that often encounter very cold temperatures (well below freezing) to
tropical fly species that rarely encounter cold temperatures, the investigators
will identify which processes are beneficial for persistence in cold
environments. The research will also attempt to quantify the lower temperature
limits of transcription and will test whether these limits can evolve when flies
experience new environments. This research will be integrated with biology
education at the undergraduate level. The investigators will develop a Course-
Based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) allowing students to participate
in authentic research as part of an introductory biology course.
Underrepresented student groups often have reduced access to research
opportunities; the CURE will be purposefully designed to encourage broad
participation and to provide a gateway to further research experiences for
underrepresented student groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmentally-induced
changes in the transcriptome provide a widely used and relatively comprehensive
snapshot of how cellular, tissue, or whole organismal physiology changes across
environments. However, in commonly used experimental designs it is impossible to
infer whether a change in abundance of any particular transcript has beneficial
or detrimental effects on performance, and ultimately fitness. Common approaches
to quantify differential expression in transcripts are further limited because
they cannot distinguish the effects of new transcription and transcript
degradation on transcript abundance. Thus, the transcriptional dynamics
regulating transcriptomic environmental responses also remain largely unknown.
This research will compare profiles of newly formed transcripts during low
temperature exposures among replicate temperate- and tropical-origin Drosophila
species. Combining sequencing of chromatin-associated RNA fractions and
bromouridine-labeled new transcripts with standard messenger RNA sequencing, the
research team will 1) identify putatively beneficial changes in new
transcription or transcript degradation rates associated with adaptation to low
temperature, and 2) characterize reaction norms for transcriptional dynamics in
a comparative framework. The research will be integrated with undergraduate
education by developing lab exercises that allow undergraduates to test the
roles of individual genes in thermal adaptation using transgenically-modified
lines of Drosophila melanogaster. This CURE will integrate with ongoing efforts
at CU Denver to improve outcomes for underrepresented groups and increase their
representation in STEM fields. The CURE will also generate a database of
transparently reported results that will contribute to candidate gene testing in
the field of thermal biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.