* 2045084
* CAREER: Time-Resolved Studies of Charge Transfer and Chemical Reactivity at Photoelectrode-Electrolyte Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Yi Rao, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 03/31/2026
* USD 654,870.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Yi Rao and his students at Utah
State University (USU) will develop sophisticated laser techniques to explore
conversion of carbon dioxide (CO2) into fuels at photoelectrode-electrolyte
interfaces. Interfaces are thin regions-a few molecules wide-where two bulk
phases, such as a solid and liquid, meet. In this case, the boundary is between
a solid photoelectrode, a surface where a light-activated reaction can occur,
and a liquid that can conduct electricity. The research is advancing our
knowledge of reactions of CO2 at interfaces, driven by solar energy and
electricity. The work will integrate scientific training and discovery, using
laser-based spectroscopic tools as its cornerstone to enhance teaching at the
undergraduate and graduate levels. Leveraging this research expertise in an
educational context, Dr. Rao plans to facilitate PHOTON FUELS workshops for K-12
students and hosts USU Science Unwrapped outreach events in the local community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on ultrafast interfacial charge
transfer and chemical reactivity at the photoelectrode-electrolyte interfaces
using newly developed interface-selective spectroscopic tools, including time-
resolved electronic sum frequency generation (TR-ESFG) and time-resolved
vibrational sum frequency generation (TR-VSFG). These techniques, recently
developed and established in the Rao group, provide a unique opportunity to
advance fundamental knowledge of the PEC reduction of CO2 and other related
interfacial phenomena. The expected outcomes of photoelectrochemical reactions
at the photoelectrode-electrolyte interfaces include (1) identification of
interfacial states and the effect of pH, ionic species, ionic strength, and
applied potentials, (2) quantification of binding geometry and strengths of
reactants and intermediates, and (3) development of a relationship between
interfacial states and intermediates. A broader societal impact of this work is
increased understanding of interfacial chemical reactivity of solar fuels. The
project also will allow students to gain valuable experience in cutting-edge
laser technology, electrochemistry, and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.