* 2045001
* CAREER: Nitride FinFET on Silicon for Medium-Voltage Monolithically  Integrated Power Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Yuhao Zhang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Title: CAREER: Nitride FinFET on Silicon for Medium-Voltage Monolithically
Integrated Power Electronics&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
2045001&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Yuhao Zhang&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Medium-voltage (600-1700 V) power devices are key for
efficient power conversion in electric vehicles, solar farms, power grids, among
other applications. They are among the fastest-growing sectors in the $40
billion power semiconductor market. Today’s medium-voltage devices are mainly
made of silicon (Si) and silicon carbide (SiC). Gallium nitride (GaN) has
superior physical properties over Si and SiC for power applications. Recently,
the vertical GaN power field-effect transistor (FinFET), a new power transistor
utilizing sub-micron-meter fin channels, has demonstrated one of the best
performances in all medium-voltage transistors. However, all existing vertical
GaN FinFETs employ small-diameter and high-cost GaN substrates, which hinders
their commercialization. This CAREER proposal aims at developing a new
generation of medium-voltage vertical GaN power FinFETs on low-cost, large-
diameter Si substrates with high performance, and fabricating them on the same
wafer with the low-voltage lateral GaN FinFETs or tri-gate transistors, hence
allowing monolithic integration of the driving circuitry and medium-voltage
power devices for the first time. This project, if successful, will enable an
unprecedented advancement in the performance, frequency, efficiency, and form
factor of the medium-voltage power electronic systems. This project provides
opportunities for student education and outreach: (a) establishing an integrated
undergraduate research program tackling interdisciplinary problems in the fields
of materials, devices, and power electronics; (b) mentoring the participating
students with the industrial collaborators and promoting the student
interactions with the power semiconductor industries; (c) contributing to the
pre-college summer camps and providing summer research opportunities to K-12
students and teachers in microelectronics. The program will actively engage
students from underrepresented minority groups in microelectronics research and
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
objective of this project is to build a monolithic “full GaN FinFET” platform on
Si substrates, which shares common processing technologies and device building
blocks, where the high-voltage, vertical GaN FinFET is employed for power
processing and the low-voltage, lateral GaN FinFETs/trigate FETs are used for
information processing. The interdisciplinary nature of this project offers
significant intellectual merits in materials, devices, processing technologies,
and power modules: (a) New characterization methods will be established to map
the leakage current in GaN-on-Si with spatial resolutions down to the nanometers
and characterize the trap-mediated breakdown voltage with temporal resolutions
down to the nanoseconds. (b) Innovative function structures will be explored to
overcome the insulating and highly-defective buffer layers in GaN-on-Si
structure and enable superior electrical, thermal, and mechanical performances
in fully-vertical GaN-on-Si power FinFETs. (c) Innovative epitaxial structure
and fabrication processes will be established to enable the monolithic
integration of medium-voltage vertical FinFETs and lateral digital FinFETs/tri-
gate-FETs. (d) Advanced models and simulations will be explored to link the
microscopic material non-idealities and circuit dynamics to device designs and
optimizations, which has been a long knowledge gap in nitride devices and
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.