* 2045658
* CAREER: A Systematic Understanding of Accelerated Emergence and Transmission of Antibiotic Resistance under Non-antibiotic Micropollutant Exposure
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* Yujie Men, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2026
* USD 418,780.00

Antibiotic resistance poses a major global threat to public health. The World
Health Organization estimates that annual deaths due to antibiotic resistant
infections could reach 10 million by 2050 if no actions are taken. Antibiotic-
resistant bacteria (ARB) are found in many natural and engineered environments
in surface water, soil, and wastewater. ARB in these environments may enter
potable water supply and food chains, resulting in human exposure and increased
risk. Thus, it is critical to understand and control the emergence and spread of
ARB in these environments to better protect human health. The goal of this
CAREER research project is to understand how the presence of micropollutants
affects the development, proliferation, and transmission of antibiotic
resistance under environmentally relevant conditions. This will be achieved by
specific research to track the induction of antibiotic resistance in
microorganisms exposed to micropollutants through a novel combination of
chemistry and molecular biology. Successful completion of this research will
advance knowledge of how micropollutants induce antibiotic resistance. Results
also have strong potential to improve efforts to monitor and prevent the spread
of antibiotic resistance. Dissemination of results to the public on antibiotic
resistance issues form the basis of outreach efforts in collaboration with local
wastewater treatment plants, high schools, and colleges in the Inland Empire
Region of southern California. These efforts will benefit society by educating
the public about a critical public health issue and increase the scientific
literacy of the Nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although antibiotic resistance
selected by increasing concentration of antibiotics has been well studied, there
is a critical knowledge gap concerning how the co-occurrence of non-antibiotic
micropollutants and antibiotics in the environment influence the development of
antibiotic resistance. Preliminary work found that non-antibiotic
micropollutants influence the development and transmission of antibiotic
resistance in a synergistic manner. The goal of this CAREER project is to
develop a mechanistic understanding of this process specifically focusing on the
genotype-to-phenotype relationships that underpin the development and
transmission of antibiotic resistance. This goal will be achieved through
specific research integrating selective growth experiments with systems and
molecular biology tools. The genetic basis leading to synergistic antibiotic
resistance selection will be first identified and validated via molecular
biological tools. Next, the environmental factors that promote the proliferation
of resistant mutants selected from the co-exposure of antibiotics and non-
antibiotic micropollutants will be examined. Short-term growth competition tests
will use co-cultures containing two strains of bacteria with different
antibiotic resistance capacity. The fitness of each strain will be assessed
during growth using single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping. Lastly, the
effect of exposure to non-antibiotic micropollutants on conjugative horizontal
gene transfer (HGT) will be determined via mating experiments between the same
and different bacterial species. The molecular mechanisms leading to accelerated
HGT will be identified by comparative transcriptomics and proteomics. The
research program will be integrated with an education and outreach component
that emphasizes diversity through activities designed for different groups of
learners. Undergraduate workshops (“WeAreIn”) will be organized to encourage
participation of women undergraduates in STEM, and research training programs
will be utilized for recruiting undergraduates from underrepresented groups.
Online education resources will be developed for K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students, and open houses and a public website will target local
communities to educate the public on antibiotic resistance and promote the
proper use and disposal of antibiotics to control its
spread.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.