* 2045054
* CAREER: Emergence of Functional Organization in the Adaptive Immune System
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Armita Nourmohammad, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2026
* USD 540,000.00

It takes decades for humans to reproduce, but our pathogens can reproduce in
less than a day. How can we coexist with pathogens that can evolve more than
10,000 times faster than us? The answer lies in our adaptive immune system,
which is a self-organized system of highly diverse immune cells that develop
during the lifetime of an organism. The adaptive immune system incorporates all
aspects of life, from molecular signaling to cellular evolution. The result is
an information processing molecular organization with many interacting
components, which can reliably sense and adaptively respond to diverse and
evolving pathogens. The vast differences in immune repertoires between
individuals suggest the existence of many molecular solutions to statistically
similar pathogenic environments. The goal of this project is to use machine
learning to derive a map from the diverse and high-dimensional space of receptor
repertoire sequences to a lower dimensional space of immune functions that
relates to biophysics of immune recognition. This effective functional
representation of immune repertoires would allow construction of predictive
models for immune responses to pathogens, and will shed light on functional
organization of immune repertoires. To bridge the gap between physics and
biology, the PI will introduce pre-college and undergraduate students to
biophysics research, with particular emphasis on women and underrepresented
minorities. The PI will create new teaching modules to introduce both the
physics and the life-science undergraduate and graduate students to current
progress in physics of living systems. In addition the PI will commit
significant resources to mentor undergraduate and high school students during
summers and the academic year to pursue biophysics research. The PI will invite
biophysics researchers to the department’s “Frontiers of Physics Public Lecture
Series”, to foster an appreciation and support among the community for the
exciting developments in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The adaptive immune
system develops during the lifetime of an organism and consists of highly
diverse B-and T-cells, whose unique surface receptors are generated through
genomic rearrangement, mutation, and selection. This diverse repertoire of
receptors can mount specific responses against a multitude of evolving pathogens
and keep a memory of past infections for future encounters. Pathogens in return,
evolve to escape the immune challenge, forming a rapid co-evolutionary arms race
during the life-time of an organism. Over the past decade, high throughput
immune repertoire sequencing has been instrumental in characterizing the
diversity of immune receptor sequences. However, we still lack an understating
of how receptor sequence diversity translates to immune function. In this
project, the PI will combine theoretical modeling with inference from molecular
data to uncover the biophysical and evolutionary basis of the functional
organization and encoding of pathogenic information in the adaptive immune
system. The life-cycle of immune cells is defined by a continuum of selection
stages leading to their functional specialization. The PI will develop
biophysical inference techniques to leverage receptor repertoire data of
distinct immune cell-types and use machine learning to derive sequence-
determinants of immune function. In addition the PI will develop predictive
fitness models to characterize how the short-and long-term dynamics of immune
repertoires relate to functional responses to pathogens. By building upon recent
advances in machine learning, the PI will infer a latent representation (i.e., a
shape space) for immune receptors that reflects the relevant biophysics of
immune recognition and function. The inferred immune shape space will allow to
ask fundamental questions regarding the biophysical determinants of antigenic
interactions, and self/non-self discrimination. Lastly, a theoretical framework
to study how the co-evolutionary history of hosts and pathogens has shaped
immune strategies, both at the individual-and the population-level will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.