* 2045906
* CAREER: Defining the regulators of enteric plasticity in engineered microfluidic environments
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2026
* Abigail Koppes, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2026
* USD 394,247.00

Directly studying cells in a living human body remains challenging, so engineers
employ small fluidic devices that contain cells, called microphysiological
systems, to study how cells behave in healthy and diseased states outside of the
body. This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award supports
research to engineer and apply microphysiological systems to better understand
how the nervous system regulates the gut in response to inflammation. These
models have wide applications to other organs in the body and will advance
knowledge in neurobiology and engineering for human health discovery. Integrated
at each level of this project is education and community outreach components to
support diversity in science and engineering through hands-on, in-person, and
virtual kit-based workshops, summer internships, as well as collegiate
coursework and research, and annual programmatic
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical difficulty of examining human
neural circuits directly has limited the ability to understand neural
communication in health and disease. The millions of enteric neurons innervating
the gut, for example, dynamically undergo synaptic management in response to
signals from the epithelium lining the gut lumen. How, when, and why peripheral
neural plasticity is turned on and off, as well as which signals are transduced
from the luminal space remains unknown, in part due to insufficient availability
of innervated models. This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER)
award will harness a new in vitro microphysiological system (MPS) that combines
human primary enteric neurons and epithelium to systematically examine cell
fate, function, and plasticity in response to perturbing the epithelium. Genetic
engineering with live microscopy, effluent profiling, pilot transcriptomics,
histology, and statistical analysis will give insight and predictions into
perturbed cell behavior compared to native tissue and non-perturbed controls to
identify master regulators of enteric neural dynamics. The MPS technology can be
applied broadly to other innervated organ systems and the understanding garnered
of the plastic behavior of enteric neurons will facilitate the evaluation of the
role of the brain-gut-axis in human health, disease progression, and therapeutic
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.