* 2045322
* Learning pool boiling physics with scientific machine learning
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Yoonjin Won, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 04/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Phase changes are fundamental processes that underpin many natural phenomena and
industrial applications such as dew condensation on insects, water droplet
harvesting, immersion cooling for electronic devices, and nuclear reactor
cooling. Boiling is a particular phase change process which involves the dynamic
formation, movement, and evolution of bubbles. Bubbles mark liquid-vapor
interfaces, and characterization of their statistics is crucial for unveiling
fundamental boiling principles. So far, it has been very challenging to
characterize and extract bubble statistics as they are extremely complex,
rapidly move, and deform drastically. Such limitations about object tracking and
data processing can be addressed by the recent advances in computer vision and
deep learning. In this proposed work, computer models are trained to detect and
track bubbles in live-imaging data and, subsequently, extract meaningful
statistics on bubbles, for example, their number, size, and trajectory, to learn
bubbles and boiling physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of using computer
vision concepts in thermofluidic engineering will enable modelling the
interconnected relationships among surface designs, bubble data, and boiling
performances by integrating new technologies in engineering, computer science,
and data science. The goal of this project is to develop a novel data-based
approach to obtain new understanding about boiling processes. The proposal
envisions three major thrusts: (1) Experimentally and computationally extract
interpretable and rich physical descriptors from live bubble images, which has
been challenging in past; (2) develop learning models to connect surfaces,
bubbles, and thermal performances by applying transfer learning, probabilistic
surrogate modelling, and sequence learning; and (3) provide a holistic and
fundamental understanding of dynamic boiling physics, enabling the inverse
design of surfaces with desired heat transfer performance. Another contribution
will be enriching the thermal science community with concepts and methods from
machine learning, data science, and statistics. This enrichment can positively
impact numerous thermofluidic experiments, in general, including cell or
particle tracking in biofluidics, droplet study during condensation, and bubbly
flow statistics during flow boiling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.