* 2045562
* CAREER: Molecular level consequences of mRNA modification
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Kristin Koutmou, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 01/31/2026
* USD 769,507.00

Cells face the daunting challenge of accurately synthesizing the correct number
of proteins at the right time. Messenger ribonucleic acids (mRNAs) serve as
blueprints for protein synthesis, and chemical modification of mRNA presents one
avenue for cells to regulate protein production. Despite a rapidly growing
recognition of their importance, fundamental questions regarding the identity,
prevalence and functional consequences of mRNA modifications remain to be
answered. This project will fill critical knowledge gaps to enable a molecular
level understanding of how mRNA modifications impact protein synthesis. Such a
framework will be imperative for ascertaining the contributions of mRNA
modifications to key biological processes. This research provides training
opportunities for students and is combined with a concurrent education plan
aimed at increasing biochemical literacy in the public and motivating a future
generation of scientists. Efforts include the development and presentation of
hands-on educational experiences through the University of Michigan Museum of
Natural History (UMMNH).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pioneering studies of mRNA
modifications mapped the locations of individual chemical modifications to
thousands of RNA molecules. However, it remains unclear how (or, in many cases,
if) most modifications fundamentally change the functional properties of mRNAs
to alter the expression and/or identity of the resulting proteins. This project
uses a comprehensive set of biophysical chemistry and cell-based experiments to
develop a mechanistic foundation for understanding the influence of chemical
modifications on how the ribosome ‘reads’ the mRNA code. Furthermore, mass-
spectrometry tools will be developed and implemented to ascertain the identity
of modifications in yeast mRNAs and the MS2 bacteriophage RNA genome. The
integrated application of direct and quantitative approaches to study the
functional impact of mRNA modifications on translation is a distinguishing
feature of this project. Together, these studies will reveal the molecular-level
consequences of mRNA modifications on protein
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms program of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the
Biological Sciences Directorate and the Chemistry of Life Processes program of
the Chemistry Division in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.