* 2045656
* CAREER: Fundamental Limits of Cryptographic Primitives Through Network Information Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Hua Sun, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2026
* USD 248,427.00

The advent of the modern information age is enabled by pervasive networked
communication and computation devices, which accelerate data generation,
exchange, and access at an unprecedented pace and bring security and privacy
concerns to the forefront. Cryptographic primitives are canonical and
representative problem formulations that capture key challenges in understanding
the fundamentals of security preserving techniques, and are essential building
blocks for more sophisticated secrecy systems and protocols. This project
studies the fundamental limits of a diverse array of cryptographic primitives
through network information theory and coding tools. The project will also
provide training in this national priority discipline for undergraduate and high
school students and cultivate their interests in the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes an information theoretic view of
the investigation of the fundamental limits of cryptographic primitives. This
Shannon-theoretic view, which focuses on the information-theoretic capacity
metric and the scaling of data size, is in contrast to most existing
cryptography and theoretical computer science studies, which focus on complexity
theoretic metrics and the scaling of system size. This project is comprised of
three main thrusts: the first thrust focuses on the investigation of the message
rate, key storage size, and broadcast bandwidth of broadcast encryption and
secure groupcast; the second thrust focuses on the capacity characterization of
conditional disclosure of secrets; the third thrust focuses on extending this
viewpoint to additional reformulated and new primitives that expand the
application of information theory to security. The project is expected to unveil
theoretical and practical insights into cryptographic primitives, and enhance
the understanding on their fundamental limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.