* 2045128
* CAREER: Learning and property testing -- a complexity theoretic perspective
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Anindya De, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2026
* USD 206,804.00

From genomics to meteorology, advanced technology has led to collection of data
at an unprecedented scale. In turn, the future promise of science is crucially
reliant on our ability to analyze such massive and complex datasets. To gain
deeper insights here, modern data analysis relies on mathematical abstractions
called models. In particular, a central desideratum of machine learning is to
find simple models which fit a given dataset. Accordingly, theoretical computer
science, machine learning and statistics have developed both mathematical and
algorithmic frameworks in this pursuit. The goal of this project is to put this
agenda under the lens of computational complexity theory. In particular, using
tools and insights from complexity theory, the investigator will study (i)
efficient learning algorithms for several high-dimensional models which appear
in machine learning and statistics, and (ii) explore the tradeoffs between
robustness, efficiency, data size and accuracy for these models. Besides the
mathematical foundations of machine learning, the underlying questions also
appear in a wide variety of applications ranging from evolutionary biology to
signal processing. Through the introduction of new courses at the intersection
of complexity theory, machine learning and statistics, as well as other
activities such as workshops and seminars, the project will train the next
generation of graduate students who will achieve fluency in all of these areas
leading to a further cross-pollination of ideas between these disciplines. The
project will also support activities aimed at attracting undergraduate students
to research in theoretical computer science, especially those from
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two principal
thrusts: (1) Noise tolerant learning algorithms for high-dimensional models: The
project will study both supervised and unsupervised models such as linear
separators, Gaussian mixture models and trace reconstruction (which is an
abstraction of the problem of ancestral DNA reconstruction from evolutionary
biology). For these models, the project will explore the three-way tradeoff
between sample efficiency, computational efficiency and noise tolerance. (2)
Algorithms to test high dimensional models for sparse representations: Examples
of such models include Boolean functions over the hypercube and high-dimensional
matrices. The overarching goal here is to design algorithms whose complexity is
independent of the ambient dimension, thus avoiding the proverbial curse of
dimensionality. Underlying this broad agenda is the insight that Boolean
function analysis -- a suite of tools developed in complexity theory which
combines combinatorics, harmonic analysis and probability theory -- is an
effective algorithmic tool for learning and testing high dimensional models in
machine learning and statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.