* 2045900
* CAREER: Automatic Variational Inference
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Justin Domke, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 207,006.00

Hundreds of thousands of people across science, government, and business use
automatic probabilistic inference tools. In these tools, people carefully state
their assumptions, and then combine them with observed data. However, these
automatic tools only work at a relatively modest scale, and ever-growing
datasets require more powerful methods. Recent years have seen the development
of a novel strategy for inference that has been able to address data orders of
magnitude larger. However, great care and expertise is needed to wield these
methods successfully, putting them out of reach for most potential users. This
project seeks to promote the progress of science by making these large-scale
techniques more automatic, putting them within reach of the vast majority of
users not able to invest huge amounts of effort in manual algorithmic
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances methodology for
automatic and general-purpose variational inference, with the goal of answering
two questions. The first question is when does variational inference work. This
is paramount, since no method can succeed on all problems. We take three
directions, namely new diagnostic error measures, improved scalability for
diagnostics, and an empirical evaluation on a corpus of real non-expert models
gathered from an integrated course. The second question is how to automate
algorithmic design choices. Variational inference algorithms require many
delicate design choices, currently made manually. The core idea to automate
these decisions is to maintain statistics so the effect of any set of choices on
optimization speed can be predicted. This project will contribute 1) a corpus
and evaluation of automatic inference on non-expert models, 2) improved
diagnostic performance measures, and 3) methods to automatically make
variational inference choices, guided by convergence
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.