* 2045259
* CAREER: Mechanics of Viscous Damage Zones Along Rough Faults and Community Tutorial/Forums for Experimental Rock Mechanists
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Hiroki Sone, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2026
* USD 311,288.00

Earthquakes occur to release the compressional forces (stress) that accumulate
in the Earth due to plate tectonics. Such accumulation and release of stress is
oftentimes studied using models that treat rocks as spring-like elastic
materials. However, real rocks - especially those surrounding fault zones -
contain many defects that cause non-elastic (permanent) deformation. Therefore,
movement between tectonic plates may not only be accommodated by slip along
faults, but also by deformation distributed in the surrounding rocks. Ignoring
such effects may lead to overestimating stress accumulation in the Earth.
Accounting for rock deformation around faults is thus crucial to accurately
assess seismic hazards. Here, the team aims to characterize such rock behavior
through laboratory experiments. They use rock specimens with existing defects;
specimens are either collected around natural faults or prepared in the
laboratory. They quantify the rock behavior and assess its impact on earthquake
mechanics through numerical modeling. The project provides support for an early-
career scientist and graduate and undergraduate students at University of
Wisconsin - Madison. It also fosters knowledge transfer and community building
among experimentalists experts in rock mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the project is to evaluate the impact of fault damage-zone rheology on fault
mechanics. Field and laboratory evidence shows that fault damage-zone rocks
exhibit time-dependent deformational behavior and that shear stress relaxation
within the damage zone is a ubiquitous phenomenon. Viscous properties of fault
damage-zone rocks are not acknowledged in current fault mechanical models. This
may lead to an over-estimation of fault shear stress accumulation. Here, the
researchers characterize the damage distribution around selected fault zone
outcrops. The emphasis is on quantifying the heterogeneities across and along
the faults. Laboratory experiments are conducted on both natural and synthetic
damage-zone rocks to constrain the viscous constitutive properties of damaged
rocks in the framework of viscoplasticity. A synthesis modeling incorporates
findings from the field and lab. The goal is to evaluate how slow distributed
deformation in rough damage zones influence the interseismic loading of fault
shear stress. The team also examines how the distribution of stress and fault
slip evolve during the interseismic period; this provides insights on how
earthquake statistics and kinematics evolve during interseismic loading. Another
goal is to evaluate the validity of upscaling friction laws to field scale
problems. Finally, geophysical observations on transient changes in seismic
velocity and strain from the San Jacinto Fault Zone will be examined to explore
consistency with the viscous properties constrained in the
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.