* 2045778
* CAREER: The social representation of the physical world
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Julian Jara-Ettinger, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 02/28/2026
* USD 432,600.00

Imagine walking into a crowded conference room, spotting an empty seat, then
realizing there is a jacket on it. From this simple arrangement of objects, we
might suspect that someone was using the chair, left temporarily, and intends to
return. Situations where we extract social information from our physical
surroundings are commonplace: we hang rope across entrances to signal people
should not walk through, we mark trees to indicate hiking trails, and we leave
our office doors ajar to reveal we are available. This project will use a
combination of computational modeling and behavioral studies to understand how
people read social signals from their physical environment. Characterizing how
people extract social information from their physical surroundings is critical
for understanding how humans seamlessly coordinate and cooperate with each
other, even in the absence of direct communication or physical interactions. The
results also have implications for the goal of instantiating human social
intelligence in machines. For example, there have been remarkable advances in
robot navigation, but these algorithms do not yet represent the social
information in physical environments, treating them as devoid of social
meaning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will answer three questions:
What aspects of the physical world contain social information for humans? How do
we infer what produced this information? And how do we determine what it means?
To answer these questions, the investigator will combine advances in
computational models of social reasoning and computational models of physical
reasoning to determine how these two cognitive systems interact with each other.
Specifically, the investigator will build computational models that jointly
reason about how people’s mental states lead to different behaviors and how
these behaviors leave observable traces in the environment. The model’s behavior
will be compared with data from human participants to determine the extent to
which the model can capture and replicate human reasoning. Computational tools
will be developed with the parallel goals of producing high-quality open-source
libraries that are widely accessible to all students interested in computational
cognitive science. Software will be complemented with extensive tutorials
showing how to implement various classical models, created by the investigator
in collaboration with undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.