* 2045346
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Understanding bioerosion from individuals to ecosystems: the impacts of biotic and abiotic stressors on sponge erosion of oyster reefs.
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Amber Stubler, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 10/31/2024
* USD 312,639.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oyster reefs, historically one of
the most important economic and ecological habitats in the U.S., have suffered
major losses due to declining water quality, overharvesting, and diseases. In
estuaries across the country, many large-scale conservation, restoration, and
research efforts have been implemented to help reestablish oyster reefs. To
better understand and protect these ecosystems, this project focuses on
understanding the breakdown (erosion) processes that are occurring in areas
where oysters are found. Erosion facilitated by living organisms (called
bioerosion), such as boring sponges, is problematic for oyster aquaculture and
restoration efforts, yet little is known about the processes that influence the
rates of sponge bioerosion on oyster reefs. To address this knowledge gap, this
research is evaluating two factors thought to affect sponge bioerosion rates:
the presence of nudibranchs that prey on boring sponges and ocean acidification.
The project uses manipulative experiments and collects sequence data to 1)
determine the ways that Atlantic and Pacific boring sponge species respond to
predators under different ocean acidification conditions, and 2) compare the
short- and long-term effects of predator presence and acidification on sponge
bioerosion rates of oyster reefs. The experimental data collected will be used
to model bioerosion on simulated oyster reefs to better understand how these two
factors influence overall oyster reef carbonate changes. This research informs
better management practices for controlling sponge bioerosion for oyster
growers, aquaculturists, and restoration programs and improve our understanding
of how biotic and abiotic stressors act individually and together to alter
sponge bioerosion behavior. This project strategically links undergraduate
students at a small liberal arts college (Occidental College) with collaborators
at an R1 institution (Louisiana State University), an R2 Hispanic-Serving
Institution (University of California Merced), and will incorporate over 40
undergraduate students in various aspects of the project, including intensive
field and lab experiences, bioinformatics workshops, and classroom-based
projects. Students will also help create open-access materials (both written and
video-based) that detail the research methods, protocols, and analyses and all
data and code will be made publicly available to promote transparency and
reproducibility in science. Results and open-access materials will be broadly
disseminated via scientific conferences, peer-reviewed journals, industry
meetings with shellfish growers and aquaculturists, and social media
outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organism-mediated substrate removal, or
bioerosion, has a negative effect on oyster reef growth and resilience;
bioeroding sponges are considered one of the most destructive bioeroding taxa in
these ecosystems. While many abiotic stressors have been found to influence
sponge bioerosion (e.g. acidification, temperature, etc.), the ability of
bioeroding sponges to react to biotic stressors, such as predation, remains
unexplored. This project uses experimental investigations, transcriptome
sequencing, and mathematical modelling of a nudibranch-sponge predator-prey
model to evaluate the responses of bioeroding sponges to biotic and abiotic
stressors. The research determines how sponges modify their relative investment
in chemical and mechanical bioerosion in response to predation pressure and
seawater acidification at the phenotypic and transcriptomic levels. The project:
(i) explores whether predator presence directly elicits bioerosion as an
inducible defense in boring sponges, (ii) quantitatively assesses the phenotypic
and transcriptomic response of boring sponges to predation and acidification
over different temporal scales, and (iii) determines whether sponge response to
these abiotic and biotic factors are similar across phylogenetic and geographic
scales. The research advances the scientific understanding of sponge bioerosion
in non-tropical, non-coral carbonate ecosystems and examines the ubiquity of
these processes across heterogeneous geographic regions. This project has the
capacity to transform our understanding of the biotic and abiotic interactions
between boring sponges and the ecosystems where they
reside.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.