* 2045928
* CAREER: Galactic Archeology: Understanding the Building Blocks of the Milky Way across Cosmic Time
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Andrew Wetzel, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 462,896.00

Dr. Wetzel and his student research team are working to understand how galaxies
like our Milky Way (MW) formed. Through this analysis they will they gain an in-
depth understanding of the basic building blocks that formed the MW. Catalogs
derived from the simulations will be made available to help optimize
observational surveys of the MW. The team will develop and disseminate their
interactive GalaxyLab program and use it to teach an undergraduate computational
astrophysics class.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will use cosmological
simulations to track the population of stars formed in giant molecular clouds
(GMCs) in the MW disk and compare it to stars stripped from companion dwarf
galaxies. This project builds on the Latte suite of cosmological simulations,
which uses the Feedback in Realistic Environments (FIRE) physics model. The new
simulations will have a large dynamic range and will resolve GMCs and ultra-
faint satellite dwarf galaxies. The team will investigate (1) the origin of the
alpha-element bimodality in the abundance distribution of MW stars, (2) the
lifetimes, dynamical evolution, and elemental abundances of GMCs and their
stellar associations, and (3) "chemical tagging," where the 3D formation history
of the MW is reconstructed from trends observed in the distribution of stellar
elemental abundances. GalaxyLab will be distributed as a series of modules in an
open-source Jupyter Python notebook.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.