* 2045974
* CAREER: Effectuating Hardware-Accelerated Systems with Domain-Specific Primitives
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Lisa Wills, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 02/28/2026
* USD 315,765.00

With enormous volumes and vast varieties of data being produced and consumed
every second, having computer systems that can process large volumes and diverse
sets of data in unprecedented efficiency is imperative for computer architects
and system designers to keep up with this data deluge. Custom hardware has long
been a solution to run a specific application or a set of applications at
exceptional performance and energy efficiency compared to general purpose
platforms. However, the development and deployment of custom hardware has been
time-consuming and expensive. Moreover, the toolchain, programming, and usage of
custom hardware are complex and obtuse, reducing its accessibility. Thus, there
is a need to innovate and drastically reduce the development and deployment
costs of custom hardware while making these accelerated systems accessible to
not only computer system designers but also non-hardware savvy scientists to
expedite their research analyses and advance knowledge in their perspective
fields. This research develops a novel execution paradigm to democratize
hardware accelerated system designs. This research approach leverages
application-specific knowledge to guide the underlying hardware design and
compose highly efficient, programmable, portable, and easy to use custom
hardware systems that are orders of magnitude faster and more power efficient.
This research promotes the progress of computer science and computer system
designs and serves as an education tool in the computer research community to
advance knowledge in hardware acceleration abstractions, concepts, and
effectuations. In addition, this research can be applied to several example
domains to solve open problems in the interdisciplinary area of computer
architecture and healthcare such as cancer research and drug discovery to
improve national health and bring direct impacts to human flourishing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores how to create highly efficient
hardware-accelerated systems for compute- and memory-intensive applications that
process enormous volumes of data. The key idea is to develop a new execution
paradigm, that decomposes algorithms into coarse-grained operators instead of
traditional execution work units such as instructions, that describes how and
what portions of applications can be accelerated and executed on a hardware-
accelerated system. Such execution work units are called Domain-Specific
Primitives (DSPs). The vision is to raise the level of abstraction when
designing hardware accelerators by examining domain-specific, already-defined
software datatypes and constructs and thereby creating hardware execution units
that closely match software datatype-specific method calls, the starting point
of DSPs. DSPs can be used by software compilers, programmers, as well as
hardware development designers to compose, program, develop, and optimize
domain-specific hardware-accelerated systems in a systematic fashion. This
project first develops the fundamental concepts and abstractions of DSP designs.
This project then explores the productivity, resultant system performance and
energy efficiency, portability, and the ease of use of DSP-composed accelerated
systems. The result is a transformative realization in highly performant, highly
efficient, and highly productive development of hardware-accelerated systems
that are easy to use. This research makes a significant contribution towards
teaching acceleration concepts via various education and outreach programs. In
addition, the research will advance computer systems and healthcare research and
enable industry technology transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.