* 2045270
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Internal Waves from Cradle to Grave
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Marie-Pascale Lelong, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 700,510.00

This project will examine the evolution of near inertial internal waves
generated at the ocean surface, using a suite of nested very high resolution
models. Internal gravity waves are thought to be responsible for the bulk of
turbulence production, dissipation and mixing in the stratified ocean interior.
The cutting-edge one-way nesting approach would represent energy cascades
realistically, in terms of the scales those cascades preferentially occupy. The
goal is to examine the importance of isotropic vs. anisotropic turbulence and
dissipation, which will transform the understanding of mixing. This is a
necessary step to inform and improve modeling of heat and carbon storage and
transport within the ocean. The project will involve high school and
undergraduate interns recruited from local programs targeting under-represented
minorities, focusing on gaining experience in manipulating, analyzing and
visualizing large datasets. Co-I Kunze is a Science Communication Fellow at the
Seattle Pacific Science Center and PI Lelong is a mentor with MPOWIR, an NSF-
sponsored program to mentor and retain early career women in the oceanographic
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the
fundamental question of how near-inertial internal waves are connected to
diapycnal mixing by considering whether they directly produce small scale,
nearly isotropic turbulence or whether they first create large-scale anisotropic
turbulence that in turn creates small-scale turbulence. The energy cascade would
be tracked from wind-forced near-inertial waves in the surface mixed-layer
through refraction and trapping in a baroclinic anticyclone, downward radiation
into the pycnocline, critical-layer amplification at the vortex base,
instability producing turbulence, and the cascade to dissipation. The
coordinated set of simulations will produce a dynamically-coupled flow field
consisting of mesoscale eddies, submesoscale filaments, near-inertial and higher
frequency internal waves, shear-driven instabilities, and isotropic turbulent
motions at sub-Ozmidov scales, allowing an oceanographically realistic energy
cascade from the meso- to turbulent scales to be studied in detail. The work
will test dynamical hypotheses linking disparate scales of motion that cannot be
feasibly addressed in stand-alone simulations. The project will recruit
undergraduate students through REU programs designed to increase the diversity
of students successfully prepared to pursue Earth and ocean sciences career
pathways. The educational goals will focus on gaining experience in the
manipulation, analysis and visualization of large data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.