* 2045466
* CAREER: Evo-Developmental Interactions of Craniofacial and Brain Anatomy
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Akinobu Watanabe, New York Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/28/2026
* USD 392,533.00

Approximately one in 1,500 newborns are diagnosed with congenital hydrocephalus
where excess cerebrospinal fluid leads to an expanded brain, which then causes
the surrounding skull to swell. This brain-to-skull interaction exemplifies the
prevalence and compounding effects of interactions between tissue types.
Nevertheless, analyses used in most anatomical studies treat each tissue as
independent, isolated entities. Disregarding tissue-to-tissue interactions
impedes true diagnoses of factors that contribute to anatomical changes along
developmental and evolutionary timelines. To address this issue using modern
techniques, the proposed research features two complementary projects on brain-
skull interactions. The first study involves collection and analysis of high-
density brain and skull shape data across &gt;350 bird species to understand how
the brain and skull have directed each otherâ€™s evolutionary trajectories. To
pinpoint the mechanisms governing brain and skull interactions, the second study
comprises embryological experiments on a novel avian model organism with a
bizarrely shaped brain and skull. Collectively, these projects will demonstrate
the contribution of tissue-to-tissue interactions on emergence of novel and
diverse anatomical forms. Beyond its scientific merit, the research will also
foster Science, Technology, Engineering, Art, and Mathematics (STEAM) talent
through development and implementation of (i) a project-based Embryology module
into a nascent graduate program; (ii) new virtual reality (VR) and 3-D puzzle
games; and (iii) musical expressions of scientific data to engage more inclusive
audiences, including racial and ethnic minorities, people with disabilities, and
artistically inclined non-expert audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Darwinian
paradigm champions the role of adaptive selection as a key process underlying
trait evolution. However, recent large-scale evolutionary studies have shown
that functional and ecological variables account for very modest amounts of the
total morphological diversity of a structure. If ecology and function account
for only a small proportion of the total phenotypic disparity, what are the
major drivers of diversification through deep time? Instead of analyzing a
single structure, this research focuses on the interactions between structures
as a fundamental process that accounts for the unity and diversity of traits.
Using the brain and craniofacial anatomy as an exemplar system, the project
comprises (i) a collection-based interspecific analysis of brain-skull
integration across the avian tree of life; and (ii) observational and
manipulative developmental studies on a pair of chicken breeds, one with
aberrant brain and skull morphologies. Through a synthesis of classic and modern
techniques, including computed tomography (CT) imaging, high-density shape
analysis, in vivo embryology, and fluorescence microscopy, these studies will
visualize, model, and test evolutionary and developmental interactions between
brains and skulls across multiple scales, from subcellular to gross anatomical
levels. Importantly, these techniques and the resulting scientific data will
converge on three proposed education initiatives: (i) a new project-focused
Embryology module for a nascent graduate program; (ii) an immersive virtual
reality (VR) game and an associated 3D-printed puzzle; and (iii) a STEAM project
that translates biological data into music, offering a new modality to express
and teach scientific concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.