* 2045398
* CAREER: Fluorogenic Radical Polymerization for Signal Amplification and Detection
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Christina Cooley, Trinity University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 403,322.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Christina Cooley of Trinity University
is studying fluorogenic polymers that are prepared from non-fluorescent, "dark"
monomers. The incorporation of multiple dark monomers into a long polymer chain
"turns-on" visible fluorescence emission with increasing brightness as the
polymer chain grows. This research aims to identify new monomers to develop
synthetic strategies for preparing fluorogenic polymers in open-air and aqueous
solution, and to reveal fundamental principles that govern polymerization
kinetics and fluorescence properties. The Cooley group will also explore the use
of fluorogenic polymerization in signal amplification platforms for the
sensitive detection of biomolecules and their interactions. Signal-amplified
sensing platforms are potentially useful in a range of applications including
medical diagnosis of biomarkers. Undergraduate students engaging in this
research will receive broad, interdisciplinary hands-on training in preparation
for future careers in science. A new undergraduate organic chemistry laboratory
course will be developed that integrates concepts and problem-solving with
hands-on scientific training. The PI is also establishing a STEM outreach
program to local elementary schools led by female undergraduates to foster
retention and diversity in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cooley group
will identify monomers for the synthesis of fluorogenic polymers in aqueous
solution by atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) using the activators
regenerated by electron transfer (ARGET-ATRP) method. Synthetic approaches will
be developed to enable fluorogenic polymerization by reversible addition-
fragmentation chain-transfer (RAFT) in the open air. To allow exquisite control
of polymer length and to correlate the observed fluorescence with initiator
concentration, this research aims to reveal the fundamental principles that
govern polymerization kinetics and fluorescence properties of these fluorogenic
polymers. This fundamental knowledge will inform the design of a sensitive,
signal amplification platform for qualitative and quantitative detection of
analytes and receptor-ligand binding interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.