* 2045489
* CAREER: Seeing Through Atmospheric Turbulence: Image Restoration and Understanding using Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Vishal Patel, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Atmospheric turbulence can significantly degrade the quality of images acquired
by long-range imaging systems by causing spatially and temporally random
fluctuations in the index of refraction of the atmosphere. Variations in the
refractive index causes the captured images to be geometrically distorted and
blurry. These distortions adversely affect the performance of subsequent
computer vision algorithms such as object detection and recognition. Hence, it
is important to compensate for the visual degradation in images caused by
atmospheric turbulence. Adaptive optics-based techniques can be used to
compensate for turbulence effects in images. However, they require large,
complex and expensive hardware. On the other hand, image processing-based
approaches are cheap and effective. The idea of the proposed approach is to pose
the turbulence degraded image restoration problem as a nonlinear regression
problem, where the optimal parameters are learned from synthetically generated
data. As a function approximator, we propose to use deep convolutional neural
networks. The goal of this CAREER project is to develop data-driven learning-
based approaches for restoration and understanding of images degraded by
atmospheric turbulence. This project will help create new undergraduate/graduate
courses on Deep Learning and Image Restoration. Further, this project will
impact many diversity outreach activities, including specific outreach to ensure
broad participation of women, minorities and disadvantaged
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research will provide a comprehensive framework
for restoring and understanding images/videos degraded by atmospheric
turbulence. We will significantly innovate in the areas of supervised, semi-
supervised and unsupervised image restoration techniques by developing novel
end-to-end trainable deep convolutional neural networks and corresponding loss
functions. Furthermore, domain transfer learning-based methods for adapting
computer vision algorithms such as object detection and segmentation to
turbulence-degraded images will be developed. Algorithms that will be developed
in this project will significantly enhance the quality of images and videos
collected by long-range visible and infrared imagining systems, and will result
in improved understanding of images degraded by atmospheric turbulence. The
proposed methods will be useful in many applications of remote sensing, long-
range surveillance, optical communications, astronomy, road traffic monitoring,
underwater imaging, and autonomous navigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.