* 2045953
* CAREER: Catalytic Resonance-Enhanced Activation of Hydrocarbon Resources
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Omar Abdelrahman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,002.00

Leveraging the recent abundance of U.S. shale gas resources as a chemical
production feedstock requires the use of catalytic upgrading strategies.
Constraints related to chemical composition and geographical distribution of
both the feedstocks and products require the development of innovative catalytic
strategies that can take advantage of these new resources. Motivated by the
continuous growth of cost-competitive renewable electric power, the use of
electrochemical strategies to enable the activation of hydrocarbon resources
provides a unique opportunity to reduce the environmental impact and cost of
chemical manufacturing by avoiding the high pressures and temperatures
synonymous with thermally driven chemical transformations. Furthermore, the
electrochemical approach is more resistant to major disruption events that pose
resilience and safety threats in traditional chemical manufacturing supply
chains. Therefore, the development of electrically driven chemical reaction
strategies in this research program has significant transformative potential.
Direct electrochemical catalytic upgrading of hydrocarbon resources, however,
currently is limited by both slow reaction rates and poor selectivity to desired
products. This study will advance the development of catalytic resonance,
whereby the energetics of a catalyst is modulated in time to maximize the
reaction rate and selectivity towards the desired product. This study will
integrate concepts of sustainable chemical transformation, renewable energy
sources, and catalytic kinetics into an educational plan that will engage
students both at UMass and the surrounding area. The impact of outreach efforts
will be expanded by developing educational online content, using simple and
effective teaching techniques to communicate the fundamental science behind
energy related applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will focus on
developing a fundamental understanding of catalytic resonance for the
electrochemical oxidation of hydrocarbons into value-added oxygenates. While
renewable and cost-effective energy to drive the electrochemical reactions is
readily available, the rate of catalytic turnover associated with the
electrochemical oxidation of hydrocarbons (e.g., alkanes, alkenes) limits the
approach. Metal catalysts that do exhibit appreciable electrocatalytic activity
are plagued by the lack of selectivity to partial oxidation products due to the
over-oxidation of hydrocarbons into carbon dioxide as an undesirable product.
Under steady-state conditions, the challenges to catalytic activity and
selectivity share a similar origin: balancing the necessary adsorbate coverages,
kinetic driving force, and the combination of faradaic and non-faradaic
elementary steps involved in the catalytic cycle. Controlled energetic
oscillations of the catalytic working electrode decouples the rate-determining
factors, allowing for their independent tuning by accessing non-equilibrium
states that cannot be sustained under static conditions. While this study will
focus on hydrocarbon oxidation, the work will develop the understanding and
capabilities needed for extending the concept of catalytic resonance to other
important chemical transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.