* 2045147
* CAREER: Rapid Manufacture of Three-Dimensional Nanostructures for Nano-enabled Devices Using Projection Two-Photon Lithography
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Sourabh Saha, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant focuses on fundamentally
transforming the three-dimensional printing of complex nanostructures using two-
photon lithography from a slow and poorly scalable guesswork-based approach to a
rapid and resource-efficient knowledge-based approach. The two-photon
lithography process, which uses lasers to direct print three-dimensional
structures in photopolymers, fills an important technology gap between
microfabrication that is limited to planar geometries and typical additive
manufacturing that cannot print structures with nanoscale features and
precision. The two-photon lithography process is therefore critical for the
fabrication of three-dimensional nano-enabled devices with applications in
emerging fields such as quantum information processing, electric transportation
and biomedicine, which are important to national prosperity and welfare.
However, it has remained a niche process due to the low printing rates and
limited process knowledge. Industrial-scale adoption is particularly challenging
due to the slow and labor-intensive iterative ad-hoc experimentation involved in
predicting the process inputs for a desired print geometry. This project
elucidates the fundamental relationships between process parameters and product
performance for a projection-based high-speed implementation of two-photon
lithography. The research is complemented by an educational and outreach program
centered around project-based experiential learning for training of
manufacturing workforce, K-12 students and teachers, and undergraduate and
graduate students, with a focus on reducing the barriers to diversity, equity
and skills acquisition in advanced manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goal of the research is to generate the processing science for high-
throughput three-dimensional printing of nanostructures using projection two-
photon lithography. This project advances three core research areas: (1) the
coupling between light-matter interactions at high intensities (approaching
terawatts per square cm), (2) polymerization at short time and small length
scales (i.e., on millisecond and submicron scales), and (3) effect of
polymerization on the physical properties of the printed nanoscale features. The
specific research objectives are: (i) generation of physics-based relationships
to predict printability and print geometry, (ii) elucidating the mechanisms that
determine the rate limits, and (iii) developing error compensation techniques to
minimize defects during printing of large structures with nano-scale precision.
The research seeks to answer three fundamental questions about the process. (1)
Can broadly generalizable predictive relationships be generated? (2) What are
the theoretical and practical printing rate limits? (3) Is error compensation
feasible? These are answered through a combination of physics-based
computational modeling of the underlying physical phenomena, validation of
models against previously unmeasurable empirical data, and in-situ process
monitoring and control. This project advances additive nanomanufacturing of
nano-enabled devices using scalable processing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.