* 2045636
* CAREER: Robust and High-Performance Computational Methods for Simulating Metamaterial-Based Optical Devices
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Matthias Maier, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2026
* USD 222,264.00

The project centers around the development of novel computational approaches to
simulate metamaterial-based optical devices. Such optical geometries allow one
to manipulate light on a microscopic scale. The project addresses a critical
need for robust and controllable numerical schemes that can reliably describe
the optical response of complex microscale geometries. The project will enable a
broader scientific community to perform direct numerical simulations of optical
devices and will help to bridge the gap between physical theory and optical
device engineering. In addition to the dissemination of the research to the
scientific community, the PI will present the work to students through the
proposed educational agenda targeting the graduate and undergraduate curriculum
offered in the Department of Mathematics at Texas A&amp;M University: a
research-integrated, project-based graduate-level course that bridges the gap
between numerical analysis and interdisciplinary research; a project-centered
collaborative research program for undergraduate students that highlights
interdisciplinary research and applied computational mathematics; and an
accompanying summer school. The educational program will teach core competences
in computational sciences highlighting collaborative research and the
multidisciplinary character of the computational sciences. Efforts will be made
to attract female and minority students to these undergraduate activities and
stimulate their interest in exciting new research topics in scientific computing
and optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern nanoscale optical devices are based on
an intricate interplay of incident electromagnetic waves and the electron
structure of the nanodevice. The research component of the proposal is organized
around two complementary directions addressing a critical need for robust and
controllable numerical schemes that can reliably describe the optical response
of complex nanoscale geometries: (i) The first research direction is concerned
with the development and analysis of computational methods for simulating time-
harmonic non-local conductivity responses. (ii) The second research direction
will focus on the development and analysis of highly scalable and distributed
time-stepping methods that couple time-dependent Maxwell's equations with 2D
evolution equations modeling a subscale conductivity response. In both
directions the PI will connect the algorithmic and numerical development to
interdisciplinary applications. The numerical and algorithmic development will
be carried out alongside a number of research collaborations that are concerned
about the design and simulation of nanoscale optical devices for modulation and
control of the path of light, and the validation of fluid mechanical models for
electron response against recent experimental results. All these projects depend
on a strong computational component which current methods do not provide and
which is not available commercially.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.