* 2045492
* CAREER: Developing Agentic Computing Identities Through Computational Justice Programs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Patricia Garcia, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2026
* USD 344,854.00

Women of color (e.g. African American, Hispanic, and Native American) remain
largely underrepresented in computing degree programs and careers. Sociocultural
barriers are significant contributors to the stratification of participation in
computing along racialized, gendered, and classed lines. However, focusing
solely on long-standing sociocultural barriers can have the unintended
consequence of perpetuating deficit narratives and further preventing girls of
color from envisioning themselves as active participants in computing. This
study challenges deficit narratives through an investigation of how a
computational justice program model can support girls of color (ages 13-16) in
developing agentic computing identities. An agentic computing identity describes
the ability to view oneself as an active participant in computing with the
knowledge and skills to enact social change and control future life
trajectories. A computational justice approach develops concrete computing
skills and simultaneously provides opportunities for girls of color to ground
those skills in self-directed forms of personal and collective action.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research makes intellectual contributions to K-12
computer science education and design-based research through: (1) an empirical
understanding of how girls of color develop computing identities, (2) a
broadened conceptual understanding of computing identities that incorporates
agency as a core construct, (3) an empirical understanding of how investigating
the relationship between computing and social change influences feelings of
self-efficacy, competency, recognition, interest, and agency among girls of
color, (4) a theoretical examination of how concepts from social science
disciplines (social change, collective action, agency) can inform K-12 CS
education efforts, and (5) a novel co-design process that leverages cooperative
partnerships for sustained adoption of informal computing programs. This
research will create a robust computing identity model that moves beyond
performance-based identity models and can theoretically inform educational
interventions aimed at broadening participation in computing. It will also
contribute a program model that includes an asset-based pedagogical approach,
justice-centered curricular design, and practitioner-informed
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.