* 2045640
* CAREER: Multimodal Approach for Label-free Imaging of Lipidomic Changes in Brain
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Manas Gartia, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 05/31/2026
* USD 400,004.00

The objective of this CAREER project is to develop a method to image lipids
(fatty acids) in brain cells and tissues. This capability is needed because
lipids contribute to nerve generation and impulse conduction, and they are
essential signaling molecules and sources of energy. The method will be
demonstrated on neuronal cell and tissue samples relevant to Alzheimerâ€™s Disease
(AD). Current diagnosis methods of AD are either invasive, expensive, low-
resolution, low-sensitivity, or subjective and are not capable of probing
complex molecular actions down to the level needed to study neurodegenerative
diseases. These limitations will be addressed by combining two existing
microscopy techniques that enable precision measurements at depths not possible
with current techniques. The development of the proposed technology will advance
our understanding of the pathology of AD and could lead to early detection as
well as better therapeutics for AD. The research objectives of the CAREER
project are integrated with educational objectives to engage middle school and
high school students by partnering through a local museum. Further, the project
will involve students from local community colleges, minority, and
underrepresented groups on brain research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
goal of the Investigator is to develop a Second Harmonic Generation (SHG) and
Raman-based micro-endoscopy probe system along with statistical analysis
software to perform minimally invasive imaging of lipids and metabolites in vivo
at sub-millisecond time resolution. Towards this goal, the focus of this CAREER
project is on pioneering a multimodal label-free approach to elucidate the
spatial distribution of lipids in brain cells and tissues that will enable
probing of complex molecular actions down to the synaptic level (nanoscale).
Once developed, the 3D imaging platform will be used to assess the dynamics of
proteins and lipids along the neuronal membrane in a mouse model of Alzheimer's
Disease (AD), which could lead to improved understanding of AD pathogenesis. The
Research Plan is organized under three objectives: (1) Develop a state-of-the-
art nonlinear microscope system and establish a polarization activated rapid
(PAR) switching of second harmonic generation (SHG) / PAR-SHG method with
localize molecules with &lt; 20 nm accuracy, depth &gt; 1mm; (2) Utilize time-
resolved high resolution SHG to image the adsorption and transport of molecules
across the membrane of a single cell and to implement a novel optical biomarker
identification method to perform quantitative metabolic profiling of neuronal
cells; and (3) Combine high resolution SHG with Raman microscopy to perform
lipidomic imaging of in vitro and in vivo samples from an AD mouse model. In the
long term, the transformative approach will be able to perform super resolution
in vivo imaging of living brain to study sub-cellular processes at molecular
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.