* 2045068
* CAREER: Robust and Efficient Algorithms for Statistical Estimation and Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Stanislav Minsker, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2026
* USD 204,203.00

Statistical and machine learning methods are useful for making data-driven
decisions. These methods are particularly advantageous in the presence of
uncertainty originating from measurement errors or randomness inherent to the
data collection process itself. The principal investigator (PI) will pursue a
research program to develop statistical and machine learning methods possessing
two important characteristics, robustness and efficiency. Robust algorithms are
characterized by their ability to perform well even when some of the data are
not accurate and clean but instead are "outliers," such as completely irrelevant
or grossly corrupted measurements. Robust techniques can help to reduce the
amount of resources spent on human-supervised data cleaning and preprocessing.
On the other hand, methods that are efficient are able to extract most of the
useful information contained in the data, therefore reducing the amount of
uncertainty in the data-guided decision. This research program will be
integrated with educational activities that, among other things, will expose
undergraduate and graduate students to cutting edge approaches in statistics and
machine learning, and give students an opportunity to serve as individual tutors
and mentors at local K-12 schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One part of the research
program is devoted to investigation of the connections between self-normalized
sums and robust statistical techniques. In particular, the PI will demonstrate
that, unlike many existing approaches, algorithms based on the self-normalized
sums often give rise to efficient methods, for instance in the context of
univariate and multivariate mean estimation. Analysis of such algorithms is
closely related to the theory self-normalized processes. Another part of the
research focuses on the asymptotic properties of U-statistics of growing order,
and the implications of these properties for robust and efficient empirical risk
minimization (ERM), one of the key principles underlying modern mathematical
statistics and machine learning algorithms. The PI will introduce a new approach
to robust ERM and will relate questions about efficiency of resulting algorithms
to purely mathematical questions in the theory of U-statistics. Finally, the
research will address uncertainly quantification in robust statistics using
Bayesian methods. Specifically, the PI aims to develop new robust analogues of
the standard posterior distribution based on U-statistics of growing order, and
will investigate the asymptotic behavior of these robust posteriors as well as
the asymptotic frequentist properties of the corresponding credible
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.