* 2045510
* CAREER: Functional Fouling of Surfaces by Interfacial Silk Fibroin Self-Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Runye Zha, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 03/31/2026
* USD 398,297.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tendency of proteins in water to
adhere randomly to nearby surfaces is a ubiquitous phenomenon in nature. This
phenomenon, known as “fouling,” is usually considered a confounding problem
which can lead to a wide range of issues, such as clinical failure of biomedical
implants and undesirable attachment of marine organisms to ship hulls. However,
this project aims to leverage the persistence of protein fouling as the basis of
a new, highly versatile approach for creating multifunctional surfaces. Using
silk fibroins, a class of biocompatible proteins derived from or inspired by the
main component of natural silk, this project will develop methods for creating
robust nanometer-thin coatings on a variety of surfaces without requiring
hazardous chemicals or complex instrumentation. Towards this goal, the project
will seek to gain a fundamental understanding of the fouling behavior of silk
fibroins as they undergo self-assembly – an aggregation process which underlies
the spinning of silk threads by insects and spiders. Through a combination of
synthetic biology and surface-sensitive material characterization techniques,
this project will also reveal fundamental insights about how proteins and other
biomacromolecules in nature are able to adhere tenaciously to surfaces without
specific chemical reactions. Furthermore, this project will develop a bio-
inspired strategy by which the function of surfaces, such as biocompatibility or
therapeutic activity, can be modified for applications in human healthcare and
sustainability. To facilitate the dissemination of complex scientific findings
from this project to a global public audience, the Merian Studio for Visual
Communication will be founded at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. This
technology-equipped workspace will enable students to produce compelling visual
educational tools, such as 2D/3D graphics and animations. As part of this visual
communication effort, the project will also support an interdisciplinary team of
art and engineering students to create an interactive video game that
intuitively teaches the fundamental concepts of natural protein assembly and
fouling phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to develop a powerful bottom-up
strategy for creating multifunctional thin-film coatings that leverages the
unique self-assembly behavior of silk fibroins at solid-liquid interfaces. Such
interfacial behavior, where adsorption occurs concurrently with protein-protein
assembly, is a type of robust “fouling” which has not been sufficiently studied
to date, despite being an important aspect underlying natural biomacromolecular
adhesion. Furthermore, whereas fouling of surfaces by proteins has long been
considered an undesirable but unavoidable problem, interfacial silk fibroin
self-assembly can be used as a versatile non-covalent approach for modifying a
variety of surfaces under mild, biocompatible conditions without complex
chemistries or advanced instrumentation. This project will seek to gain a
fundamental understanding of the growth of adherent and defect-free coatings via
interfacial protein self-assembly by 1) relating silk fibroin adsorption on high
and low surface energy substrates to tunable solution-phase assembly phenomena,
2) determining the role of protein sequence and size on coating formation using
de novo designed recombinant silk fibroins, 3) visualizing the effects of
nanoscale substrate topography on coating formation, and 4) exploring co-
assembly of enzymes and growth factors with silk fibroins as a one-pot method
for creating therapeutically active surfaces. The project will generate a
comprehensive model for interfacial assembly of network-forming proteins, such
as silk fibroins, in terms of protein-protein and protein-surface interactions.
Moreover, this work will establish a new non-covalent approach towards
functionalizing surfaces for a variety of materials applications. To facilitate
the dissemination of complex scientific findings from the proposed research to a
broad lay audience, the project will establish the “Merian Studio for Visual
Communication” at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, which will be a technology-
equipped workspace enabling students to produce compelling visual educational
tools, such as 2D/3D graphics and animations. The project will also support an
interdisciplinary team of art and engineering undergraduate students to create
an interactive video game that teaches fundamental concepts in protein
adsorption and assembly related to the proposed research for use in global
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.