* 2045506
* CAREER: Solid-state molecular motion, reversible covalent-bond formation, and self-assembly for controlling thermal expansion behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Kristin Hutchins, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2026
* USD 376,979.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Materials used in real-world settings are
frequently exposed to changes in temperature. For materials used in outdoor
applications such as concrete, this is typically due to weather or seasonal
changes. For materials used in devices such as computers or electronics, this is
due to excess energy that results in heat. Thermal expansion is the response of
a material to any change in temperature. The way a material responds to
temperature impacts its ability to function. If the thermal expansion behavior
of a material is not understood and controlled, failure or fracture is likely to
occur as a result of temperature fluctuations. The chemical structures of the
molecules and the bonds that hold a solid material together typically dictate
the thermal expansion behaviors. The behaviors of materials like concrete are
well-understood; however, analogous behaviors for organic (carbon)-based
materials are more challenging to predict and design because these materials are
held together by weaker forces. Organic materials are becoming more widely used
in a variety of fields such as electronics. Balancing high material performance
with ideal thermal expansion is critical to such applications. This CAREER
project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the
Division of Materials Research, develops fundamental strategies for controlling
the thermal expansion behaviors of organic materials. Specifically, thermal
expansion is influenced through the use of dynamic groups, which respond to
temperature changes by undergoing motion or by making and breaking the bonds
that hold the material together. The strategies developed in this project are
expected to influence the design and preparation of novel materials with
predictable thermal expansion properties for use in technological applications
that advance national prosperity. Integrated with the research plan is a
holistic education, mentorship, and outreach program involving underrepresented
groups at each education stage from middle school through graduate school. The
activities include (1) development and implementation of an annual presentation
on 'Thermal Expansion Around Us' at Tech Savvy – a STEM workshop for middle
school girls, (2) a traveling lab experiment on molecular structures and solid-
state properties for high school students in West Texas, and (3) a STEM career
preparation workshop for upper-level undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Research, develops a fundamental understanding of thermal expansion
(TE) behaviors in organic crystalline solids through synthesis of novel, dynamic
solid-state materials with controllable and predictable TE behaviors. TE is the
response of a material to a change in temperature. The chemical structures of
the molecules and the interactions that hold the solid together typically
dictate TE behavior. However, other mechanisms such as structural flexibility or
motion can give rise to unexpected or unique TE. For inorganic or covalent
network solids, intermolecular forces are strong, structural assembly is well-
controlled in three dimensions, and TE is often predictable. On the other hand,
purely organic molecular solids are held together in three dimensions by weaker,
noncovalent interactions. Directing self-assembly of individual organic
molecules into a solid structure with full control over the noncovalent
interactions comprising all crystallographic dimensions is challenging.
Noncovalent forces, motion, and flexibility all affect TE in organic molecular
solids. Reliably directing, achieving, and controlling solid-state motion, self-
assembly, and predicting their influence on TE remains challenging. This CAREER
project develops fundamental knowledge and systematic strategies for controlling
and tuning TE in organic molecular solids through (1) installation of functional
groups capable of undergoing solid-state molecular motion and reliably turning
motion on and off, (2) use of reversible solid-state covalent-bond-forming
reactions to switch between large and near zero TE behaviors within a single
solid, and (3) control over self-assembly of organic molecules in all three
crystallographic dimensions using orthogonal noncovalent interactions. The work
is expected to advance fundamental knowledge of solid-state motion, reactivity,
self-assembly, and TE, and transform the design of functional solid-state
materials that exhibit dynamic properties. The educational and outreach
activities emphasize a STEM-powered approach to education and career preparation
by engaging students in STEM activities at each stage of education from middle
school through graduate school. This is achieved through (1) development and
implementation of an annual presentation on 'Thermal Expansion Around Us' at
Tech Savvy – a STEM workshop for middle school girls, (2) a traveling lab
experiment on molecular structures and solid-state properties for high school
students in West Texas, and (3) a STEM career preparation workshop for upper-
level undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.