* 2045025
* CAREER: Multiphase Oxidation and Fate of Pesticides in Dry and Wet Deposition
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Jennifer Faust, College of Wooster
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2026
* USD 508,926.00

Pesticides are introduced into the environment deliberately through their
application to cops. Once applied, pesticides can enter the atmosphere where
they react on aerosol particles and eventually deposit back to surfaces that may
be far removed from their point of application. Little is known, however, about
the chemical reactions that pesticides undergo on these particles while
suspended and how these processes impact their spatial distribution. In this
CAREER award, the PI intends to integrate laboratory and field studies to
increase understanding of pesticide oxidation reactions on particles and their
deposition. State-of-the-art instrumentation is used to characterize reactants
and products as well as components in field samples. Numerous undergraduate
students will be involved at every level of this research and play a significant
role in mentoring students from diverse high schools thus contributing to the
development of a well-prepared STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives
of the research focus on increasing current understanding of the atmospheric
fate of pesticides, specifically through processes of (i) heterogeneous
oxidation of pesticides adsorbed on aerosol particles and (ii) regional
atmospheric transport and deposition. Rates and products of heterogeneous
oxidation of pesticide films will be determined under controlled laboratory
conditions, using advanced instrumentation, including Attenuated Total
Reflection-Fourier Transform Infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy and liquid
chromatography/quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (LC/QToF-MS).
Regional transport and deposition will be determined through measurements
performed at 4 sites in a regional network in Ohio, where herbicides are
regularly used on corn and soybean fields. Air mass back trajectories and
statistical testing of pesticide levels in samples across sites and seasons will
aid in assessing whether local or regional sources dominate pesticide
deposition. Findings will provide insight into whether pesticides and their
degradation products cause poor air quality, health risks to humans and
ecosystems, and crop damage in regions distant from pesticide
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.