* 2045373
* Collaborative Research: Undergraduate Research Experiences in Extragalactic Radio Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* David Craig, West Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2024
* USD 14,720.00

Undergraduate Research Experiences in Extragalactic Radio Astronomy by the
Undergraduate ALFALFA Team (UAT) is a collaborative, multi-faceted program of
faculty and undergraduate research at a consortium of 21 diverse U.S.
institutions. Through this program, faculty and undergraduates collaborate to
pursue frontier astronomy research projects related to the atomic gas content of
the universe as detected at radio wavelengths. The primary UAT program
components are an annual UAT Workshop and an extended summer research program.
In these programs they communicate project science, observing, and data analysis
techniques to undergraduate researchers via lectures, observing sessions, and
group work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next three-year phase of the UAT will
capitalize on the robust infrastructure and faculty skill set across the 21
institutions to perform radio spectral line observations to trace the atomic gas
content of the local universe. Utilizing new collaborations with wide field
optical surveys and accumulated radio experience with the ALFALFA (Arecibo
Legacy Fast ALFA) survey and follow-up, the UAT empowers faculty and students to
be contributors to cutting-edge science and the broader astronomical community.
The participating UAT faculty have a shared dedication to involving
undergraduate students in research. Faculty and students collaborate across a
wide range of public and private colleges, primarily undergraduate
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.