* 2045237
* CAREER: Foundations of Secure Communication in mmWave Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Martina Cardone, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2026
* USD 280,847.00

Today, an ever-growing number of services rely on the use of the wireless medium
to transfer sheer volumes of data that is inherently private, such as e-health
data and credit card information. One solution to support high data rates
consists of utilizing the communication bands in the millimeter-wave (mmWave)
spectrum, that is, the abundant range of frequencies from 30 GHz to 300 GHz. Due
to its openness and shared nature, however, the wireless medium is highly
vulnerable to eavesdropping attacks. The traditional assumption that an
eavesdropping adversary will have limited computational capabilities is placed
in doubt by recent trends and advances in (quantum) computing. Conversely, in a
large multi-hop mmWave network, it is reasonable to assume that an eavesdropper
can intercept transmissions only over a subset of the links over which she has
to be physically present. The goal of this project is to provide simple yet
powerful abstractions of mmWave networks and to design information-theoretic
optimal transmission protocols that are unconditionally secure against an
external eavesdropper with unbounded computational capabilities but limited
network presence. The research is highly integrated with educational activities
that leverage the unique opportunities presented by the awardee
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an information-theoretic
framework that captures the essentials of multi-hop mmWave communication and
eavesdroppers' capabilities. The first objective consists of characterizing the
maximum secure information flow over single-source single-destination multi-hop
mmWave networks with the derivation of converse bounds and the design of novel
transmission schemes. A key aspect is the characterization of the trade-off
between parameters that account for the computational and processing
capabilities at the nodes and afford a target end-to-end secure rate. The second
objective consists of developing information-theoretic optimal secure
communication protocols for multi-hop mmWave networks where multiple legitimate
source-destination pairs share the same resources and wish to securely
communicate among themselves. Towards this end, the benefits of cooperation in
generating randomness and sharing the resources, together with the advantages of
employing common keys in place of private keys, are investigated to develop
architectures that have provably optimal scaling laws for the secure flow of
information over large and dense mmWave networks. The wide range of applications
in which mmWave communication is foreseen to play a key role, together with the
urgent need of protocols to maintain the confidentiality of the exchanged data,
render this project relevant to global industrial and societal
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.