* 2045957
* CAREER: Continuous-wave Terahertz laser employing HTS Josephson junctions
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Timothy Benseman, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal Number: 2045957&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Timothy M
Benseman&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Continuous-wave Terahertz laser employing HTS
Josephson junctions&lt;br/&gt;Institution: CUNY Queens
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Powerful and
lightweight lasers that operate at frequencies between 0.3 trillion Hertz and
1.5 trillion Hertz will offer a leap forward for numerous applications, such as
secure and ultrafast wireless data networking, detection of concealed drugs and
explosives, and early-warning identification of tooth decay and skin cancer.
They will far surpass the capabilities of lasers and laser-like electromagnetic
radiation sources currently available in this frequency range, which either have
low power output, or are too large, heavy, and power-consuming to be used in
field-portable applications. This project establishes a new type of laser
technology uniquely based on high-temperature superconductors that will be ideal
for the above applications in this ‘terahertz gap’ frequency range. To date,
milliwatt-level power from this type of laser has only been theoretically
predicted, at the level of fundamental physics. This project tests the ideas
empirically and engineers the technology to make it available for deployment.
The cryocooling requirements of this technology take advantage of micro-
cryocoolers that are already used for infrared cameras and night vision goggles.
To complement the superconductivity research project, a program of scientific
outreach activities is performed. These are based on superconductive levitation
experiments to inspire high schoolers and community college students,
particularly from underrepresented demographics, into STEM fields. A graduate-
level course module focuses on lithographic fabrication techniques for
microelectronics and prepares students for careers in device microfabrication
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;At present, the
sources of coherent radiation available between approximately 0.3 trillion Hertz
and 1.5 trillion Hertz all have serious engineering drawbacks that limit their
usefulness. Existing technologies that work at these frequencies either generate
very low levels of output power, or are very heavy, bulky, and power-consuming.
User-friendly lasers operating in this ‘terahertz gap’ range would revolutionize
a number of fields, including high-bandwidth data transmission, scientific and
medical imaging, and security and defense technologies. Stacked ‘intrinsic’
superconductor-insulator-superconductor (Josephson) junctions in the extremely
anisotropic high-temperature superconducting compound Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 are one of
the most promising candidates for filling the ‘terahertz gap’. These intrinsic
Josephson junctions can be used to engineer the only compact terahertz laser
source that currently offers tunability, high power, and continuous-wave
operation. This project engineers terahertz laser sources based on Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8
Josephson junctions to achieve at least an order-of-magnitude enhancement in the
terahertz power output of these devices to 1 milliwatt or more, while also at
least doubling their operating frequency range to at least 1.0 terahertz. These
enhancements in terahertz power and emission frequency are targeted even at
operation temperatures of 77 Kelvin or more, in order to minimize cryocooling
requirements. Terahertz sources are microfabricated by patterning stacks on
Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 crystals using optical lithography and argon-ion milling. The
feasibility of doing this at volume for commercial-scale terahertz laser
applications will be tested. Finally, a further research aim of this project is
to measure the behavior of a novel type of Josephson plasmon in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8.
Experimentally understanding this plasmon would make it possible to engineer an
entire new class of highly efficient electronic devices for terahertz signal
detection and mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.