* 2045881
* CAREER: Finite Elasticity of Morphing Metamaterials. Theory and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Hussein Nassar, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2026
* USD 609,605.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will investigate the
elastic behavior of structures that can unfold and deploy from compact
configurations into useful 3D geometries. Deployable structures are used in
several areas pertaining to robotics (e.g., soft robots used in minimally
invasive surgeries and in search-and-rescue), to aeronautics and astronautics
(e.g., smart airfoils, deployable mirrors and solar panels and sails in space
missions) and to smart structures (e.g., deployable shelters and rooftops). The
relationships that exist between the global behavior of a deployable structure
and the local behavior of its elementary constituents (bars, plates and
membranes) are governed by a mixture of geometrical and mechanical laws. The
research aims to establish a fundamental understanding of such local-to-global
relationships and of the way they dictate how a deployable structure changes
shape under external loads so as to improve current modeling, design and control
paradigms. The theme of geometry provides aesthetic and appealing connections
with several areas of artistic and fashion design and will be leveraged to
increase public engagement with science and technology through outreach
activities which, with the help of an institutional center, will particularly
target K-12 and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
purpose of the project is to initiate a theory of the finite, geometrically non-
linear, elastic deformations of deployable structures that are tailored on small
space scales as in architected materials and metamaterials. The technical
objectives of the research efforts are to (i) characterize the macroscopic
deformation paths compatible with the small-scale kinematics of a deployable
structure composed of rigid or inextensible elements; to (ii) compute the
generalized, strain-gradient or enriched, elasticity functionals that govern the
equilibrium geometries of a deployable structure and particularly so in cases
where standard Strength of Materials theories break down; (iii) formulate
conceptual control problems and solve them for actuation parameters understood
as the boundary data that deform the deployable structure into a target shape;
and (iv) establish inverse design paradigms that allow us to find deployable
structures with pre-programmed deformation paths. To do so, the project will
develop analysis methods marrying differential geometry, asymptotics and
homogenization theory. This project will allow the PI to advance the knowledge
base in solid mechanics and to support his long-term career within that
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.