* 2045014
* CAREER: Human/Machine Collaborative Learning and Control of Contact-Rich Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2021,04/30/2027
* Sam Burden, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 04/30/2027
* USD 784,690.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant seeks to discover
fundamental engineering principles that enable humans and machines to
collaboratively learn and control the complex dynamics that arise when the human
or machine intermittently contacts objects or uneven terrain in the environment.
Although humans successfully learn to control complex machine dynamics when they
fly planes, drive cars, or perform robot-assisted surgery, these applications
avoid the abrupt changes in dynamics encountered when one's feet hit the ground,
or when one's hands initially grasp objects. Despite the prevalence of contact-
rich dynamic interactions in daily life and work, state-of-the-art robots
struggle with making and breaking contact whether or not there is a human in-
the-loop. In many applications of current and future interest -- remotely-
operated robots, active prosthetics and exoskeletons, and brain/machine
interfaces, to name a few -- humans and machines will collaboratively learn to
control legs and arms as they make and break contact with the environment. The
project will advance the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and to
advance national health, prosperity, and welfare by advancing understanding of
how humans learn to control contact-rich dynamics and how machines can adapt to
ensure safety and improve performance of the human/machine system. In the long
term, the results of this project will human/robot teams to perform complex
tasks involving dynamic interaction with the world. Since many jobs are becoming
increasingly automated, and since many people will experience impaired movement
at some point in their lives, the goals of this research have tangible benefits
for work and/or health of many people. To ensure these benefits are shared
equitably, this project includes three evidence-based education and outreach
programs designed to broaden participation in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to test the
hypotheses that humans can learn dynamic models of complex contact-rich machine
dynamics, that they can and invert those models to control machine interactions
with the environment, and that machines can exploit these facts to adapt their
behavior to assist the human to perform desirable tasks. This goal will be
pursued through three objectives. The first is to mathematically derive and
computationally approximate inverse models for contact-rich dynamics. To achieve
this objective, the PI will derive conditions that ensure that a forward model
involving contact dynamics is invertible (exactly or approximately) and create
algorithms that compute representations for the (approximate) inverse model. The
second objective is to experimentally test whether humans control contact-rich
dynamics as if they learned and inverted forward models, and to discern how
sensorimotor pathways are integrated to implement the humanâ€™s controller. To do
so, the project team will conduct human subject experiments using a novel
teleoperation testbed to study trajectory tracking tasks involving intermittent
contact events. The third objective will mathematically derive and
experimentally test performance of human/machine co-adaptation algorithms based
on game theory. The education goal of this project is to broaden participation
in STEM fields by engaging high school and college students from
underrepresented groups in hands-on research and design experiences focused on
human/machine interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.