* 2045750
* CAREER: Elucidation of the Physical Principles the Govern Endothelial Structure and Function
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Robert Steward, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will utilize principles
from cell biology and mechanics to establish the role that biomechanical forces
and fluid forces play in the structure and function of the endothelium.
Endothelial cells line the inside of all blood and lymphatic vessels within the
body. Their ability to regulate structure and function is essential to proper
functioning of every major organ within the body. Furthermore, aberrant
endothelial cell function has been linked to debilitating diseases including
atherosclerosis, cardiac fibrosis, thrombosis, and brain tumors. Endothelial
cells are constantly exposed to biomechanical inputs, but the influence
mechanics has on their ability to regulate structure and function is not well
understood. Specifically their ability to change phenotype (plasticity) is a gap
in our understanding. To fill this gap, this project will: 1) develop an
endothelial biomechanical force model; 2) define the role of fluid shear stress
and cell-derived mechanical forces on endothelial permeability; and 3)
Investigate the influence of fluid pressure and fluid frequency on endothelial
permeability. The education and outreach initiatives of this program will train
and mentor STEM majors of the future through utilization the Research and
Mentoring Program (RAMP), McNair Scholars Program, and Campus Connect program at
the University of Central Florida. Collaboration with the programs mentioned
above will provide an opportunity for high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students from underrepresented groups to receive hands-on training and research
experience.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work will address the central hypothesis
that hemodynamic forces and cell-derived biomechanical forces interact
synergistically to influence endothelial structure and function. In support of
this research objective this work will 1) define the role of angioadaptation in
endothelial plasticity; 2) define the role of fluid shear stress and
intercellular stress on endothelial permeability; and 3) investigate the
influence of fluid pressure and fluid frequency on endothelial permeability. To
complement the research objectives of this program the outreach objectives are
to: 1) engage the STEM majors of the future; 2) energize the STEM majors of the
future; and 3) educate the STEM majors of the future. Every major organ in the
body requires endothelial cells to maintain homeostasis. Therefore, this program
will be applicable to numerous vascular systems such as the cardiovascular
system and cerebrovascular system. The results of this work have the potential
to advance knowledge in endothelial biology, biomechanics, and the drug delivery
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.