* 2045234
* High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) energized functionalized nanoparticles mediated enhanced thermal ablation of tumors
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Rupak Banerjee, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2024
* USD 382,179.00

High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) ablation has gained endorsement in
recent times for treating limited cancer types, e.g., localized prostate cancer.
HIFU procedure is not routinely conducted because its targeting effectiveness
remained uncertain when compared to standard treatments for localized cancers.
HIFU ablation in presence of direct injection of gold nanoparticles into
subcutaneous tumors have shown enhanced ablation due to unique acoustic-thermal
phenomenon, while thermal damage in adjacent normal tissues was reduced.
However, HIFU ablation with direct gold-nanoparticles injection has yet to
achieve its full potential because it primarily treats superficial tumors and
that the heterogeneous gold-nanoparticles concentration at the injection site
leads to uneven heating profiles. The objective is to achieve the goal of
focused ablation at reduced HIFU power levels using functionalized-gold-
nanoparticles enhanced energy deposition. The use of HIFU heating of
systemically injected gold-nanoparticles for ablating deep-seated cancer could
guide future larger-scale animal studies and treatment planning in humans. This
unique interdisciplinary study links fields of cancer therapy, nanomaterials,
bio-heat transfer, wave propagation, image analysis, and non-invasive surgical
method, augmenting ongoing collaborations with US FDA and, in turn, benefiting
medical and industry community. Undergraduate/minority students will be actively
recruited as in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal is to develop
HIFU-gold-nanoparticles ablation methods that selectively target and ablate
deep-seated tumors. It is hypothesized that systemically injected
functionalized-gold-nanoparticles exposed to reduced HIFU power will lead to
improved targeting of tumors and enable uniform heat deposition, while
minimizing collateral damage to surrounding tissues. To test the hypothesis,
animal models with will be used to assess the efficacy by which functionalized
gold-nanoparticles injected into the circulation combined with reduced HIFU
power will achieve precise targeting and uniform ablation of prostate cancer.
Nanotechnology will be used to develop functional gold-nanoparticles that can
recognize specific cell-surface markers overexpressed on prostate cancer cells.
It is expected that systemically injected functionalized-gold-nanoparticles will
selectively target deep-seated cancer; and that they can be used to both image
and ablate prostate cancer tissues with minimal collateral damage to adjacent
tissues. This pilot research is expected to provide proof-of-principle that
cancer tissues can take up multifunctional gold-nanoparticles and can be
selectively ablated, thus developing a novel ablation approaches to treat cancer
tissues. Such protocol would improve cancer patient care and management of
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.