* 2045204
* CAREER: Toward Reliable Nonadiabatic Dynamics in Condensed Matter and Nanoscale Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Alexey Akimov, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2026
* USD 650,000.00

Alexey Akimov of the State University of New York at Buffalo is supported by a
CAREER award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry for theoretical research aimed to advance the
reliability and efficiency of quantum dynamics methods for condensed matter and
nanoscale systems. Understanding the kinetics and mechanisms of quantum
processes such as charge and energy transfer is critical for rationally
designing a wide variety of materials such as photovoltaic, photocatalytic, or
energy-storage systems, optoelectronic and quantum materials. The computational
modeling of the quantum processes in such complex systems at the atomistic level
inevitably involves approximations that challenge the reliability of the
computational predictions. The computational complexity also limits the range of
the processes that can be studied from first principles. In this project, Akimov
and his group will develop new theoretical frameworks, computational
methodologies, and open-source software to lift the current limitations of
quantum dynamics simulations in nanoscale systems. This project will explore the
quality of the presently-used simplified approaches, re-evaluate them from more
rigorous grounds, and bring the state of quantum dynamics calculations in large
systems to a new level of rigor and practicality, unreachable before. The open-
source software developed in this project will enable researchers to study new,
previously inaccessible, classes of solar energy materials, contributing toward
sustainable and renewable energy economy development. Dr. Akimov’s research
program is closely integrated with his outreach and educational programs,
including workshops on theoretical chemistry for graduate students and a virtual
international seminar series for a broad scientific
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the Akimov group will develop
and study reliable and efficient methods for modeling quantum nonadiabatic
dynamics in condensed matter and nanoscale systems. The nonlinear dimensionality
reduction and machine learning strategies will be explored to enable computing
many nanosecond-long quantum trajectories, without expensive ab initio
calculations. These strategies are expected to help obtain the converged
statistics of electronic transitions and estimate the error bars in computed
properties. They will also enable modeling intrinsically slow quantum processes
and infrequent events and help accelerate nonadiabatic dynamics modeling of
large systems. The project aims to identify the “effective” low-dimensional
coordinates that can be used to facilitate the analysis of photoexcited dynamics
in various materials. New techniques for nonadiabatic dynamics in large systems
will be developed based on the formally-exact hierarchy of equations of motion
method. These developments enable the accurate description of the bath-induced
decoherence, and thermalization of excited states in complex systems, in a non-
perturbative way. New nonadiabatic dynamics methods for computing electronic
state couplings and energies at the many-body level, beyond the commonly-used
single-particle picture, will be developed and implemented in open-source codes.
These advancements seek to enable computational material scientists to model
excitonic dynamics in quantum-confined systems and capture slow dynamics with
infrequent electronic transitions. The nonadiabatic dynamics approaches
resulting from this project will be validated against the model and experimental
references. These efforts aim to assess modern approximate quantum-classical
methods for extended systems and bring them to a new level of rigor and
reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.