* 2045390
* CAREER: Transition Metal Chalcogenide Clusters: Preformed Building Blocks for Framework Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Christopher Bejger, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2026
* USD 335,239.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bulk transition metal chalcogenides
(TMCs), are important materials for energy storage, electronic devices, and
catalysis. However, TMCs are typically synthesized at high temperatures and
pressures or are isolated using exfoliation techniques. Traditional synthetic
approaches to TMC materials lack precise structural control, thus limiting their
ability to be rationally tuned for specific applications. With this CAREER
project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research, Prof. Christopher Bejger studies how nano-sized
fragments of TMCs can be used as building blocks for multidimensional scaffolds
with high surface areas, known as metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). MOFs offer
robust stability, crystalline structures, and can be predictably synthesized.
The resulting hybrid materials share features of both conventional, bulk TMCs
and crystalline MOFs. Frameworks made from TMC units undergo multiple,
reversible oxidation state changes. Thus, TMC-MOFs are relevant to the study of
nanoelectronics and future charge storage devices. The design of these materials
provides inspiration for an integrated education component. The PI plans and
fabricates an interactive Nanoscale Science Pop Up Museum, influenced by the
principles of molecular and materials design, in collaboration with Prof. Rachel
Dickey at the UNC Charlotte School of Architecture. The PI and his architecture
colleague also partner with the Charlotte Teachers Institute (CTI) to present a
seminar series for Charlotte-Mecklenburg School (CMS) teachers titled "Design
Matter(s)" and host both science and art educators in a Summer Research
Experience for Teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research,
investigates a new class of redox-active metal-organic frameworks (MOFs)
comprising transition metal chalcogenide (TMC) molecular clusters. TMC clusters
exhibit rich electrochemical behavior and have a propensity to undergo
reversible, multi-electron transfer events. However, their use in MOF chemistry
is limited by a lack of suitable synthetic protocols. The Bejger research group
uses phosphine ligands with ancillary functional groups to incorporate pre-
formed, atomically defined, metal-sulfide units into multidimensional
frameworks. Several strategies are explored to expand the stoichiometric and
structural combinations of precursors of the general formula MxSy (M= Ni, Co,
Mo, Fe). The composition, topology, and surface areas of the materials are
tailored to control the arrangement and charge of redox-active clusters. TMC
clusters have mixed-valence, delocalized, metal-chalcogen cores that provide
structural integrity across oxidation states and serve as electron reservoirs.
Select TMC-MOFs that undergo stable charge/discharge cycling are studied for
energy storage applications. TMC-MOF cathodes that mediate bifunctional charging
are investigated for use in lithium ion batteries. The educational component of
this proposal aims to increase civic engagement with materials chemistry through
the lens of architecture and design. A pop-up museum is designed and fabricated
as a collaborative project with the UNC Charlotte School of Architecture. The
educational plan is multifaceted to emphasize links between MOF topology,
reticular synthesis, and architecture. The ideas presented in the museum concept
are disseminated and developed into a curriculum for local teachers through a
partnership with the Charlotte Teachers Institute
(CTI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.