* 2045740
* CAREER: Populations and Systematic Uncertainties in the Era of the Advanced Gravitational-Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Salvatore Vitale, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This award supports research in relativistic astrophysics and it addresses the
priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The detection of
gravitational waves has opened new avenues to explore the universe and some of
its most fascinating phenomena. When two compact objects, black holes or neutron
stars, collide, they emit gravitational waves which encode the properties of
their sources, for example masses and spins. To date, more than a dozen binary
black hole and 2 binary neutron star mergers have been found in the data of the
NSF-funded LIGO observatories and the Virgo detector. Over the next five years,
we expect to detect more than one binary black hole source per week, and roughly
one binary neutron star per month. This project will enable a broad scientific
exploitation of gravitational-wave data by developing methods to combine
information from a large number of sources. At the same time, it will deal with
the main sources of systematic error, which might otherwise hinder astrophysical
inference, limiting its usefulness for the scientific community. In addition to
enabling a reliable analysis of the population of gravitational-wave sources,
this project will also increase the representation of underserved communities
and underrepresented minorities in STEM. The project includes a professional
development program for high school teachers which will target low-income areas
and expose the teachers and their students to the main ideas behind
gravitational-wave astrophysics and highlight the many transferable skills
acquired with a physics degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the tens to hundreds
of compact binary systems that will be detected in the next few years, their
full exploitation will bear fruit on key physics and astrophysics questions.
Such a wealth of detected systems, some of which at large signal-to-noise ratio,
constitutes both an opportunity and a challenge. To fully exploit the available
data, sophisticated data analysis algorithms and a full control of systematic
errors will be needed. The work has on two main goals: a) to develop tools to
characterize the population of compact binaries while accounting for marginal
sources and for the possibility that some triggers might not be of astrophysical
origin and b) to quantify and mitigate the effect of an important type of
systematic errors, those those arising from the calibration of the
gravitational-wave detectors. The work will thus advance key questions in
gravitational-wave astrophysics and help maximize the science output of LIGO and
the international network of gravitational-wave detectors. Despite some progress
over the last twenty years, the fraction of bachelor physics degrees awarded to
students from under-represented minorities, and in particular African Americans,
is still too low. Among the many factors that might contribute to these low
numbers, is the perception that a degree in physics does not open many doors to
the job market. The project includes a professional development program for high
school teachers, with schools in districts with low per-pupil expenditure. The
program will have two main goals: expose the teachers, and hence their students,
to the main ideas behind general relativity, gravitational waves and
astrophysics, and provide examples, directly from this research program, of
ideas and methods that can be directly transferred from a physics degree to a
job in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.