* 2045993
* CAREER: Topological Phenomena in 4d and 5d Complex Oxide Interfaces and Superlattices Grown by Hybrid Molecular Beam Epitaxy
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Ryan Comes, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 04/30/2026
* USD 393,501.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Thin films of metal oxides such as ferrous oxide and
titania have long been studied for their various unique physical properties,
such as magnetism and superconductivity. It is only in the past few years,
however, that research in oxides comprised of metallic elements lower in the
periodic table has gained prominence. Oxides composed of these metals exhibit
unusual properties when they conduct electricity making them strong candidates
for use in quantum computation technologies. This project focuses on the
synthesis of oxide thin films comprised of elements in the fourth and fifth rows
of the periodic table. Researchers are studying the unusual behavior derived
from materials comprised of two different elements made with atomically sharp
interfaces using a technique called molecular beam epitaxy. By alternating
layers of each material in a sandwich structure to produce repeating interfaces,
the research focuses on making a material that exhibits the properties of the
interface many times over. Through two outreach programs, exposure to science in
rural and underserved areas of Alabama is broadened to groups that are not
introduced to science in their daily lives. The investigator teaches annual
seminars in Alabama prisons through the Alabama Prison Arts and Education
Project about the applications of physics and materials science to new
technologies, offering non-traditional students scientific enrichment and
education during their rehabilitation that is not otherwise available. The
researchers also lead the annual Gameday Physics outreach event to perform
science demonstrations and introduce physics research to a broad and diverse
audience at highly-attended football games on the Auburn University campus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Complex oxides comprised of 4d and 5d
transition metals exhibit significantly higher spin-orbit coupling than those
comprised of 3d elements. These materials have been predicted to exhibit high
temperature superconductivity and other emergent topological phenomena when
formed in epitaxial thin film heterostructures and superlattices. These
properties make 4d and 5d materials promising for use as materials to enable
topological quantum computation. In this project, systematic studies of
synthesis of several candidate 4d and 5d complex oxides via hybrid molecular
beam epitaxy are performed. Using this novel approach, a metal-organic precursor
replaces the traditional elemental source for the transition metal, enabling
easier synthesis and producing higher quality materials. Exploration of emergent
interfacial phenomena includes high-temperature superconductivity,
ferroelectricity, and topological electronic states. By synthesizing
superlattice films comprised of repeating interfaces, the research focuses on
the development of materials that exhibit interfacial phenomena in a bulk film.
This project provides educational experiences for undergraduate students to
learn about materials characterization through machine learning analysis of
diffraction and spectroscopy data. Computational codes to analyze such data are
shared for the research community to advance real-time analysis of film
synthesis. Graduate student researchers gain experience in materials synthesis
and characterization in the lab and at user facilities around the world. Such
experiences help prepare students for careers in materials research in the
integrated circuit and electronic device industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.