* 2045968
* CAREER: Improving understanding and prediction of photosynthetic acclimation to global change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Nicholas Smith, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,114,917.00

Land plants regulate the largest transfer of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere
to the Earth’s surface through the process of photosynthesis. Because carbon
dioxide accumulation in the atmosphere is the primary driver of ongoing climate
change, it is critical to understand how plants, and photosynthesis in
particular, will respond to future conditions as these responses will dictate
the rate and magnitude of future climate change. Despite their sensitivity to
plant processes, the climate models include simplistic representations of
plants. Model representation of plant functioning mirrors student understanding
of these processes, as exemplified by the simplistic way in which they are
represented in popular press and textbooks. This project will quantify long-term
plant responses, including acclimation, to ongoing global change and will use
findings from the lab and field to improve climate models. The research program
will be integrated with an education program focused on student exploration of
the interrelationships between plants and climate change. Hands-on research
experiences for students will help to develop the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use an integrated model-
experiment approach to define the mechanisms underlying photosynthetic
acclimation responses and their impact on larger ecological processes. First, it
will quantify the effect of soil nutrients and nutrient acquisition on
photosynthetic acclimation and the resulting impact on whole-plant functioning.
This will test the general hypothesis that soil nutrient demand alters
photosynthetic trait responses to soil nutrient availability. Second, the
project will determine what plants acclimate to and how long acclimation takes.
This will address the general hypothesis that less resource conservative species
will acclimate faster than more resource conservative species. Third, the
project will quantify the impact of photosynthetic acclimation on community- and
ecosystem-scale processes. It will test the hypothesis that the response of
individual physiology can substantially alter larger ecological processes by
testing refined theory in multiple models. The research will be integrated with
an education program that will develop two course-based undergraduate research
experiences (CUREs). The first will teach non-majors the role of plants as
regulators of the global climate using semi-independent research projects. The
second CURE will refine a majors-level CURE, providing opportunities for
students to participate in the main research funded by this project by
developing, carrying out, and disseminating independent spin-off projects. The
CUREs will specifically target underrepresented minority students at TTU, a
Hispanic Serving Institution, as a means to increase diversity in the fields of
plant physiological and global change ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.