* 2045070
* CAREER: Chemomechanics of 2D Transition Metal Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Chenglin Wu, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2026
* USD 502,723.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project aims to reveal the
fundamental coupling between the chemical reactivity and mechanics of two-
dimensional (2D) transition metal materials. Being mostly surfaces, the high
chemical reactivity of 2D transition metal materials makes them ideal for
chemical and biological sensing for environmental and health condition
monitoring. However, the same chemically active nature makes 2D transition metal
materials vulnerable to attacks from the complex environmental conditions.
Understanding the coupled chemo-mechanical coupling is critical in synthesis,
design, and fabrication of resilient 2D transition metal material devices. In
this project, advanced experimental methods will be used to understand the
underlying mechanisms that give rise to this coupling, which will advance the
performance of these materials and accelerate their integration in industrial
applications. The education and outreach plan will be centered on equipping
students with the state of art knowledge and skills in 2D materials. The plan
includes participation of underrepresented students from the rural Ozark school
districts in the summer research program and recruitment of undergraduate STEM
students to join the research team in reaching out to local medical communities.
Recently developed prototype devices such as 2D antibacterial filters and MXene
field effect transistors will be showcased in the summer camp program and
outreach science tours.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIâ€™s research team will achieve
investigate chemo-mechanical coupling in 2D materials from three perspectives:
(1) identifying the role of mechanical strain in affecting the chemical
reactivity, (2) investigating the chemical reaction induced adhesion
degradation, and (3) discovering the fracture behavior of chemically reacted 2D
transition metal materials. MoS2 (typical 2D transition metal dichalcogenides,
or TMDs) and Ti3C2O (typical 2D transition metal carbides, or MXenes) will be
used as the template materials and oxidation will serve as the model chemical
reaction. The PI will characterize the chemo-mechanical coupling mechanisms
utilizing the newly developed experimental approaches including, (1)
mechanically strained oxidation, (2) atomic force microscope (AFM) adhesion
characterization with functionalized probe, and (3) in-situ scanning electron
microscope (SEM) and transmission electron microscope (TEM) fracture experiments
in combination with chemical reaction characterizations. Atomistic modeling and
continuum mechanics-based theories will also be established to rationalize these
characterized chemo-mechanical coupling mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.