* 2045567
* CAREER:  Reinforced Imitative Graph Learning: Bridging the Gap between Perception and Prescription in Graph Sequences
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Yanjie Fu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2026
* USD 569,333.00

In modern management of critical infrastructures, such as transportation
networks and power grids, machine intelligence is expected to perceive and
assess situations, track and infer changes, and control and mitigate system’s
threats. For example, in power grid management, AI can assist in characterizing
the electrical distribution (what happened) and forecasting future electrical
demand (what will happen); in traffic light control, AI can simulate traffic
evolution under traffic light control mechanisms (how it changes) and generate
better control mechanisms (how to change it) for safe and efficient
transportation. This project will develop novel AI techniques to equip systems
with the perception intelligence to understand what happened and predict what
will happen, and the prescription intelligence to understand how the system
changes. The research outcomes can help computers to better assess situations,
forecast trends, detect anomalies, discover causality, simulate system
behaviors, and, moreover, prevent, mitigate, and eliminate threats to the
system. Such capabilities are important for the operations and defense of
critical infrastructures. Furthermore, this research provides new courses,
research, and internship opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interconnected
critical infrastructures can be viewed as dynamic network systems that generate
big graph sequence data. Such data is an essential source of the perception and
prescription intelligence. This project will develop a transformative framework
that generalizes and unifies perception and prescription into a joint and
interactive learning architecture. This project will address three fundamental
research challenges: (1) How can a unified learning paradigm be designed to
simultaneously perform perception and prescription in graph sequences? (2) Can
the new learning paradigm be used to develop precise representation and reliable
projection capabilities of graph sequences? (3) Can the new learning paradigm be
used to develop system simulators and intervention planners with interaction and
feedback capabilities? This project will result in new algorithms, including
reinforced graph imitative embedding, adversarial confidence training,
prescriptive intervention, and interactive learning with external and causal
knowledge. The project will be complemented by a comprehensive evaluation plan
with transportation networks, power grids, social networks data. This research
effort will provide new exploration and insights into distillation, transfer,
and feedback mechanism between predictive and actionable
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.