* 2045755
* CAREER: Amateur Radio as a Tool for Studying Traveling Ionospheric Disturbances and Atmosphere-Ionosphere Coupling
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Nathaniel Frissell, University of Scranton
* Continuing Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 05/31/2026
* USD 384,788.00

Space weather refers to the varying conditions of the Earth’s upper atmosphere
and surrounding space environment. Influenced by the sun from above and
atmospheric perturbations from below, space weather can significantly impact
important modern technological systems, including navigation and communication.
By combining data from amateur ham radio network and advanced computer modeling,
the present study seeks to fill observational gaps and increase current
understanding of the processes that control such disruptions in space weather
and at the same time strengthen the synergy between research and citizen science
involving amateur radio enthusiasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal
has the overall research goals to (1) improve the understanding of traveling
ionospheric disturbances (TIDs) by using amateur radio data to fill
observational gaps in Total Electron Content (TEC) from existing data sources,
and (2) adapt coupled models SD-WACCM-X (Specified Dynamics - Whole Atmosphere
Community Climate Model with thermosphere and ionosphere extension) and SAMI3
(Sami3 is A Model of the Ionosphere) to improve predictive capabilities of TID
events. The overall education goals are to (1) strengthen the synergy between
research and outreach, through citizen science involving amateur radio, and (2)
promote interdisciplinary research at The University of Scranton.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal addresses frontier questions in the
field of atmosphere-ionosphere coupling while simultaneously developing the
techniques necessary to derive scientific utility from amateur radio
communications data. The proposed research will make the following contributions
to ionospheric physics: (1) new abilities to test the multistep vertical
coupling paradigm of atmospheric gravity waves /TIDs theorized in the latest
physics-based models; (2) identification of the amount of TIDs observed by high-
frequency communications systems that are and are not associated with
geomagnetic activity; (3) establishment of a TID longitudinal dependence on the
2D stratospheric polar vortex configuration; (4) determination of the ability of
data from amateur radio to fill TID observational gaps and be scientifically
useful; and (5) determination of the extent that the use of advanced, physics-
based whole atmospheric models in conjunction with observations can improve our
capacity to study the science of TIDs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This space physics
research project will greatly enhance the research portfolio of The University
of Scranton, a primarily undergraduate teaching university. This program will
continue the University’s mission of serving undergraduates by having them play
a pivotal role in research tasks. The project will enable significant
international outreach by integrating this research into the Ham Radio Science
Citizen Investigation (HamSCI) program, allowing for wide dissemination of
results as well as participation in this research by interested (and often
highly qualified) volunteers. Finally, this research directly studies the
impacts of disturbances on operational, worldwide medium-frequency and high-
frequency communications systems. This will be of interest to amateur radio,
emergency services, airline, maritime, and defense
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.