* 2045200
* Estuarine Ecosystem Adaptation Due to Environmental Variability and Watershed Restoration
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Mason Smith, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 02/28/2023
* USD 12,450.00

This doctoral dissertation will examine the combined influences of ecological
restoration, sea-level rise, and environmental variability on changes in the
food webs of coastal ecosystems. Estuaries produce highly productive
recreational and commercial fisheries that feed billions and drive economies.
Many large-scale ecosystem restoration efforts target changes in freshwater
systems that impact the functioning, productivity, and biodiversity of
downstream coastal waters. Simultaneously, environmental variability is driving
changes in sea-level, temperature, and precipitation that are influencing the
same characteristics of these same estuarine systems. The ecosystem model
developed by this research will help resource managers and restoration
practitioners design and plan for beneficial outcomes for coastal ecosystems
given the complex interactions of these co-occurring drivers of
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modeling, prediction, and analysis of ecosystems
impacted by the coupled effects of environmental variability and large-scale
restoration efforts will lead to new knowledge of spatial and temporal estuarine
ecosystem responses to these large-scale drivers. The project addresses the
following questions: 1) How will changes in salinity range and variability,
water depth, temperature, and bottom sediments affect the distribution of
fishes, invertebrates, and seagrass coverage in estuaries? 2) How will future
spatial and temporal ecosystem changes, resulting from the interactions of
hydrological restoration and environmental change, affect productivity,
fisheries landings, and food web structure in estuaries? The doctoral student
will develop habitat suitability models to incorporate into the studentâ€™s
previously calibrated and validated aspatial ecosystem model and predict future
estuarine dynamics with the development of a spatially explicit and temporally
dynamic food web model. The modeled ecosystem has broad spatial and temporal
salinity variation, has an economically valuable sport fishery, nursery habitat
for commercial fisheries, disturbed watershed and hydrologic regime, ecosystem-
scale restoration effort, and is vulnerable to the ubiquitous threat of
environmental variability and sea-level rise that reflects future changes in
systems worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.