* 2045843
* CAREER: Designing Optimal Sampling Strategies for Epidemiological Models
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Olivia Prosper, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 02/28/2026
* USD 298,329.00

Emerging infectious diseases are an inevitable part of our world. Mathematical
models can inform scientific understanding of these complex and ever-changing
systems, as well as public health policy. In particular, mechanistic models,
mathematical models that describe the key processes that drive dynamic, real-
world systems, along with empirical data, can be useful for assessing the
efficacy of different control strategies, or testing different hypotheses about
the underlying biology. The COVID-19 pandemic has underscored both the
importance of mechanistic models and the challenges of implementing these models
to inform policy. One of these challenges, which spans disciplines, arises when
there is a mismatch between the data available and the data required to inform
these models and reduce uncertainty in model outputs and predictions. A model-
data mismatch could lead to erroneous conclusions about which control policies
will be most effective at achieving a particular goal. This project aims to
create a methodology that finds the most cost-effective approach to data
collection for a given mathematical model, such that the model produces reliable
outputs and measures of uncertainty. Applying these methods to recent case
studies like COVID-19, Zika, and Ebola can inform appropriate responses to, and
improve preparedness for, future pandemics. These methods will also be
applicable to areas of ecology and physiology, where the overarching goal of
integrating modeling and empirical studies is critical to progress. Integral to
the research objectives is a new education program targeting undergraduate
students, with unrecognized potential in STEM. A series of educational
&lt;br/&gt;modules will engage students in the fundamentals of mathematical
modeling, coding, and visualization, using a collaborative and inquiry-based
approach. Participants will hone these skills by working with epidemiological
models related to the proposed project, and will use their creativity and unique
perspectives as novice modelers with diverse backgrounds to promote model
literacy in the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One way to address the
problem of a model-data mismatch is first to evaluate the practical
identifiability of a model, that is, the ability to estimate model parameters
unambiguously from data, given a particular data set. Conclusions derived from a
practically unidentifiable model may not be robust. Furthermore, commonly used
methods to determine practical identifiability of epidemiological models rely on
simple likelihood models (functions proportional to the probability of observed
data given the model parameters) that make unrealistic assumptions about
epidemiological data, which in reality are highly correlated and complex. A poor
approximation to the true likelihood model can lead to inaccurate estimates of
uncertainty in model outputs. Using appropriate identifiability metrics and
improved (yet tractable) likelihood models, control theory can be leveraged to
derive data sampling strategies, constrained by finite public health resources,
that render a model practically identifiable. The approach is to find sampling
protocols that jointly minimize the identifiability metric and the cost of the
sampling strategy. These new methods will be tested using synthetic data, and
applied to recent outbreaks to determine what data sampling strategies would
have been sufficient to reduce the uncertainty in model parameter estimates, and
therefore, reduce uncertainty in model outputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is jointly funded by the MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) through the
Mathematical Biology Program and the BIO Division of Environmental Biology
through the Population and Community Ecology (PCE)
Cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.