* 2045951
* CAREER: From Fairness to Justice in AI systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Elisa Celis, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 550,000.00

Despite the incredible success of Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems, their
predictions and decisions have been shown to discriminatory in crucial domains
such as employment, housing, and lending. Hence, it is imperative to center the
interests of the public, protect disadvantaged groups, and empower society in
the design and execution of the technology we create. This can only be done by
considering the entire ecosystem in which the AI is situated â€“ one cannot assume
perfect data or perfect usage of the technology. In this project novel
approaches towards anti-discriminatory AI will be assessed and redesigned taking
into account common flaws in the data stream. The evaluation of the systems will
be done in the broader context in which the technology is commonly used in order
to assess the downstream effects and long-term impacts of different approaches
to fair machine learning interventions. Further, the researchers will produce
engaging content for students, the AI community and the public, in order to
engage all in working towards the socially-conscious design of AI
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical standpoint, this work will design
new approaches that take into account the problems that arise when a machine-
learning algorithm is lifted out of the lab and placed into a broader ecosystem
in which data is erroneous and humans interact with the AI system. Outcomes of
this project will include new models and algorithms for fundamental problems in
fair machine learning such as classification, summarization, ranking, and online
advertising that can satisfy fairness demands while simultaneously performing
well according to their original objectives. Importantly, these algorithms will
function in a robust manner that account for realities such as missing,
incorrect, or adversarial data. The projects will increase our understanding of
the demand and nature of fairness within specific social and economic contexts,
and the impact that fair machine learning interventions can have. This project
will significantly impact and advance the technical core of computer and data
science, and inculcate a more holistic approach towards social justice in AI
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.