* 2045781
* CAREER: New Platforms for Topology, Correlation, and Superconductivity in Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Yuxuan Wang, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2026
* USD 264,030.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education on the interplay between strongly correlated quantum
materials and topological phases of matter. Strongly correlated quantum
materials are solids in which the electrons behave collectively rather than an
individual particles, while topological phases exhibit behavior that is
insensitive to noise, defects, and impurities. Over the past decades, driven by
these two topics, condensed-matter physics has witnessed great progress, with
examples ranging from high-temperature superconductors to topological insulators
and topological superconductors. These advances not only deepened our
understanding of the quantum physics of many-body systems but also hold enormous
potential for revolutionary applications, from commercial MRI machines and
lossless power transmission to quantum computers that are no longer a futuristic
concept. While historically the two areas of research have, in large part,
developed separately, in recently years it has become increasingly clear that
their synergy reveals even richer novel phenomena and greater potential for
applications. One prominent example is the so-called moire flat-band materials,
including the recently discovered magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene
superconductor. When two layers of graphene are twisted relative to each other
and the electron density varied, the system exhibits a variety of topological
phases and unconventional superconducting phases. While potential applications
abound, the fundamental mechanism for forming these phases is still under
intensive investigation. These developments present an exciting opportunity for
breakthroughs at the intersection of topology and correlation
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will pursue the research goal in multiple
directions. The PI will develop the ideas needed for a new topological quantum-
computing platform based on the notion of higher-order topological phases, which
seem featureless in the bulk and on the edge but host nontrivial states on the
corners. The PI will uncover various kinds of topological superconducting phases
in topological semimetals, which form an ideal playground for examining topology
and interaction effects. To properly address the role of strong correlations,
the PI will develop new theoretical and numerical approaches for quantum many-
body systems that are not captured by perturbation theory and apply these
approaches to topological systems, including morie flat bands. The closely
related research topics addressed in this project will advance the forefronts of
topological phases and their applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integral
component of this project is an education plan at high-school, undergraduate and
graduate levels, with a specific emphasis on enhancing inclusion and diversity
in academia and the STEM workforce. The PI will participate in existing programs
at the University of Florida to reach out to high school students through
lectures and direct mentorship on summer research projects. The PI will host a
series of seminars in the physics department that focuses on career development
within and outside academia. Via adapting and developing graduate-level courses,
the PI will fill a gap in the training of junior condensed-matter physicists by
bridging traditional topics and modern aspects such as topological
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating outreach and education into the
research plan, this work will provide young citizens of diverse backgrounds with
unique learning and research experiences at the forefront of quantum physics and
its potential applications, ensuring the success of the fundamental "Quantum
Leap" identified by NSF as one of the "10 Big Ideas for Future
Investment".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the intersection between
topological phases of matter, in particular topological superconductivity, and
strongly correlated systems. In the first part of the project, the PI will
establish a new classifying framework for higher-order topological phases based
on characterization of topological defects in topological insulators and
topological ordered states. The PI will demonstrate the potential application of
higher-order topological superconductivity as a new platform for braiding non-
Abelian anyons. The second part focuses on demonstrating interacting topological
semimetals as natural hosts of novel topological phases, including higher-order
topological superconductivity and ultra-nodal topological superconductors with
Bogoliubov Fermi surfaces. The final part is devoted to a close examination of
theoretical models that admit topological superconducting instabilities. These
models involve low-energy fermions in the vicinity of a quantum-critical point
interacting with soft bosonic modes, which induce unconventional superconducting
instabilities. To further understand the strong correlation and rich phases in
these models, the PI will adopt and develop Quantum Monte Carlo methods and a
Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev-like model that is exactly solvable in a large-N limit. In
broader terms, these results will connect two thriving fields of condensed
matter physics: unconventional superconductivity and topological phases of
matter. Combining tools and ideas from both rapidly developing fields will
tremendously deepen our understanding of quantum many-body
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also has three main educational
components targeting students at different career stages. In collaboration with
the University of Florida's Center for Precollegiate Education and Training, the
PI will actively engage motivated high-school students through lectures on the
basics of quantum computing and through individual research projects. With an
emphasis on enhancing inclusion and diversity in academia and the STEM
workforce, the education plan includes a series of seminars focused on career
development for physics majors and physics graduate students. Through a long-
term plan of special-topic and regular graduate courses, the PI will develop a
new pedagogical framework for quantum many-body physics that naturally
incorporates perturbative, non-perturbative, and topological aspects of these
systems, which better suits modern research activities in condensed-matter
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.