* 2045679
* CAREER: Advancing Remote Collaboration: Inclusive Design for People with Dementia
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Amanda Lazar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 03/31/2026
* USD 609,362.00

Technology increasingly provides opportunities to interact remotely with others.
People with cognitive impairment can be excluded from these opportunities when
technology is not designed with their needs, preferences, and abilities in mind.
Mild dementia is one form of cognitive impairment that is experienced by many
individuals worldwide. Little is known about how technology should be designed
to support people with mild dementia. In addressing this gap, this project has
the potential to benefit not only people with dementia, but also researchers,
caregivers, and the general public, who currently lack opportunities to interact
with and learn from people with dementia. This project will also train the next
generation of technology researchers and designers in two key ways: 1) with a
remote dementia lab that scaffolds design activities involving end users with
dementia, and 2) by co-developing and disseminating modules with people with
dementia, disability advocates, and healthcare professionals that can be
flexibly integrated into human-centered design courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to design, develop, and evaluate approaches to support
and study inclusive collaborative technologies that support people with mild
dementia in remote interaction. The project will investigate: 1) empirical
knowledge of preferences, benefits, and barriers experienced by people with mild
dementia in using digital collaborative tools; 2) new interaction techniques to
engage people with dementia in remote collaborative technology use through the
iterative development of three novel applications; 3) a theoretical
understanding of how established Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW)
theories can be adapted for dementia; 4) a validated framework for designing for
people with mild dementia; and 5) innovative methods to remotely include people
with dementia in design activities. In order to achieve these goals, this
project involves research threads targeting three diverse domains (social,
purpose-oriented, and cognitive) and interaction partners (peers with dementia,
mixed ability groups of older adults, and caregivers). This project has the
potential to transform research, design, development, and deployment of
technologies for people with cognitive impairment, advancing collaborative
technology design from highly customized and bespoke technology to an area ripe
for scalable development and deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.