* 2046611
* CAREER: Mechanics of Active Polymers with Dynamic Molecular Bonding
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Kai Yu, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2026
* USD 572,876.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will use an integrated
experimental-theoretical-computational approach to study the mechanical and
interfacial properties of dynamic active polymers. Dynamic active polymers
promise numerous applications ranging from healthcare to aerospace. As a notable
example, adaptable liquid-crystal elastomers have the great potential to become
a transformative actuator material that mimics the major functions of biological
muscle (i.e., protection, actuation, self-healing), which will bring man-made
machines closer to the natural capabilities of humans while greatly extending
their applications. However, existing mechanics theories cannot fully
accommodate the sophisticated coupling among the new chemistry, physics, and
mechanics involved in these emerging active polymers. The project's theory will
establish a clear connection between the dynamic molecular bonding and material
energy dissipation, mechanical, and interfacial properties, which serves as an
effective tool for the application-driven design and manufacturing with active
polymers. The educational objective of this grant is to promote students'
interest in engineering, enhance their learning of mechanics concepts, and
prepare them with critical skills to meet the challenges in polymer engineering.
Augmented reality-assisted active learning approach will be developed to improve
students’ understanding of complex concepts. Annual workshops will be created to
engage minority high school students with 4D printing of liquid-crystal
elastomers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to use
adaptable liquid-crystal elastomers as a material platform to develop a
mechanics of dynamic active polymer theoretical modeling and simulation
framework that links the evolution of chain configuration with dynamic bonding
to the network bulk and interfacial properties and use it to generate new
designs of active structures with tailored energy dissipation, actuation, and
healing capabilities. The research objectives include: (i) revealing the energy
dissipation mechanisms, (ii) determining the stress-strain relationship, (iii)
understanding the interfacial welding kinetics, and (iv) establishing a
computational platform to design functional structures. The following
fundamental questions will be answered: (1) why do liquid-crystal elastomers
exhibit such an extraordinary energy dissipation, and how is it related to the
material composition? (2) What is their stress-strain relationship when
temperature-dependent chain interactions and dynamic bonding are both involved?
(3) How is their interfacial welding different from the amorphous networks? The
theory will serve as a cornerstone for the PI’s future studies on the design and
characterization of structure-property relationships of newly developed active
polymers. It also lays the foundation for the PI to investigate different forms
of manufacturing and processing technologies of active
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.