* 2046367
* CAREER: Understanding the Fate of Reactive Organic Carbon in the Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Gabriel Isaacman-VanWertz, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2026
* USD 343,145.00

This CAREER project is focused on studying the removal of organic gases from the
atmosphere by wet deposition. A series of laboratory and field measurements of
the solubility and scavenging of organic gases will enable estimates of the
timescales for removal. The results of this research could significantly improve
model estimates of atmospheric composition and aerosol mass and could more
broadly lead to a better understanding of the global carbon cycle relevant to
the study of air quality and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this research is to estimate timescales for the deposition
of oxygenated gases to assist with understanding the fate of reactive organic
carbon and the removal of atmospheric reactivity. The major objectives are to:
(1) quantify the parameters controlling the deposition of reactive organic
carbon through novel laboratory and field measurements; (2) understand the fate
of atmospheric components and the potential for deposition to impact atmospheric
reactivity and aerosol formation; and (3) improve understanding of atmospheric
composition and aerosol formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel “rain chamber”
will be built that uses controlled, variable precipitation to selectively
scavenge gases as a function of solubility. Henry’s Law constants will be
measured in this chamber for hundreds of short-lived oxygenated gases formed
from a wide range of atmospherically relevant precursors. The scavenging chamber
also will be deployed in the field at the Virginia Forest Lab to connect
compound solubility to wet deposition for short-lived oxygenated gases, with a
focus on data collected during the growing season when terpene emission is high.
The results of this research will lead to a better understanding of the
competition between oxidation and deposition for the removal of reactive carbon
from the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes the development
of on-line educational materials and hands-on activities through a collaboration
with the Science Museum of Western Virginia and the Virginia Tech Center for
Educational Networks and Impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.