* 2046403
* CAREER: Autonomous Targeted Software VeriÔ¨Åcation
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Francisco Servant, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 101,862.00

Today's society is highly dependent on software-based systems and highly
vulnerable to the consequence of software defects. A high percentage of software
costs are consumed by efforts to find and fix software defects. It is now common
to apply defect-finding techniques continuously throughout development and
operation of software systems, reviewing every code change (Modern Code Review,
abbreviated MCR) and testing the software for defects continuously (Continuous
Integration, abbreviated CI). Unfortunately, these continuous defect-finding
efforts incur high cost for software developers, and they provide limited
success. The goal of this project is to reduce the unfruitful, manual effort
that software developers spend on code reviews and continuous integration, while
keeping as many of their fruitful tasks as possible. To achieve this goal, this
project will develop techniques to automatically prioritize review and
integration actions, giving higher priority to those that are more likely to
find defects. This project will advance the understanding of what software
changes are risky, which ones are better accepted by developers, and what makes
developers trust automatically-targeted defect-finding techniques. It will also
produce many techniques and tools to enable software engineers to find more
software defects in less time. This project will benefit society by improving
software reliability, as well as reducing its cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will conduct interviews to survey software engineers to understand the
human factors that would impact the adoption of automated targeted MCR and CI
techniques. The project works toward the achievement of three objectives using
machine learning and search-based algorithms: reduce the size of the code
changes for which MCR and CI get executed, by determining which code sections
are unlikely to improve; automatically carry out actions resulting from MCR and
CI. The project will also investigate how to generate automated explanations of
the decisions made using these techniques. The long-term vision is to provide an
integrated system that automatically reduces the number and size of MCR and CI
tasks, automatically performs some of them, and explains its automated decisions
to software engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.