* 2046102
* CAREER: An Algorithm and System Co-Designed Framework for Graph Sampling and Random Walk on GPUs
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Hang Liu, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2023
* USD 224,446.00

Graph analytics is one of the key technologies to address the grand challenges
of our time, such as understanding the spread of pandemics, designing extremely
large-scale integrated circuits and uncovering software vulnerabilities among
many others. However, as the size of the graph continues to grow, learning,
mining and computing such gigantic graphs become ineffective, impractical, and
potentially dire. Fortunately, Graph Sampling and Random Walk can dramatically
reduce the size of the original graphs, while still capturing the desired
properties for downstream graph analytics tasks. But a comprehensive system that
can perform graph sampling and random walk on real-world trillion-edge graphs at
an acceptable speed is absent. This research pioneers the effort of uniting
various graph sampling and random walk algorithms behind a user-friendly
framework that can take advantage of world-class Graphics Processing Unit (GPU)
computing facilities, including the future exascale ones, to rapidly handle
trillion-edge graphs. This project contributes to the U.S. national goal of
increasing participation in science and engineering, which is crucial to
America’s success in addressing global challenges, building a stronger and more
diversified workforce, and meeting the needs of the global innovation economy.
This project produces a high-performance software library that serves as a
foundational tool for fellow science and engineering practitioners from
academia, national laboratories and industry. With a commitment to helping K-12,
undergraduate, female, and Underrepresented Minority (URM) populations in the
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) field through the
interesting investment and rewarding education plan, this project lays out a
comprehensive road map to prepare the next-generation high-performance graph
analytics professional workers and researchers. This project revamps and creates
core courses in both graduate and undergraduate levels for the PI's home
department. To benefit the society at large, this project disseminates the
project data, software, and publications to the broader research community at
http://personal.stevens.edu/~hliu77/gsrw.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this research is to make graph sampling and random walk
fast, scalable and user-friendly. Towards that end, this career proposal
advocates algorithm and system co-designed researches. First, this research
introduces novel update and construction designs for transition probability of
various major Monte Carlo methods that are essential for fast sampling. Second,
to fully unleash the potential of GPUs, this project formulates the key
primitive into problems that can take advantage of general, and reserved tensor
and ray tracing cores on GPUs. Third, based upon the asynchronous processing
nature of graph sampling and random walk, this research exploits Remote Direct
Memory Access (RDMA)-assisted task and partition adaptive scheduling mechanism
to reduce the data transfers for scalable trillion-edge graph sampling and
random walk. Last but not the least, this career research delivers a bias-
centric framework, which offers end users expressiveness to program not only a
variety of exiting GSRW algorithms but also future ones, and simplicity by
hiding the aforementioned advanced optimization
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.