* 2046240
* CAREER: Coastal Antarctic Snow Algae and Light Absorbing Particles: Snowmelt, Climate and Ecosystem Impacts
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2027
* Alia Khan, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,303,508.00

________________________________________________________________________________
________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part I:
Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;The Antarctic Peninsula is one of the most
rapidly warming regions on the planet. This 5-yr time-series program will build
on an ongoing international collaboration with scientists from the Chilean
Antarctic Program to evaluate the role of temperature, light absorbing
particles, snow-algae growth, and their radiative forcing effects on snow and
ice melt in the Western Antarctic Peninsula. There is strong evidence that these
effects may be intensifying due to a warming climate. Rising temperatures can
increase the growth rate of coastal snow algae as well as enhance the input of
particles from sources such as the long-range transport of black carbon to the
Antarctic continent from intensifying Southern Hemisphere wildfire seasons.
Particle and algae feedbacks can have immediate local impacts on snow melt and
long-term regional impacts on climate because reduced snow cover alters how the
Antarctic continent interacts with the rest of the global climate. A variety of
ground-based and remote sensing data collected across multiple spatial scales
will be used. Ground measurements will be compared to satellite imagery to
develop novel computer algorithms to map ice algal bloom effects under changing
climates. The project is expected to fundamentally advance knowledge of the
spatial and temporal snow algae growing season, which is needed to quantify
impacts on regional snow and ice melt. The program also has a strong partnership
with the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators to involve cruise
passengers as citizen scientists for sample collection. Antarctic research
results will be integrated into undergraduate curricula and research
opportunities through studies to LAPs and snow algae in the Pacific Northwest.
The PI will recruit and train a diverse pool of students in cryosphere climate
related research methods on Mt. Baker in Western Washington. Trained
undergraduate will then serve as instructors for a local Snow School that takes
middle school students to Mt. Baker to learn about snow science. Resulting
datasets from Antarctica and Mt. Baker will be used in University classes to
explore regional effects of climate change. Along with enhancing cryosphere-
oriented place-based undergraduate field courses in the Pacific Northwest, the
PI will recruit and train a diverse pool of undergraduate students to serve as
instructors for the Mt. Baker Snow School program. This award will advance our
understanding of cryosphere-climate feedbacks, which are likely changing and
will continue to evolve in a warming world, while also increasing under-
represented student engagement in the polar geosciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;Rapid and persistent
climate warming in the Western Antarctic Peninsula is likely resulting in
intensified snow-algae growth and an extended bloom season in coastal areas.
Similarly, deposition of light absorbing particles (LAPs) onto Antarctica
cryosphere surfaces, such as black carbon from intensifying Southern Hemisphere
wildfire seasons, and dust from the expansion of ice-free regions in the
Antarctic Peninsula, may be increasing. The presence of snow algae blooms and
LAPs enhance the absorption of solar radiation by snow and ice surfaces. This
positive feedback creates a measurable radiative forcing, which can have
immediate local and long-term regional impacts on albedo, snow melt and
downstream ecosystems. This project will investigate the spatial and temporal
distribution of snow algae, black carbon and dust across the Western Antarctica
Peninsula region, their response to climate warming, and their role in regional
snow and ice melt. Data will be collected across multiple spatial scales from in
situ field measurements and sample collection to imagery from ground-based
photos and high resolution multi-spectral satellite sensors. Ground measurements
will inform development and application of novel algorithms to map algal bloom
extent through time using 0.5-3m spatial resolution multi-spectral satellite
imagery. Results will be used to improve snow algae parameterization in a new
version of the Snow Ice Aerosol Radiation model (SNICARv3) that includes bio-
albedo feedbacks, eventually informing models of ice-free area expansion through
incorporation of SNICARv3 in the Community Earth System Model. Citizen
scientists will be mentored and engaged in the research through an active
partnership with the International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators that
frequently visits the region. The cruise ship association will facilitate
sampling to develop a unique snow algae observing network to validate remote
sensing algorithms that map snow algae with high-resolution multi-spectral
satellite imagery from space. These time-series will inform instantaneous and
interannual radiative forcing calculations to assess impacts of snow algae and
LAPs on regional snow melt. Quantifying the spatio-temporal growing season of
snow algae and impacts from black carbon and dust will increase our ability to
model their impact on snow melt, regional climate warming and ice-free expansion
in the Antarctic Peninsula region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.