* 2046141
* CAREER: Supporting Families’ Collective Agency as Learners in Science Centers and Museums through an Integrated Research and Practice Agenda
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Susan Letourneau, New York Hall of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 05/31/2026
* USD 611,938.00

Recent studies have advocated for a shift toward educational practices that
involve learners in actively contributing to science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) as a shared and public endeavor, rather than limiting
their involvement to the construction of previously established knowledge.
Prioritizing learners’ agency in deciding what is worth knowing and how learning
takes place may create more equitable and inclusive learning experiences by
centering the knowledge, cultural practices, and social interactions that
motivate learning for people across ages, genders, and backgrounds. In informal
learning environments, families’ social interactions are critical avenues for
STEM learning, and science centers and museums have developed strategies for
prompting families’ sustained engagement and conversation at STEM exhibits.
However, exhibits often guide visitors’ exploration toward predetermined
insights, constraining the ways that families can interact with STEM content,
and neglecting opportunities to tap into their prior knowledge. Practices in the
maker movement that emphasize skill-building and creative expression, and
participatory practices in museums that invite visitors to contribute to
exhibits in consequential ways both have the potential to reframe STEM learning
as an ongoing, social process that welcomes diverse perspectives. Yet little is
known about how these practices can be scaled, and how families themselves
respond to these efforts, particularly for the diverse family audiences that
science centers and museums aim to serve. Further, although gender and ethnicity
both affect learning in informal settings, studies often separate participants
along a single dimension, obscuring important nuances in families’ experiences.
By addressing these outstanding questions, this research responds to the goals
of the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance
evidence-based understanding of the design and development of STEM learning
opportunities for the public in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening engagement in STEM learning experiences and
advancing innovative research on STEM learning in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research will address (1) how families
perceive and act on their collective epistemic agency while exploring STEM
exhibits (i.e., how they work together to negotiate and pursue their own
learning goals); (2) whether and how families’ expressions of agency are
influenced by gender and ethnicity; and (3) what exhibit design features support
expressions of agency for the broadest possible audience. Research studies will
use interviews and observational case studies at a range of exhibits with
distinct affordances to examine families’ epistemic agency as a shared, social
practice. Cultural historical activity theory and intersectional approaches will
guide qualitative analyses of families’ activities as systems that are mediated
by the physical environment and social setting. Education activities will
involve an ongoing collaboration between researchers, exhibit designers,
educators, and facilitators (high-school and college-level floor staff), using a
Change Laboratory model. The group will use emerging findings from the research
to create a reflection tool to guide the development of more inclusive learning
experiences at STEM exhibits, and a set of design principles for supporting
families’ expressions of agency. A longitudinal ethnographic study will document
the development of inclusive exhibit design practices throughout the project as
well as how the Change Lab participants develop their sociocultural perspectives
on learning and exhibit design over time. Analyzing these shifts in practice
within the Change Lab will provide a deeper understanding of what works and what
is difficult or does not occur when working toward infrastructure change in
museums. By considering how multiple aspects of families’ identities shape their
learning experiences, this work will generate evidence-based recommendations to
help science centers and museums develop more inclusive practices that foster a
sense of ownership over the learning process for the broadest possible audience
of families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.