* 2046640
* CAREER: Integrating Machine Learning with Game Theory for Multiagent Communication and Coordination
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* FEI FANG, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 03/31/2026
* USD 280,786.00

Many societal challenges we are facing involve multiple decision-makers
(agents), each with their own goals or preferences. More importantly, these
agents often need to communicate and coordinate with each other to achieve their
goals or satisfy their preferences. For example, in security, public safety, and
environmental sustainability domains, law enforcement agencies defend against
attackers and poachers. These agencies often work together with the local
community to combat the actions of their opponents using communication and
coordination, e.g., through community policing programs, or relying on justice
collaborators. Game theory is an established paradigm for reasoning about
strategic interactions among multiple decision-makers. It consists of
mathematical models with the common assumptions that the players act rationally
and they will try to make the best decisions to obtain their own best possible
outcome. Several game-theoretic models and algorithms have been successfully
deployed in the field to help law enforcement agencies allocate their limited
resources in the presence of opponents. However, the problem of communication
and coordination in complex environments is still underexplored. This research
aims to design new game-theoretic models for multiagent communication and
coordination. In addition, this research attempts to develop novel machine
learning-enhanced computational frameworks for solving these games. These will
findings be applied to the real-world problems of wildlife protection and food
bank operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to establish
theoretical foundations of multiagent communication and coordination in settings
with varying commitment power (i.e., some agents can commit to a strategy
first), make algorithmic advances, and make a transformative real-world impact.
The research will provide answers to the following questions: (i) How to find
the best communication and coordination strategies in large-scale multiagent
interaction? (ii) How to account for the bounded rationality of human agents?
(iii) How to deal with the uncertainties in the environment, e.g., noise in
communication? The research consists of three thrusts for three critical classes
of interactions: defender-attacker-community interaction, platform-users
interaction, and mediators-agents interaction. In each thrust, the researchers
attempt to answer the three questions by (i) propose new game-theoretic models
and solution concepts; (ii) theoretically analyze the behavioral and
computational aspects of the games and characterize the impact of coordination
and communication; (iii) build human behavior models from data; (iv) propose
efficient algorithms based on mathematical programming, deep learning, and
multiagent reinforcement learning to compute close-to-equilibrium strategies
given the human behavior models and uncertainties. The results will enrich the
body of knowledge in computational game theory and transform the thriving line
of work into new research topics that integrate game theory with machine
learning and other research areas in and outside Artificial
Intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.