* 2046381
* CAREER: Fair Artificial Intelligence for Intelligent Humans: Removing the Barriers to Deployment of Fair AI Technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* James Foulds, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 02/28/2026
* USD 323,663.00

There is growing awareness that artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning systems can in some cases behave in unfair and discriminatory ways with
harmful consequences in many areas including criminal justice, hiring, medicine,
and college admissions. Techniques for ensuring AI fairness have received a lot
of attention in the AI literature. However, these techniques are yet to see a
substantial degree of deployment in real systems, which has thus-far limited
their real-world impact. This is likely due in part to several practical
challenges for deploying fair AI technologies. Firstly, the conventional wisdom
is that fairness brings a cost in prediction performance which could affect an
organization's bottom-line. Secondly, it is difficult to know which mathematical
definition of AI fairness is appropriate to adopt since the definitions conflict
with each other and encode different value systems. Finally, there is a chicken-
and-egg problem, in that public pressure for an organization to adopt fairness
considerations into an AI system only increases after this has been successfully
demonstrated elsewhere. This research will develop technical solutions to
resolve these human-facing barriers for the adoption of AI fairness techniques,
thereby increasing deployment and the subsequent positive real-world
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To resolve the practical limitations of fair AI
techniques, this research incorporates human-centered considerations into the
design and execution of fair AI algorithms, connecting and advancing the state
of the art in statistical machine learning, fair AI, and human-centered AI. The
first track of the project will develop methods for obtaining “fairness for
free,” in which the fairest possible solution is found when sacrificing little-
to-no performance. The researchers will design black-box, gray-box, and white-
box approaches to this task. Then, the second track of the research will focus
on developing explainable AI and data visualization techniques to help humans
assess and trade off the consequences of different competing notions of
fairness. A key step to accomplish this is to create a unifying fairness
framework which systematically encodes the space of possible fairness metrics.
Finally, in the third track of the project, the researchers will develop
practical solutions to several real-world applications of AI fairness, including
the allocation of medical resources, and AI-based career counseling. The
solutions will involve both applied and fundamental AI research, and will
facilitate the evaluation of the methods developed in the first two tracks. The
project also includes initiatives for outreach, broadening participation in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, training and
educating graduate students, and curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.