* 2046607
* CAREER: SBP: Understanding Emotion Regulatory Flexibility among African American Adolescents
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Fantasy Lozada, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2026
* USD 533,472.00

Recent instances of violence targeting African Americans has sparked protests
and greater attention to the racism that African American youth and their
families have faced for generations in the United States. Studies report that
most African American youth will experience racism during their lifetimes, and
these experiences increase their risk for negative life outcomes, such as poor
mental and physical health and less academic success. How do African American
youth manage their experiences with racism to protect against such negative
outcomes? This research examines how African American youth develop a specific
form of emotional competence, called emotion regulatory flexibility, to protect
themselves from racism. They may attend to cues that signal when an interaction
is not going well, and then use these signals to adjust how they express and
manage their emotions so that others do not perceive them as angry or
threatening. This research provides a novel perspective on emotion regulatory
flexibility as a form of emotion-related competence that is malleable and
culturally situated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do African American youth develop
such self-protective emotional competence? This question is addressed by doing
research with both African American youth and their parents, and by combining
physiological and self-report measures. The unique approach provides subjective
and objective indicators of emotional reactions to racism and captures the
social cues that African American youth use to manage these situations. The
research also includes parent-child interactions to reveal how parents discuss
these issues with their children. This project provides training experiences for
junior scientists from various racial backgrounds in how to work with the
African American community to address the effect of racism on youth, and can
help African American youth recognize their positive emotion
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.