* 2046236
* CAREER: Towards Exploratory Data Science on Spatio-temporal Big Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Ahmed Eldawy, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 210,444.00

The OPEN government data act helped in making hundreds of thousands of datasets
publicly available to the scientific community and the general public;
geospatial data comprise over 60% of this data. This project describes basic
research towards building an end-to-end system that allows data science students
and domain scientists to interactively explore spatio-temporal datasets. The
overarching goal is to bridge the gap between domain scientists and data
providers. On one end, it helps domain scientists in various fields, e.g.,
agriculture, environmental science, and political science, who have little
programming skills to explore and access publicly available geospatial and
temporal data. On the other end, it helps data providers, e.g., government
agencies, non-profit organizations, and national research labs, to attract more
data scientists to exploit and utilize public data. The project will also
establish educational activities that encourage domain scientists to use public
open geospatial data which will promote the reproducibility of scientific
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces new research directions
that are geared towards building an end-to-end interactive exploratory system
that will allow domain scientists to process, analyze, and visualize petabytes
of spatio-temporal data. It consists of three research components. First, an
interactive query processor provides a real-time answer to exploratory queries
so that the user will stay engaged and active which increases the productivity;
this innovation systematically studies approximate query processing for large
geospatial data and will utilize deep learning to provide accurate error bounds
for both vector and raster data for complex spatio-temporal queries. Second, to
provide users with an exploratory interface, a spatio-temporal visualization
component provides an interactive map-based interface that allows users to
explore the spatial and temporal attributes of the data. This visualization
component will also provide guided assistance to users when exploring big
datasets through a novel recommendation system. Lastly, as the datasets grow in
size, a dynamic storage system will continuously consume the new records and
update the spatio-temporal indexes, data summaries, and visualizations on top of
a distributed storage engine which is inherently immutable, i.e., does not
support updates. Additionally, this project will build a working prototype where
scientists can interactively explore and share spatio-temporal data and share
public open data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.