* 2046602
* CAREER: Abiotic degradation of emerging RNA interference pesticides
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* Kimberly Parker, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2026
* USD 396,295.00

Modern agriculture employs a variety of tools to increase food production to
meet the growing demands of the world’s population. This has resulted in
increasing need for efficient and effective fertilizers and pesticides.
Increasingly, innovations in biotechnology are being made to address these
needs. However, the adoption of biotechnology leads to new challenges in
ensuring the safety and sustainability of agricultural practices. The goal of
this CAREER project is to assess key degradation processes that determine the
environmental fate of emerging pesticides that use double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)
as their active agent. This will be achieved through an integrated research
program to identify specific processes that degrade dsRNA pesticides in the
environment. Successful completion of this research will enable the safe,
sustainable, and effective use of dsRNA pesticides to simultaneously support
U.S. agricultural practices and minimize potential environmental impacts.
Educational activities integrated with this research plan will train
environmental engineers to address emerging challenges that arise from the rapid
and ongoing development of synthetic biotechnology products for use in
agriculture and other sectors. Societal benefits will result from an increased
STEM workforce and greater scientific literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this CAREER project is to elucidate the abiotic degradation pathways for dsRNA
pesticides in soils, in surface water, and on leaf surfaces. This goal will be
achieved by (1) elucidating underlying abiotic mechanisms of hydrolysis,
denaturation, depurination, and photodegradation that occur under
environmentally relevant conditions; (2) developing and applying novel product-
oriented methods to distinguish dsRNA degradation by specific mechanisms in
complex environmental media; and (3) determining the impact of molecular
features and formulations of dsRNA pesticides on their degradation. By defining
processes that control the degradation of dsRNA pesticides, this project
advances fundamental knowledge on the environmental fate and persistence of
nucleic acids, including microbial genetic markers. These research activities
are integrated with an education program promoting the application of
environmental engineering principles to the risk assessment of dsRNA pesticides
and other biotechnology products. The specific objectives of the education
program are (1) to train Environmental Engineering students to contribute to
risk assessment of emerging products through research and project-based
learning; (2) to promote multidisciplinary discourse on biotechnology safety
through a graduate student-led seminar series; and (3) to support engagement in
safe and sustainable applications of agricultural biotechnology through a
scalable high school outreach program. The integrated research and educational
activities proposed herein will position the environmental engineering field to
address new multidisciplinary challenges arising from the rapid and ongoing
development of biotechnology products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.