* 2046606
* CAREER: Understanding the Multi-Scale Dynamics of Heterogeneous Polymeric Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Reika Katsumata, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2026
* USD 342,336.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging polymer processing
methods, such as 3D printing and imprint lithography, often require materials
with unconventional rheological, or flow, properties. Such properties in liquid
and solid states of polymers are dictated by the relationship between molecular
motion on short length scales (about ten molecular bonds, ~1 nanometer) and
molecular motion on long length scales (hundreds of molecular bonds, ~10
nanometers). This project aims to understand these multi-scale polymer dynamics,
leveraging tunable interactions between polymers and ultrasmall (~2 nanometers)
nanoparticles as a model system. The fundamental understanding obtained in this
study will guide materials designs to reveal unconventional flow properties.
Moreover, newly developing fluorescence technologies will be employed to study
multi-scale dynamics of polymer systems with high throughput. This research is
relevant in the polymer nanocomposites market, estimated to be $4.1 billion
worldwide in 2019, and predicted to reach $8.5 billion by 2024. The educational
plan is integrated with the research plan to inspire the next generation of
planners, scientists, and engineers. The outreach and mentoring activities will
broaden participation and will cultivate fascination and interest in polymers
among K-12 students from low-income communities through demonstrations and
laboratory internships. A proposed new course for senior undergraduates and
graduate students will bridge polymer/materials science to life sciences through
cutting-edge fluorescence technologies with an emphasis on effective science
communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relationship between segmental and chain
dynamics of polymers dictates both glass and melt properties and is crucial to
designing processing operations. However, the physical foundations of this
relationship across multiple time and length scales remain elusive despite much
progress over the past sixty years, although it is clear that dynamic
heterogeneities are the key contribution. Attempts to understand the influence
of heterogeneous segmental friction are limited by the difficulty to control
spatial heterogeneity, and a lack of high-throughput experimental techniques for
studying segmental and entire chain dynamics. To this end, this project aims to
elucidate the influence of heterogeneous segmental friction on the decoupling of
entire chain motion from segmental dynamics, i.e., deviations from the predicted
relationships between segmental and entire chain motion for ideal homogenous
polymers. To establish a controlled heterogeneous system, the PI's group is
developing polymer nanocomposites in which all chains are effectively
interfacial with well dispersed, very small nanoparticles that are comparable in
size to segments. Aims 1 and 2 will uncover the interplay of polymer-
nanoparticle interactions and molecular weight on multi-scale dynamics. In Aim
3, newly developing fluorescence technologies will be employed to study multi-
scale dynamics of polymer systems efficiently. A comparison of experimental data
to models such as the Heterogeneous Rouse Model will provide new insight into
the decoupling of segmental entire chain motion in heterogeneous polymeric
systems. It is anticipated that such decoupling will allow rheological
properties to be altered simply by adding ultra-small nanoparticles or by
designing polymers with optimal monomer
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.