* 2046549
* CAREER: Pivoting XENONnT to Neutrinos and Anomaly Resolution
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Christopher Tunnell, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 04/30/2026
* USD 298,261.00

To identify dark matter, understand the nature of the neutrino, or discover why
the Universe is made of matter instead of a mixture of matter and antimatter
would all constitute major advances. This award will follow-up on previous
measurements by the XENON1T collaboration that may provide evidence of physics
beyond the Standard Model, such as the neutrino magnetic moment or solar axions.
The observed electronic recoil (ER) excess is the first result of this type
produced by the liquid-xenon community. The award will improve the energy
resolution and its robustness by leveraging the group's reconstruction work to
capture the microphysical details and by exploiting their machine-learning
R&amp;D activities. The award will provide a range of broader-impact activities
that focus on the societal benefits of data literacy, where the activities
proposed are a continuation of the group’s Physics and Computation Summer
program. The long-term goal of this project is to increase the number of
students in the STEM pipeline and, more specifically, to increase the number of
students who become data-intensive scientists and engineers. This work would
provide data-science training for physicists through a project-based
interdisciplinary course. Such training is indispensable to partaking in
computationally oriented research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While working on a
diverse set of advanced-analysis (machine learning) projects, the PI developed a
unique set of skills to determine whether this excess is a major discovery or a
subtle experimental effect. The investigators will employ two work packages: 1)
to revisit the core aspects of the analysis of the ER spectrum and apply the
results to data from XENONnT (the XENON1T upgrade). They will understand ER-
modeling uncertainties by using the more complete Noble Element Simulation
Technique (NEST) ER model, which the PI’s group maintains, to fit data
simultaneously from other experiments by using likelihood-free inference
techniques; and 2) to generalize the techniques to higher energies to measure
neutrinoless double beta decay, while performing phenomenological studies of
next-generation detectors. Motivated by the excess ER interactions, the PI will
test the Majorana hypothesis by studying this beta decay process, which is
observable only if neutrinos are Majorana particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.