* 2046096
* CAREER: Parameter-free Optimization Algorithms for Machine Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Francesco Orabona, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 01/31/2026
* USD 332,674.00

Machine Learning (ML) has been described as the fuel of the next industrial
revolution. Yet, current state-of-the-art ML algorithms still heavily rely on
having a human in the loop in order to work properly. Indeed, the training
process of a ML algorithm requires significant human intervention through
twisting and tuning of the many knobs of the algorithm. Moreover, most of the
time this tweaking process is carried out without any theoretical guidelines.
The most common options for the ML practitioners are to follow their intuitions
or to exhaustively evaluate all the possibilities, making the overall time
needed to train these algorithms difficult to predict. In this project, the
investigator aims at designing truly parameter-free training algorithms for ML,
to remove the burden of human parameter-tuning and make ML algorithms more
scalable. The investigator also proposes an Education Plan that is designed to
fill the gap between theoretical and applied ML in the minds of most students.
It will involve a collaboration with the PROgram in Mathematics for Young
Scientists (PROMYS), to introduce the study of very basic concepts of the theory
of machine learning to both high school students and teachers, and with the
women’s Smith College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project stems from new methods
the investigator has recently introduced to design optimal parameter-free
optimization algorithms, e.g., Stochastic Gradient Descent without learning
rates, for the particular case of convex functions. In this project, the
investigator proposes to go beyond convex functions. In particular, the
investigator plans to pursue the following inter-related aims:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Computational complexity of learning without prior knowledge. The objective is
to fully characterize the computational complexity of learning, without assuming
knowledge of unknown quantities, in worst and "easy" cases. In other words, if a
learning algorithm needs parameters to achieve optimal performance, the goal is
to fully characterize the overall computational complexity, including the search
for the optimal parameters.&lt;br/&gt;2. Non-convex stochastic optimization
without parameters. The project's goal is to generalize recent results on
parameter-free optimization to deal with the non-convex problems in modern ML
algorithms. The investigator plans to use a novel optimization framework that
mixes elements of Online Mirror Descent with Dual Averaging, the two frameworks
used to design optimization algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;3. Reducing parameters in
optimization for Deep Learning. Deep Learning models are the most parameter-
heavy in ML. The project considers three applications of the project's research
to widely used deep-learning algorithms: adaptive scaling heuristics, saddle-
point optimization, and Bayesian Optimization with Gaussian
Processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.