* 2046031
* CAREER: Scalable, high-precision optoelectronic lab-on-a-chip towards next-generation precision therapeutics
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Guangyu Xu, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 03/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Precision therapeutics will benefit from biomedical devices that can acquire
cellular/molecular information specific to targeted patient groups. This
research project aims to establish scalable, high-precision lab-on-a-chip
technologies that will ultimately lead to enabling tools in next-generation
precision therapeutics. The outcome of this research will result in new
engineering tools and disease related assays that will likely make an impact in
pharmatheutical screening, immunotherapeutic development, and point-of-care
systems. The educational objectives of this proposal are aimed at training and
inspiring young engineers and scientists who are equipped with the
multidisciplinary background required to help define the future trajectory of
personalized medicine, neuroengineering, and point-of-care systems. The broader
impacts of this project include: 1) advancing transformative device technologies
for scalable, high-precision lab-on-a-chip systems and providing powerful tools
for pharmatheutics and point-of-care testing; 2) educating underrepresented
undergraduate and graduate researchers to contribute to the nationâ€™s workforce
needs in bioengineering and healthcare; 3) contributing to the K-12 science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics education by weekend seminars and
mentoring student-teacher pairs from local middle schools; and 4) promoting
biological sciences and biotechnology among local senior citizens and support
groups for neurological diseases and immunological disorders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this proposal is to establish
two high-precision optoelectronic lab-on-a-chips built with scalable fabrication
process, aiming to offer high-content analysis at cellular and molecular levels
towards next-generation precision therapeutics. Both lab-on-a-chips will be
built in a highly scalable array form, with their precision being evaluated in
cultured neuronal network and blood samples, respectively. The proposed work
will open ample research opportunities in drug screening for neurological
diseases and point-of-care testing for patients with acute immune symptoms. The
intellectual merit of the proposed work will be evidenced by three major
contributions: 1) a scalable, high-precision optoelectronic lab-on-a-chip
capable of precise optogenetic control, electrical recording, and electrical
field stimulation of neural activity; 2) a scalable, high-precision
optoelectronic lab-on-a-chip capable of multiplexed on-chip fluorescence
detection of biomarkers that are related to immune responses; and 3) drug-
screening and immune response monitoring assays using these two lab-on-a-chips,
which will shed light on therapeutics development targeted to neurological and
autoimmune diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.