* 2046293
* CAREER: Optimized Sensing and Recovery for Computational Imaging
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Muhammad Salman Asif, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 01/31/2026
* USD 313,364.00

Cameras have evolved tremendously over the past few decades as they have become
compact and widely available in mobile devices. Nevertheless, vast opportunities
for improvements still exist, especially as the community moves beyond consumer
photography and start building cameras for sensing and understanding new
environments under strict constraints. These constraints can arise because of
physical requirements on the size, shape, or weight of the components, time
required to capture and process the data, or cost and energy thresholds for the
entire system. The focus of this research is to develop novel methods to sense
and process visual information while taking into account the constraints and
requirements on data, sensors, algorithms, and tasks in the real world. A
successful outcome of the research will benefit diverse applications spanning
consumer photography, machine vision and automation, and scientific/medical
imaging. Training of a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students
through educational courses and research experience is an integral part of this
project. The education and outreach component of this project involves
dissemination of computational imaging research to K-12 students and teachers
through annual research days on campus, as well as to the general public by
collaborating with a museum of photography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational
imaging offers a general framework to co-design sensing hardware and
computational software to build novel and unconventional cameras. This research
will address a number of fundamental theoretical and algorithmic questions
related to optimized sensing, representation, and recovery for computational
imaging. The research is organized into three inter-related thrusts: (1)
Optimize and expand the space of measurements that computational imaging systems
can realistically capture using programmable optics. (2) Learn sensing, data
representation, and recovery algorithms in an end-to-end manner. (3) Develop
efficient algorithms for computational imaging systems beyond linear and shift-
invariant models. The insights gained from this research will help us understand
some of the fundamental limits that exist in realistic computational imaging
systems and provide tools to optimize them within the given constraints. Models
and algorithms developed in this research will be validated with real imaging
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.