* 2046437
* CAREER:  Development of Unmanned Ground Vehicles for Assessing the Health of Secluded Ecosystems (ECHO)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Daniel Zitterbart, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* William Ambrose
* 08/31/2026
* USD 813,964.00

Part I: Non-technical description: &lt;br/&gt;Understanding human-induced
changes on biodiversity is one of the most important scientific challenges we
face today. This is especially true for marine environments that are home to
much of the worldâ€™s biomass and biodiversity. A particularly effective approach
to investigate the effects of climate change on marine ecosystems is to monitor
top-predator populations such as seabirds or marine mammals. The food web in the
Southern Ocean in relatively small and involves few species, therefore climate-
induced variations at the prey species level directly affect the predator
species level. For example, seabirds, like penguins, are ideal to detect and
study these ecosystem changes. This study combines traditional methods to study
emperor penguin population dynamics with the use of an autonomous vehicle to
conduct the population dynamic measurements with less impact and higher
accuracy. This project leverages an existing long-term emperor penguin
observatory at the Atka Bay colony which hosts penguins living in the Weddell
sea and the Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean. The study will kickstart the
collection of a multi-decadal data set in an area of the Southern Ocean that has
been understudied. It will fill important gaps in ecological knowledge on the
state of the Emperor penguin and its adaptive capabilities within a changing
world. Finally, the project supports NSF goals of training new generations of
scientists through collaborative training of undergraduate students and the
creation of a new class on robotics for ecosystem study. Emperor penguins are an
iconic species that few people will ever see in the wild. Through the technology
developed in this proposal, the public can be immersed in real-time into the
life of an emperor penguin colony. Public outreach will be achieved by
showcasing real-time video and audio footage of emperor penguins from the field
as social media science and engineering-themed educational
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical description: &lt;br/&gt;Polar
ecosystems currently experience significant impacts due to global changes.
Measurable negative effects on polar wildlife have already occurred, such as
population decreases of numerous seabird species, including the complete loss of
colonies of one of the most emblematic species of the Antarctic, the emperor
penguin. These existing impacts on polar species are alarming, especially
because many polar species still remain poorly studied due to technical and
logistical challenges imposed by the harsh environment and extreme remoteness.
Developing technologies and tools for monitoring such wildlife populations is,
therefore, a matter of urgency.&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to help close major
knowledge gaps about the emperor penguin, in particular about their adaptive
capability to a changing environment, by the development of next-generation
tools to remotely study entire colonies. Specifically, the main goal of this
project is to implement and test an autonomous unmanned ground vehicle equipped
with Radio-frequency identification (RFID) antennas and wireless mesh
communication data-loggers to: 1) identify RFID-tagged emperor penguins during
breeding to studying population dynamics without human presence; and 2) receive
Global Positioning System-Time Domain Reflectometry (GPS-TDR) datasets from Very
High Frequency VHF-GPS-TDR data-loggers without human presence to study animal
behavior and distribution at sea. The autonomous vehicles navigation through the
colony will be aided by an existing remote penguin observatory (SPOT). Properly
implemented, this technology can be used to study of the life history of
individual penguins, and therefore gather data for behavioral and population
dynamic studies. The new data will contribute to intelligent establishment of
marine protected areas in Antarctica. The education objectives of this CAREER
project are designed to increase the interest in a STEM education for the next
generation of scientists by combining the charisma of the emperor penguin with
robotics research. Within this project, a new class on ecosystem robotics will
be developed and taught, Robotics boot-camps will allow undergraduate students
to remotely participate in Antarctic field trips, and an annual curriculum will
be developed that allows K-12 students to follow the life of the emperor penguin
during the breeding cycle, powered by real-time data obtained using the unmanned
ground vehicle as well as the existing emperor penguin
observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.