* 2046372
* CAREER: Peer-to-Peer Models and Mechanisms for the Next Generation of Transportation Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Neda Masoud, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 02/28/2026
* USD 538,902.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will explore the ways in
which connectivity and autonomy may shape the next generation of transportation
systems. These technological breakthroughs open doors for communication,
interaction, and automated negotiation among travelers, vehicles, and the
transportation infrastructure, enabling many innovative applications in which
value is created from interactions among peers. This project contributes to both
theory and practice in several emerging peer-to-peer applications, including: 1)
Shared multi-modal transportation systems in which on-demand shared mobility
systems can be integrated with traditional transportation modes (such as
transit) to provide seamless door-to-door mobility solutions; 2) Platooning,
wherein synchronization of vehicle motion allows a group of automated vehicles
to travel together at close proximity, thereby increasing fuel efficiency as
well as road capacity; and 3) Vehicle-to-vehicle wireless power transfer between
electric vehicles, wherein electric vehicles may pair with one another to
exchange electric power. The resulting models and algorithms from this grant can
revolutionize the way people and goods move in smart cities of the (near)
future, and offer more efficient, affordable, sustainable, and equitable
mobility options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In response to challenges that arise in
operationalizing peer-to-peer systems, this project offers several major
intellectual contributions within the realms of algorithm design (mathematical
programming and large-scale optimization) and mechanism design (auction theory
and economics). To achieve the full potential of what smart cities, autonomy,
and connected transportation systems have to offer, planning and optimization of
sub-systems can no longer occur in isolation; instead, they need to be optimized
simultaneously as one integrated system. To address the emerging massive-scale
planning and dynamic matching problems that support the real-life operation of
future peer-to-peer systems, this NSF grant tackles open problems in graph
theory, and designs a suite of new specialized methods (namely decomposition and
aggregation/disaggregation schemes that utilize the distinct structure of peer-
to-peer systems) to obtain exact or bounded solutions efficiently and as quickly
as needed, which often implies in real-time. In addition, this grant designs
novel mechanisms for pricing and resource exchange in P2P systems. These
mechanisms will be individually rational, incentive compatible, and budget
balanced, and will resolve the potential trade-off between responsiveness and
throughput in transportation systems, and to narrow down the equity gap in
access to transportation options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.