* 2046582
* CAREER: Safe and Agile Autonomous Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2026
* Madhur Behl, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2026
* USD 381,609.00

Autonomous Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), such as self-driving cars, and drones,
powered by deep learning and AI based perception, planning, and control
algorithms, are forming the basis for significant pieces of our nation’s
critical infrastructure, and present direct, and urgent safety-critical
challenges. A major limitation with current approaches towards deploying
autonomous CPS is in ensuring that the system operates safely, and reliably in
situations that do not happen very often under normal operating conditions and
are therefore difficult to gather data on. For instance, a self-driving car
trained to follow the ‘rules of the road’ will perform well most of the time,
but it is the unusual conditions, the edge cases, which pose the hardest safety
challenges. This project brings forward an innovative idea – can increasing the
agility of an autonomous vehicle improve its safety? This notion is somewhat
controversial since agility (like that of race cars) is more frequently
associated with decreased safety margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by
these challenges underlying real-world testing and safety for autonomous
vehicles, the goal of this project is to develop the foundations for autonomous
cyber-physical systems along two dimensions: agility, safety, and their
interplay. The project is centered on (1) increasing agility for AVs by
developing new methods for agile motion planning, so they can maneuver at the
limits of their handling and control when it matters most to escape potentially
unsafe conditions, (2) automated reasoning about uncertain dynamic situations
that may occur during autonomous CPS operation, and (3) developing novel methods
for automatically generating testing and edge-case scenarios at design time, to
explore scenarios under which the autonomous CPS would fail. The proposed
methods will be evaluated on scaled autonomous vehicles testbeds, on
photorealistic and high-fidelity simulation platforms, and on full scale AV
prototypes. The project will also consider not just safety of an unoccupied AV –
but one in which passengers may be present. This CAREER project includes
designing exciting new courses, and initiatives centered around autonomous
racing to engage with research and mentoring for K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students. The project aims to ensure that students cultivate a holistic
view of cyber-physical systems and autonomous systems by drawing stronger
connections between theory, applications, and hands-on platform development. The
project will help enhance the capabilities of autonomous cyber-physical systems
and facilitate with their safe deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.