* 2046925
* CAREER: Skyrmion-Vortex Interactions in Ferromagnet-Superconductor Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Serena Eley, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 236,072.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The field of spintronics is a rapidly
advancing and disruptive research area, producing novel device schemes that are
superior to conventional computing electronics. Conventional electronic elements
use electron charge to store and transmit information. For example, the amount
of charge accumulated on a capacitor may determine whether it contributes a “0”
or a “1” binary digit. On the other hand, spintronic devices exploit another
property of electrons, called spin (up, down, or canted), to encode information.
These devices can in fact use spin currents to control logic operations faster
and more energy efficiently than charge currents can accomplish in conventional
semiconductor transistor-based logic. Spintronics devices typically consist of
ferromagnets as the source of the spin current. Incorporating elements that are
superconductors, which have no electrical resistance, can enhance the overall
device performance and offer new functionalities, such as remarkably low-
dissipation (energy loss) spin transport. Such ferromagnetic-superconductor
structures are also constituents of schemes for topological quantum computing,
an architecture that is predicted to be robust to environmental noise that
plagues other quantum device platforms. This project investigates ferromagnetic-
superconductor devices that could form building blocks of novel computing
architectures by imaging nanoscale magnetic fields throughout the device and
determining the effects of temperature and an applied current on the device
operation. This effort also contributes to the development of a globally
competitive quantum workforce in the U.S. by designing a novel lab course that
teaches foundational skills for careers in quantum sensing and computing, and
providing training in electronics to K-12 students at a local elementary school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Ferromagnet-superconductor
(FS) heterostructures are promising platforms for superconducting spintronics
and topological quantum computing. In FS heterostructures, it is theoretically
predicted that skyrmion-vortex pairs can form that are desirable for computing
applications. The objective of this program is to design, fabricate, and study a
system in which skyrmions and vortices co-exist and interact. Specifically, the
research team studies proximity coupling in two different FS heterostructures:
iron germanium telluride (FGT) - superconductor bilayers and arrays of FeGe
islands under a superconducting layer. For both heterostructures, they employ
magnetic force microscopy and electrical transport measurements to study the
dynamics of magnetic textures that emerge in these devices under variable
temperatures (down to 1.6 K) and magnetic fields (up to 12 T), determining the
conditions under which skyrmions and vortices co-exist and bind. Proposed work
includes studies of the effects of thermal energy and current-induced forces,
and comparing the results to semiclassical theories describing skyrmion-vortex
pair dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.