* 2046005
* CAREER: Constructing Multi-scale Dynamical Ensembles of Ribonucleic Acids (RNAs)
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Aaron Frank, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 04/30/2022
* USD 224,330.00

The ability of ribonucleic acids (RNAs) to sample distinct structures underlie
many of their biological roles. Many RNAs that regulate gene expression in
bacteria, viruses, and humans do so by changing their structure in response to
stimuli. In bacteria, for instance, RNA elements switch their molecular
structure in the presence of specific metabolites, such as vitamin B12. The
binding of such metabolites and the subsequent structural changes enable
organisms that express these RNAs to respond to their environment and turn ON or
OFF gene expression as needed. However, visualizing the structures that RNAs
adopt remains a fundamental challenge in molecular biophysics. This project
seeks to develop and apply new methods to integrate experimental and
computational data to describe the structure of RNAs. This project will also
tightly integrate research and education to train high school, undergraduate,
and graduate students in the fundamentals of applied computational molecular
biophysics. During this project, students will leverage modern machine learning
techniques, similar to techniques used in facial recognition software, to
extract RNA structural information from biophysical measurements. Outreach
activities will be aimed at actively engaging high school students in
computationally-intensive research, especially those from historically under-
recruited groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project aims to
develop methods to determine the dynamical ensemble, i.e., the collection of
conformational states that a given RNA can populate. To understand how RNAs fold
and function, one must determine their ensembles and how they change during the
recognition of proteins or ligands or during the introduction of mutations or
chemical modifications. Characterizing dynamical ensembles of RNA, however,
remains a formidable task because the number of unknown variables exceeds that
which can be measured experimentally. Additionally, many conformers exist in
low-abundance and have short lifetimes and are therefore difficult to detect
experimentally. Even more challenging is determining how different conformers in
an ensemble interconvert as this requires characterization of exceptionally
lowly-populated transition states and complex pathways that can be difficult to
tease out. In this project, the dynamical ensembles of RNAs will be determined
using novel integrative approaches that are initialized using readily available
experimental data. In this project, NMR chemical shifts will be used to guide
simulations of RNA and to determine their dynamical ensembles. Therefore, the
first objective is to develop multi-scale methods to estimate chemical shifts
from structures of RNA. The second objective is to leverage multi-scale chemical
shift prediction methods to construct multi-scale dynamical ensembles of RNA.
The last objective is to develop a methodology that uses multi-scale dynamical
ensembles to construct transition-path ensembles of RNA. Ultimately, this
project will lead to robust, streamlined, and integrated methodologies that go
beyond static structure determination to construct dynamical ensembles that
capture the range of conformational states accessible to functional RNAs, while
simultaneously describing the transitions between these states. This structural
information will advance the understanding of RNA-driven biochemical processes
from descriptive to predictive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.