* 2046987
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing the evolving oceanic radiocarbon distribution: Sampling and analysis during GOSHIP and ships of opportunity cruises
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Rolf Sonnerup, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2026
* USD 194,660.00

This project supports the global measurement of carbon isotope tracers as part
of the Global Ocean Ship-based Hydrographic Investigations Program (GO-SHIP).
The US component of GO-SHIP typically occupies 2 or 3 major oceanic hydrographic
sections per year. The team will sample a subset of these to determine changes
in 14C and 13C of dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC). These data provide key
metrics for climate and earth-system models and can be used by the broader
research community for a diverse set of scientific applications, such as climate
model development and calibration. Both institutions will also endeavor to
engage postdoctoral researchers supported under separate funding, contributing
to the training of the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon isotopic data affords key insights into
ocean processes that are not available from any other measurements: 14C provides
high signal/noise quantification of decadal-scale penetration of anthropogenic
perturbation through the bottom of the thermocline and into the deep sea. It
also provides key insights into the global overturning circulation by
documenting return flow of Southern Ocean intermediate waters to the sea
surface. Delta 14C is critical to quantifying the air-sea CO2 gas exchange rate.
For 13C, the air-sea 13C disequilibrium is readily measured, thus quantifying
the uptake of the anthropogenic CO2 perturbation at the sea surface. When
combined with the accumulation of anthropogenic 13C changes in the ocean
interior, it is possible to quantify basin-scale redistribution of anthropogenic
CO2 in the ocean interior from observations alone. These processes are
difficult, if not impossible to examine with synthetic anthropogenic tracers
like Chlorofluorocarbon and with conventional C system measurements. The
availability of carbon isotope data will aid a wide range of studies including
climate change, oceanic anthropogenic CO2, thermocline ventilation, thermohaline
overturning rates, air-sea gas exchange rates, biological cycling rates, and
model evaluation or calibration. As GO-SHIP cruise schedules are planned, the
team will carefully evaluate which legs would yield the best science return from
the limited analytical capacity. Sampling will likely focus on long, meridional
sections in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans where a strong signal is
anticipated, and on any other areas where measurements have been lacking. The
water samples will be transported to the National Ocean Sciences Accelerator
Mass Spectrometry facility (NOSAMS) for analysis. The sampling design, final
quality control, and submission of the data to the CLIVAR and Carbon
Hydrographic Data Office (CCHDO) and to the Ocean Carbon Data System (OCADS)
will be performed at the University of Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.