* 2046551
* CAREER: Topological Assessment in Granular Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Theodore Brzinski, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2026
* USD 473,832.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pouring a bucket of sand
demonstrates the liquid-like potential of sand, yet beach-goers trust the same
material to support their weight. Why do the beach-goers not sink into the sandy
depths? Though we have the experience to understand that sands, powders, and
other granular systems will flow like a fluid or support load like a rigid solid
under certain conditions, nobody can reliably or precisely predict when, how, or
why these systems will become rigid or flowing. This uncertainty is
characteristic of a broad class of rigid, amorphous materials. Examples include
sand as well as glass and plastics. Thus, by studying the origins of rigidity in
granular materials, the principal investigator hopes to gain insight into a wide
variety of systems. The focus of this project is the transmission of stress
through the internal structure of a granular material is related to the bulk
mechanical response of the material. The research team uses an imaging technique
to measure the forces between particles throughout the material. The primary
goal is to identify structures, not in the particles' spatial arrangement, but
the patterns of force transmitted through the system. To understand these
structures, the team leverages new methods to describe complicated networks and
geometries. A secondary goal of the project is to manipulate these force-
transmission structures to design materials with specific properties. The
project will contribute to several educational goals, as well. Specifically, the
principal investigator will provide training and mentorship to undergraduate and
postdoctoral junior scientists involved in the research and integrate
experimental techniques and ongoing research within the project's scope into the
core physics curriculum. Additionally, the principal investigator will develop a
workshop that prepares research mentors to train a diverse and effective
population of junior scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to understand
the multi-scale origins of rigidity in amorphous granular materials. The
research team will leverage photoelasticimetric imaging, a state of the art
spatially- and force-resolved measurement technique, combined with high-
resolution, composite imaging to characterize the structure and internal stress
state of large granular packings in either biaxial compression or pure shear.
The project's primary goal is to identify correlations between the bulk
mechanical response of the material and the force-resolved measurements of the
material's internal stress state. Prior observations suggest that structures at
all scales contribute to the mechanical response of granular materials. Thus,
both mean-field descriptions and particle-scale metrics are ill-suited to
predicting material rigidity. In contrast, the principal investigator is
developing a novel analytic approach based on algebraic topology and the science
of networks, which identifies topological features that represent structures at
all length-scales. To identify correlations between these topological features
and the bulk material response, the research team uses the Support Vector
Machines method. This machine learning technique has been effective in
predicting local plasticity in colloidal glasses and wet, granular pillars. A
secondary goal of the project is to develop strategies for materials design to
reproducibly manufacture packings with prescribed topological properties in an
approach reminiscent of the design of topologically insulating electronic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.