* 2046795
* CAREER: Probabilistic Models for Spatiotemporal Data with Applications to Dynamic Brain Connectivity
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Oluwasanmi Koyejo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2026
* USD 482,980.00

Probabilistic models are among the most promising tools for complex
spatiotemporal data. However, transforming this promise to practical impact
requires easy-to-deploy tools that appropriately address existing roadblocks.
This project develops new tools for accurate and scalable probabilistic machine
learning with spatiotemporal data. Furthermore, the approach is motivated by
applications to mapping dynamic brain connectivity from human brain imaging
data. The importance of dynamic brain connectivity lies in its description of
neural information processing mechanisms, along with potentially transformative
applications to understanding and treating neurological and neuropsychiatric
disorders. This project will develop new techniques for estimating brain
connectivity and apply these methods to the neuroscientific tasks of explaining
inter-individual differences in cognition and behavior. This project will
include curriculum development on probabilistic models for spatiotemporal data.
This project also plans to involve participation by graduate students from
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a
transformative new direction for modeling high-dimensional spatiotemporal data
by addressing the fundamental challenges of modeling, scalability, and
mitigating data biases. The first challenge is modeling, which refers to the
inflexible assumptions of existing spatiotemporal models -- leading to under-
fitting. To this end, this project develops modular probabilistic models that
capture structured variability. Another pressing challenge is the computational
scalability of inference and learning for such probabilistic models. This
project tackles scalability by developing principled sample-selection methods
for scalable approximate inference with performance guarantees. A third
challenge is data bias, which occurs because data from a single source is often
not statistically representative. Thus, models fit using single-source data have
inconsistent and non-reproducible results. This project addresses data bias by
combining data across multiple sources using novel federated learning for shared
estimation without requiring direct data sharing. In addition to developing the
algorithmic and theoretical frameworks for these directions, this project will
also build and release open software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.