* 2046011
* CAREER: Algorithmic Approaches for Phylogenetic Analysis of Tumor Evolution
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Layla Oesper, Carleton College
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2026
* USD 368,989.00

In order to improve clinical diagnosis and treatment of patients afflicted with
cancer, there is a need for an improved understanding of how tumors grow and
develop over time. This work seeks specifically to understand what order genetic
alterations occur, and what alterations occur together or in separate cell
lineages. Such knowledge will be fundamental towards lessening the impact of
this disease on those affected. For example, treatment plans designed to target
genetic alterations occurring in separate cell lineages may be more effective in
preventing disease relapse. Recent advances in DNA sequencing technologies and
methods designed to analyze the data produced by these technologies has enabled
glimpses into the mutational processes underlying cancers. Researchers are now
better equipped to infer information about the history of a recently diagnosed
tumor, including the order that events took place during its development over
months or even years prior to diagnosis. However, there is still much
uncertainty and variation in the tumor histories inferred using these methods.
This project will address these issues through the development of critically
needed approaches that enable comparison, summarization, and visualization of
tumor histories inferred from sequencing data. Numerous opportunities will be
provided for undergraduate students and recent graduates, especially those from
underrepresented groups, to gain hands-on research experience. This will be
combined with several educational activities that enable undergraduate students
with a minimal computer science background to learn about real world
applications of how their skills can be applied to important biological problems
- an area that is likely to need a growing workforce in the coming
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The phylogenetic history of how a tumor developed is
typically described using a labeled, rooted tree called a clonal tree. This
project will result in the development of methods that compare, organize, and
communicate information about clonal trees. Specifically, the intellectual aims
of the project are: (1) Develop new distance measures for comparing clonal trees
and means for assessing such measures; (2) Design algorithms that allow for the
summarization of both small sets of clonal trees and the larger space of all
such trees; and (3) Design a visualization tool for experts to explore and
compare clonal trees. These goals are integrated with an educational plan that
focuses on expanding and broadening undergraduate involvement in computational
biology: through workshops, innovative classroom experiences, and numerous
opportunities for undergraduates to be directly involved in the research
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.