* 2046065
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Protest, Consensus, and Multicultural Democracy
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Sylvia Yanagisako, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 05/31/2023
* USD 7,752.00

Democracies serve heterogeneous constituents, expressing significant variation
in social and cultural factors. To ensure peaceful coexistence between different
social actors, reaching and preserving consensus is a priority for democratic
governments. Although consensus may be pursued on virtually any issue, resource
management is a frequent target of democratic policy making, with different
implications for different stakeholders. This doctoral dissertation research
examines how different social groups—rural communities, urban state bureaucrats,
and corporate officials—attempt to reach agreements on complex issues arising
from variation in approaches to resource management. Examining how and under
what conditions consensus may be reached in a diverse society is essential to
understanding how different peoples holding varied worldviews, modes of living,
and means of self-expression co-exist. The project supports the training of a
U.S.-based graduate student and findings will be broadly disseminated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will investigate the strategies and
narratives employed by culturally distinct groups in pursuit of consensus over
resource management policies in a context where officials are making a concerted
effort to establish peaceful spaces of deliberation. By bringing together rural
and Indigenous leaders, government officials, and company representatives, these
spaces of deliberation are an ideal site for examining how different social
actors pursue agreement with one another. This research combines in-person and
digital qualitative methods to document and analyze the spaces of deliberation
in which people from radically different cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds
endeavor to reach agreements with one another. Through interviews with rural
community leaders, residents, and government bureaucrats, the doctoral student
will investigate whether and how cultural and socioeconomic differences shape
political communication and how consensus is pursued on divisive questions of
resource distribution. Findings from this research will illuminate the spectrum
of strategies—from deliberation to social protest—that different groups deploy
in pursuit of shared political ground while contributing to social science
theories about the role consensus plays in democratic
politics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.