* 2046648
* CAREER: Tunable superconductor materials for quantum information processing using pairs of Majorana zero modes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Peng Wei, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 471,934.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum computing, which leverages quantum
mechanical processes for information storage and manipulation, is expected to
surpass classical computing schemes. Recently, prototypes of quantum computers
have demonstrated computing power on tasks that are difficult or impossible to
be carried out by a conventional computer. However, to achieve a full-scale
quantum computer which can carry out universal computation tasks, the critical
issue of quantum decoherence – a process that causes the loss of quantum
information and the generation of errors, needs to be addressed first. One
promising way to tackle this challenge is to utilize a kind of exotic quantum
particles, known as Majorana fermions, that are indistinguishable from their
antiparticles. Such unique property allows one to construct the basic element of
quantum computing, i.e. a quantum bit or qubit, using a pair of coupled Majorana
fermions, which can give rise to a new type of qubit that is naturally protected
from decoherence. This project aims to integrate the needed elements to build
prototypes of such qubit using new superconductor materials. The project
emphasizes on the education and outreach program for graduate and undergraduate
students, and K-12 students and schoolteachers, which are combined with the
research endeavors to build a next generation quantum-literate
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The project
establishes the material and device foundation for building a topological qubit
– the kind of qubit that is protected against decoherence. The research exploits
new materials known as topological superconductors, which have superconducting
energy gap in their interiors and harbor Majorana zero modes at their
boundaries. The candidate materials are two-dimensional (2D) systems and
heterostructures, in which superconductivity, magnetism and spin-orbit coupling
co-exist, such as the surface state of (111)-oriented gold coupled to a
superconductor and a magnetic insulator. Such materials feature a high degree of
tunability and allow the control of Majorana zero modes by manipulating the
properties of the superconductor materials themselves. At the same time, the
focused materials are scalable, which allows them to be easily fabricated into
the needed nano structures/devices by following standard fabrication procedures.
The research follows the “measurement-based” scheme for quantum information
processing, which utilizes the concept of quantum state teleportation through a
pair of Majorana zero modes. The project aims to achieve several milestones
towards achieving a topological qubit, which includes: 1. prove the quantum non-
locality of a pair of coupled Majorana zero modes; 2. control Majorana zero
modes using tunable superconductor materials; and 3. demonstrate interferometer
devices for topological qubit. The success of the project offers a path towards
understanding the novel quantum phases emerging in material heterostructures and
will stimulate quantum information sciences. The outcome will advance both basic
science and information technology, paving the way for the next generation
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.