* 2046733
* CAREER: Global change and the functional ecology of grasses
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Brody Sandel, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 08/31/2026
* USD 553,853.00

Grasses are one of the most ecologically and economically important plant
families. They include many staple crops such as wheat, corn, and rice, and are
defining features of an entire biome. Thus, the responses of grasses to global
change will strongly impact human well-being. At the same time, plants can
strongly influence the rates of global change through feedback loops. For this
reason, accurately forecasting climate requires understanding these feedbacks.
However, these feedbacks are currently one of the largest sources of uncertainty
in climate models. Physical and chemical characteristics of species, called
functional traits, play a central role in predicting both how plants will
respond to and influence global change. Classic ecological theory makes
predictions regarding how functional traits should relate to climate and other
environmental features. This project will test and extend these predictions and
perform strong assessments of the predictability of trait-environment
relationships. This work will use a combination of long-term monitoring,
regional surveys, and analysis of global databases. The results will improve our
understanding of plant responses to global change, illuminate the limits of
predictability, and produce valuable data that can be used to refine global
climate predictions. The project integrates educational opportunities at
multiple levels, including field research experience for advanced undergraduates
and data science modules developed with and deployed by local high school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research includes four component projects
that range from intensive local studies to global macroecological analyses. The
first will test predictions for the influence of precipitation on functional
traits across space and through time, and within and among species, by building
a ten-year record of grass traits in sites across the San Francisco Bay Area. In
project two, the researchers will sample sites across the Western states that
differ in precipitation and rate of atmospheric nitrogen deposition to examine
their interacting effects on leaf chemistry. Project three will develop an
allometry-based model of resource allocation that can predict grass trait
variation along environmental gradients and test these predictions with new data
collected by collaborators on five continents. Finally, project four will
examine broad-scale within-species variation in grass traits, using machine
learning tools and high-resolution range maps for more than 1000 grass
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.