* 2046086
* CAREER: Autonomous Tensor Analysis: From Raw Multi-Aspect Data to Actionable Insights
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Evangelos Papalexakis, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 05/31/2026
* USD 359,618.00

Real-world entities are often described by multiple aspects in data. For
instance, a news article online can be expressed by its textual content, the
images it may contain, its author, its publication date, and the number of times
it has been shared in social media. Integration of those aspects has been shown
to be beneficial in a number of data science tasks, such as extracting the topic
of an article or ascertaining its trustworthiness. Tensor decomposition, a class
of multi-aspect data analytic methods, has been empirically shown to be
particularly effective in such integration in a number of diverse applications,
including: chemometrics, signal processing, social network analysis, and brain
data analysis. Despite their effectiveness, current tensor methods have a
crucial limitation that hinders their broad applicability: conducting tensor
analysis is largely a manual endeavor that entails laborious trial-and-error
tuning and requires both high familiarity with tensor methods and domain
expertise in the target application. As a result, the number of practitioners
who can successfully apply tensor analysis is limited and, thus, tensor analysis
has not enjoyed as broad an adoption despite being such a powerful tool. The
goal of this project is to democratize the entire, currently laborious and
highly inaccessible, process of unsupervised exploratory tensor analysis,
towards producing actionable insights from raw multi-aspect data. Towards broad
convergence of research, practice, and education, the project will integrate the
research outcomes to the investigator's educational and outreach activities.
Those activities include the introduction of research outcomes to the
development of undergraduate and graduate data science curricula, organization
of workshops and tutorials at major research venues for disseminating the
research outcomes to the scientific community, mentoring undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups, and organizing summer workshops for teachers and
capstone projects for students in collaboration with the local school district
towards broadening the presence of data science in high school
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities are organized
in two major tasks: (i) Algorithms for unsupervised autonomous tensor analysis
and (ii) Real-world applications, in collaboration with domain experts. Towards
democratizing tensor decomposition, in the first task, the project will be the
first to formulate in a principled manner a number of very challenging problems
which have traditionally been tackled manually and which are essential in
unsupervised tensor analysis. The project will develop methods of self-
supervised learning in order to learn tensor datasets with exploitable and
meaningful structure from raw data, solving a fundamental problem in data
preparation for tensor analysis. The project has parallels with the emerging
fields of meta-learning and auto-ML, which have recently gained traction in the
data science and machine learning communities. However, the focus of those
fields has overwhelmingly been to automate the fine-tuning of supervised models.
The lack of supervision in this endeavor, however, poses major challenges and
presents a huge opportunity: success of the project has the potential to create
a new field of unsupervised exploratory meta-learning where the goal is to
extract actionable and interpretable insights from raw data in an unsupervised
manner. In order to maximize the potential benefit to the academic community,
industry, and society at-large, and to stress-test the proposed methods on a
wide array of diverse data (e.g., text, images, graphs, time-series, and
scientific data), the second task of the project will focus on two major
applications: (i) Misinformation detection on the Web: The project will provide
the public with tools to better judge the trustworthiness of news online,
towards more informed and active citizenry. (ii) Gravitational wave detection:
the study of gravitational waves can help unravel current mysteries of the
universe and analyze cosmic objects that do not emit light. The project aims at
improving the detection and analysis of Gravitational Waves, with the potential
to empower scientific discovery towards further understanding the
universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.