* 2046099
* CAREER: Developing Low-Cost Computational Models for the Photoexcited Dynamics of Noble Metal Nanoclusters
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Rebecca Gieseking, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2026
* USD 650,000.00

With this CAREER award, Rebecca Gieseking of Brandeis University is supported
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop computational models to understand the
interactions of light with metal nanoclusters. Metal nanoclusters have the
potential to revolutionize solar energy technologies by harnessing light to
produce chemical fuels because they support plasmons, which are collective
oscillations of the electrons that enable the nanoclusters to strongly absorb
light. Understanding, controlling, and manipulating the plasmon properties is
key to improving the efficiency of solar energy storage. Dr. Gieseking and her
research group are developing accurate models with low computational costs to
understand the decay processes after metal nanoclusters absorb light. They are
using these models to understand how these decay processes change as a function
of nanocluster size, shape, and composition to design metal nanoclusters with
controllable decay time scales for efficient solar energy storage. Dr. Gieseking
is also developing new computational chemistry laboratory exercises throughout
the chemistry curriculum to introduce undergraduates to the field and deepen
their understanding of important chemical properties. Beyond her research
contribution, Dr. Gieseking is engaged in promoting the participation of women
and underrepresented minorities in chemistry through recruiting research
students, mentoring through ChemWMN (Chemistry Women Mentoring Network), and
participating in Brandeisâ€™s outreach to local schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Rebecca Gieseking and her research group are developing nonadiabatic molecular
dynamics (NAMD) models based on semi-empirical methods to understand the
photoexcited dynamics of metal nanoclusters (NCs). Atomically precise noble
metal NCs are strong absorbers that can be tuned by changing the NC size and
shape, and the excited-state dynamics vary from excitonic (indicating discrete
excited states) to plasmonic (reflecting a near-continuum of states). Dr.
Gieseking is parametrizing semi-empirical quantum mechanical (SEQM) methods in
an effort to accurately reproduce the excited-state potential energy surfaces of
Ag and Au NCs and utilizing NAMD codes for surface-hopping simulations of the
dynamics. This project aims to advance the state of knowledge in plasmon-
enhanced hot-electron chemistry by (i) providing a novel low-cost computational
model for the atomistic excited-state dynamics of noble metal NCs and (ii)
revealing structure-property relationships that affect the excited-state
dynamics, which can be used to tailor NCs for applications in photocatalysis and
other solar energy technologies. These methods aim to provide fundamental
insight into the transition from excitonic to plasmonic behavior and refine
existing quantum mechanical definitions of plasmons by using dynamics. If
successful, these studies will make important strides toward the vision of using
SEQM methods to harness plasmonic hot electrons for photocatalysis of
industrially important reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.