* 2046856
* CAREER: Black and Latinx Parents Leading Reform and Advancing Racial Justice in Elementary Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Frances Harper, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 06/30/2026
* USD 394,984.00

Decades of reform efforts in mathematics education continue to fail Black and
Latinx children, in part, because parents are excluded from decisions about
school mathematics. Nonetheless, Black and Latinx families often persist in
supporting their individual children, but a shift toward collective organizing
among parents as change agents in school mathematics is necessary for meeting
the needs of every student. This project explores possibilities for localized
change led by parents. By making explicit how to foster and increase Black and
Latinx parents’ engagement in solidarity with community organizations and
teachers, this project could provide a model for other communities and schools
seeking to advance racial justice in mathematics education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through critical community-engaged scholarship and in
collaboration with ten Black and Latinx families, ten teachers, and two
community organizations, the research team will co-design and co-study two
educational programs aimed at advancing racial justice in elementary
mathematics. The first program seeks to build parents’ capacity to catalyze
change across classrooms and schools within their local communities; and the
second program will provide teacher professional development that supports
elementary teachers of mathematics to learn with and from Black and Latinx
families. A mixed methods research design that utilizes narrative inquiry and
social network analysis will facilitate refinement of the educational program
models by addressing two research objectives: (1) to understand the experiences
of Black and Latinx parents as they build capacity to lead change and (2) to
study the development, nature, and impact of parent-teacher-community
partnerships that promote a shared vision for racial justice in mathematics.
Findings could extend the field's understanding of community-initiated and
community-led change in school mathematics and produce a model that helps ensure
increased access and opportunity for Black and Latinx students in mathematics
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. This is a Faculty Early Career Development
Program project responsive to a National Science Foundation-wide activity that
offers the most prestigious awards in support of early-career faculty who have
the potential to serve as academic role models in research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.