* 2046195
* CAREER: Applications of Quantum Information Theory and Symmetry Principles in Quantum Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Iman Marvian, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2026
* USD 197,597.00

Over the last few decades, researchers in Quantum Information Science (QIS) have
discovered that quantum properties of nature, such as entanglement and quantum
coherence, can be used to enhance the power of computers, sensors, and other
information-processing devices. The rapid progress of QIS has also had profound
impacts on the rest of physics. From high-energy physics to condensed matter
theory, ideas, techniques, and conceptual frameworks developed in this field
have had revolutionary effects. In this project, the Principal Investigator will
address a series of related QIS questions of critical importance to both
theoretical physics and quantum computing. Broadly speaking, this project aims
to investigate the behavior and properties of composite quantum-mechanical
systems in the presence of symmetries and conservation laws. Besides
applications in QIS, the project also explores the implications of this study in
other areas of Physics. Specifically, the project investigates how quantum
phenomena can enhance or affect the performance of thermal machines. This
project also provides educational opportunities for a range of students in
physics, engineering, and other computational sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of two main parts: The first part
fully investigates the properties and applications of Local Symmetric Quantum
Circuits (LSQC) and, specifically, random LSQC. The problem of characterizing
LSQC is equivalent to determining the general features of the unitary time
evolutions generated by local symmetric Hamiltonians. This is useful, e.g., for
understanding chaos and thermalization of many-body systems with conserved
charges. Although certain aspects of LSQC have been previously studied in the
context of quantum chaos and Symmetry-Protected Topological (SPT) order, a broad
and precise understanding of the properties of this family of circuits is still
missing. A preliminary study has revealed unexpected features and the rich
mathematical structure of this framework. The anticipated results have
applications and implications in areas such as quantum control, quantum
thermodynamics, SPT order, and quantum gravity. The second part of this project
investigates quantum thermodynamics from the point of view of quantum
information theory, and more specifically, the resource-theoretic approach to
thermodynamics, which has been flourishing in the last ten years. The project
aims to address some important shortcomings of the existing framework, namely to
develop a unified theory of work and coherence distillation in the resource-
theoretic framework of quantum thermodynamics, as well as experimental proposals
for probing genuine quantum features of this theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.