* 2046089
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Bioprospecting and Scientific Knowledge in Post-Conflict Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Paulla Ebron, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 09/30/2022
* USD 24,029.00

The doctoral dissertation project investigates the mobilization of biodiversity
as a resource for building post-conflict futures in societies transitioning from
war to peace. In a context where pharmaceutical and other industries are
increasingly searching for alternative sources of materials to develop their
products, places that exhibit high biodiversity are experiencing unprecedented
interest in bioprospectingâ€”the survey, study, and commercialization of
biological resources. This research examines what is at stake when biodiversity
is mobilized as a resource for producing economic gain in regions recovering
from war. The doctoral student investigates the potential of bioprospecting as a
means of shaping local communities' expectations, scientists' practices, and
peacemaking aspirations. In addition to contributing to the training of a
graduate student in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection and
analysis, this research will enrich scientific understanding of the role of
scientists and environmental knowledge in the context of political transition,
particularly post-conflict scenarios. More broadly, the findings of this
research will advance the scientific analysis of the simultaneous production of
science, nature, and peacebuilding aspirations. By broadening the participation
of people and locations historically underrepresented, this project will inform
scientists and policymakers working in the fields of peacebuilding,
bioprospecting, and science and innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By conducting
twelve months of ethnographic fieldwork, the doctoral student will follow a
group of scientists, rural residents, and state officials in laboratories,
coastal landscapes, and government offices as they embark on a bioprospecting
project in a biodiverse and conflict-affected area. This research will examine
the conditions that enable the survey and marketization of biodiversity and how
bioprospecting is experienced and constituted through the encounters between
scientists, rural residents, and government officials. Data will be collected
through participant observation, laboratory ethnography, participatory mapping
exercises, interviews, life-histories, and document analysis. After data
integration and analysis, results will be disseminated among scientists, state
officials, academics, and residents of relevant
places.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.