* 2046470
* CAREER: Nanoreactors for Dual Catalysis Under Polymer Confinement
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Elizabeth Elacqua, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 677,150.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Elacqua of The Pennsylvania State
University will synthesize and study polymer nanoreactors that consist of
multiple catalytic units in a single polymer chain. Both nature and chemical
industry use catalysts to speed up the rate of chemical reactions. This research
project aims to provide fundamental understanding of the effects of proximally
confining cocatalysts on activity and, ultimately, to develop novel strategies
for cooperative catalytic transformations. In addition to providing research
training to undergraduate and graduate students in organic and polymer
synthesis, this project includes curricular activities that highlight
contemporary chemistry and feature a multidisciplinary research infrastructure.
Additional focus will be placed on increasing the accessibility of organic
chemistry and developing active recruitment and retention initiatives that
minimize barriers to STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses
on studying polymer nanoreactors for photoredox catalysis. Dual photoredox
catalysis and tandem reactions are a particular focus. Synthetic strategies will
be developed to incorporate multiple catalysts into single-chain polymers that
fold controllably to form discrete, nanometer-sized structures with high
catalyst density. By tuning the solubility through modifying the chemical
structure of the polymer chain, such nanoreactors can function as homogeneous
catalysts. Light-initiated reactivity will be studied in the presence of co-
catalysts, wherein polymeric confinement can lead to accelerated reactions and
provide additional mechanistic insight. These studies are expected to provide
useful information on novel strategies for cooperative catalysis. Specifically,
this research will provide insight into the effects of proximal catalyst
localization upon catalytic efficiency, with the aim of tackling diffusion
limitations in co-catalytic reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.