* 2046066
* CAREER:In-Network Computation Meets Data Persistence
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Samira Khan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 01/31/2026
* USD 353,856.00

In this current data-centric era, data generated by social media, video sharing
applications, swarms of sensors, autonomous cars, etc. is growing exponentially.
Unfortunately, as the technology scaling slows down, the semiconductor industry
has been facing a major challenge in providing better performance while
processing such large datasets. As a result, it is essential to redesign current
systems to sustain the demand for computing over exponentially growing datasets.
However, the fundamental model of computing has not changed over many decades.
In our current Von Neumann model, data sits in the slower persistent storage and
it is moved back and forth to faster memory for computation by the processor.
This project focuses on enabling a paradigm shift in how data is stored and
processed in future systems. Data should be processed close to where data is
generated and data should be persisted where it is used. The goal of this work
is to fundamentally rethink how persistent states are maintained in data centers
and expose the persistency domain in the network for better performance,
throughput, and tail latency. This work redesigns programmable switches and
smart network interface cards (NICs) to manipulate persistent data in the
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enables faster execution of
applications that manipulate global persistent state, such as global-scale deep
learning training. Machine learning models have a huge societal impact and they
are being used to predict cancers, epidemics, etc. This research will
potentially impact numerous scientific fields to take a leap forward towards new
innovations. The datasets, tools, and techniques developed in this research will
be made publicly available to benefit the whole community. The educational part
of this project will focus on attracting undergraduate and high-school students
towards science and technology through a summer
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.