* 2046136
* CAREER: Protein degradation during the maternal-to-zygotic transition
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Olivia Rissland, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,300,000.00

For all life forms, development is a highly synchronized and fundamental
process. The initial stages of animal development are directed by biomolecules
that were made by the mother and deposited into the growing egg. Once they have
served their role, these maternal biomolecules must be removed and replaced with
new ones made by the embryo. This process, known as the maternal-to-zygotic
transition, is essential for animal embryogenesis. Despite the importance of the
maternal-to-zygotic transition, little attention has been placed on
understanding how maternal proteins are removed. The goal of this CAREER award
is to fill this gap through a combination of genetic and molecular biology
techniques. This research will provide an entry point into three poorly
understood, but critical, questions: 1) how do embryos target maternal proteins
for degradation; 2) how is protein degradation controlled during development;
and 3) what are the developmental consequences when this process goes awry? This
award will also provide 15-month paid internships to undergraduates who identify
as underrepresented minorities and study at a local undergraduate institution,
Metropolitan State University of Denver (Metro). Meaningful research
experiences, like the ones provided by this award, will set the students on a
trajectory of success in science. This award will thus map the enormous scope of
protein removal in driving embryogenesis, will transform the educational
ecosystem in Denver, and ultimately will help to increase diversity in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Drosophila melanogaster, an E2 ubiquitin-
conjugating enzyme known as “Marie Kondo” removes several maternal proteins that
were critical for oogenesis but are not needed by the embryo. Marie Kondo works
with an E3 ubiquitin ligase called the CTLH complex. However, little is known
about how Marie Kondo and the CTLH complex are controlled. Using a combination
of genetics and molecular biology, this project will investigate the mechanisms
underlying the tight temporal control of substrate specificities and enzymatic
activities of Marie Kondo and its partner, the CTLH complex, and determine the
developmental consequences of mistiming their activity. Finally, as part of the
educational program, an RNAi-based screen will be used to identify other E2s and
E3s essential for the Drosophila embryogenesis, which will set the stage for
future investigations in maternal protein removal during the maternal-to-zygotic
transition. Together, these investigations will shed light on a new area of
developmental biology—protein decay—that is critical for the creation of an
adult animal from a single-cell embryo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.