* 2046214
* CAREER: Regional control of local functions: Dispersal and the biodiversity-ecosystem function relationship
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Catalina Cuellar Gempeler, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 05/31/2026
* USD 844,438.00

Biological diversity has the potential to maintain healthy ecosystems. Multiple
species work together to recycle nutrients, detoxify water and soils, and
maintain water availability. It is important to understand how species
contribute to these functions if we want to maintain healthy ecosystems. While
dispersal is an important element of how species live in nature, it is unclear
how dispersal processes influence ecosystems. Plants, animals and microbes can
move across the landscape and colonize existing and new habitats. This project
investigates how colonization influences biological diversity and function.
Specifically, this research focuses on carnivorous plants that capture insects
yet depend on their microbial communities to access the nutrients. How do these
plants maintain this digestive function despite receiving different microbial
colonists? First, the researchers will determine differences in the plant’s
microbes along the West and East coast of the US. Then, they will use
experiments to establish whether the microbe’s ability to recycle nutrients for
the plant depends on dispersal and colonization. Results from this research will
inform how to manage biodiversity and function while considering dispersal.
These findings may have major societal impacts by informing how to maintain
ecosystem functions critical for life on planet Earth. Additionally, this work
will advance our understanding of the microbiome and its role in human health
and agriculture. This project will support training for students at a Hispanic
Serving Institution who will gain skills in methods relevant for careers in
ecology and biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shape of the biodiversity-
ecosystem function relationship remains a lingering question in ecology. As a
result, it is still challenging to predict how the ecosystems will respond to
environmental change and habitat loss, and how we should manage biodiversity to
optimize functioning. This proposal will investigate the causes of colonist
functional diversity and its consequences for ecosystem function. Traditionally
overlooked, the number and type of colonists may hold the key to understanding
variation in ecosystem function rates of communities interconnected by
dispersal. Colonization can contribute functional species that were absent from
a site or non-functional species that consume resources and impede community
function. Specifically, it will explore how environmental factors generate
functional diversity in colonist pools, and whether these colonist pools mediate
the effect of (1) distance between communities, (2) dispersal rates and (3)
habitat filters on diversity-ecosystem function relationships. This project will
focus on the degradative function of microbial communities associated with the
carnivorous pitcher plants Darlingtonia californica and Sarracenia purpurea.
These natural microcosms have distinct colonist pools along their geographic
ranges and tractable degradative functions. This project will use a combination
of field sampling and microcosm experiments to investigate microbial communities
within pitcher plants. The microbial communities and their functions will be
profiled using amplicon sequencing, metagenomics and degradation assays.
Specifically, this research will establish the role of colonist pools and
habitat filters in driving ecosystem function. Additionally, this CAREER project
includes educational efforts such as (1) developing inquiry-based activities in
two undergraduate courses, (2) cultivating and evaluating explicit mentoring
plans for students in research labs, and (3) founding a Biological Sciences
Bioinformatics Group. Overall, the work described here will lead to a better
understanding of the role of dispersal in community function and contribute to
training of a diverse next-generation of scientists specializing in ecology,
molecular biology and bioinformatics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.