* 2046797
* CAREER: Experimental tests of competition and facilitation among migratory large herbivores from Yellowstone National Park
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Tyler Kartzinel, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2026
* USD 748,079.00

A big question in ecology is: “who eats what?” Biologists need answers to this
question in order to know how food webs are structured. This knowledge is what
enables us to understand where species live, how they behave, and whether any
disturbances to the system are liable to have adverse effects on the valuable
services that nature provides to people. Yet despite working to answer this
question for more than a century, researchers still struggle to identify all of
the feeding links that together create the food webs of ecosystems around the
world. This project focuses on the food web of Yellowstone National Park in
order to understand how the diets of bison and other large mammalian herbivores
are able to sustain their epic annual migrations across the ecosystem. In a
collaboration with the National Park Service, undergraduates and early career
researchers will track the migrations of five iconic species, monitor their
foraging behaviors, and develop new types of molecular biomarkers that will
enable biologists to measure animal nutrition in the wild. This CAREER project
integrates real-world and classroom-based learning objectives that will advance
the training of a diverse workforce capable of implementing the types of rapid
diagnostic tests that are essential in modern environmental science, healthcare,
and epidemiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will evaluate competing
hypotheses about how seasonal changes in plant diversity and availability alter
the diets of five co-occurring herbivore species: bison, elk, mule deer, bighorn
sheep, and pronghorn antelope. A combination of field observations and
experiments, fecal DNA metabarcoding, and an innovative adaptation of CRISPR
technology for the analysis of animal nutrition will reveal: (i) how variation
in animal diets feeds back to influence the structure and composition of
vegetation and (ii) how different herbivore species stimulate the production of
their own preferred food plants compared to the food plants preferred by other
herbivores. Results will be used to parameterize a generalizable nutritional
model in order to identify competition and facilitation operating in the food
web. By developing, testing, and employing novel laboratory methods in
combination with a series of time-tested experimental strategies in field
ecology, the team aims to overcome the long-standing challenge of precisely
characterizing trophic interactions in many research and training
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.