* 2046280
* CAREER: Physics at the Interplay between the Higgs Boson and the Top Quark
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Haichen Wang, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 02/28/2026
* USD 485,733.00

The start-up of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) a decade ago ushered in a new
era of research in hitherto inaccessible energy regimes. The discovery of the
Higgs boson is the first major highlight of the LHC program, which established
that the predicted particle content and interactions of the Standard Model (SM)
are complete. Despite this success, the SM is widely believed to be an
incomplete theory. Ongoing studies must determine whether or not this new Higgs
boson is that of the SM, and new experimental data are essential to discover if
and how Nature has chosen to extend the SM. These studies include new
measurements and searches for new physics, primarily using data recorded at the
highest currently available center-of-mass energy. The physics analysis
activities form a comprehensive program to extend characterization of Higgs
boson properties. This award will push the limits of this search for physics
beyond the SM by employing new Machine Learning techniques. The innovation being
developed by this award: using Graph Neural Networks (GNN) to analyze the
massive amount of data being produced by the ATLAS experiment at the LHC, will
push the discovery potential in the Higgs boson study. The award will also
expand an education and outreach effort using data from the LHC and GNN
techniques into local area high schools and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will search for Beyond the SM (BSM) physics in
the Higgs boson channels involving top-quark-associated production (ttH and tH).
It will also further study Higgs decay into two-photon and four-quark channels.
These are rare processes and will require the new techniques being developed by
this award. These channels are expected to put strong constraints on BSM
physics. The novel use of GNN is in a nascent state but involves re-classifying
LHC data into a graph structure. This graph structure can then be fed into a
neural network which can in effect select out the very rare events that are of
interest, revealing BSM. This award will also further develop the upgrade to the
ATLAS detector currently in preparation for the High Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC).
The work will focus on the Strip Tracker upgrade and the Data Acquisition
system, which requires a new software framework in order to meet the stringent
performance requirements of the HL-LHC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.