* 2046751
* CAREER: Machine Learned Coarse-grained Modeling for Mechanics of Thermoplastic Elastomers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Ying Li, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2023
* USD 592,928.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support fundamental
research to understand complex mechanical behaviors of thermoplastic elastomers
(TPEs). Biodegradable TPEs are promising recyclable and sustainable polymers
with minimal environmental impact. They have the potential to be used as
protective coatings for cell phones, artificial muscles for soft robotics, and
polymer electrolytes for batteries. However, few of these applications have been
effectively realized due to the limited understanding of TPEs' synthesis-
structure-property relation. This research project aims to understand and
quantify the link between synthesis, microstructure, and mechanical property of
TPEs, with the help of multi-scale computational modeling, data science (machine
learning), and experimental validation. With tailored mechanical properties,
these biodegradable and environmentally friendly polymers can be widely used to
enable an array of novel structural and device applications, alleviating the
plastic pollution crisis. The project includes an education and outreach plan to
train diverse groups of next-generation engineers through a variety of avenues:
production of educational movies for the general public and K-12 students,
engineering education for K-12 students through Pre-Engineering and Explore
Engineering Programs, and providing research experience for undergraduate and
graduate students, especially the underrepresented groups, through internships
at industries and national labs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research objective of
this project is to formulate a machine-learned coarse-grained model for TPEs
with thermodynamic consistency, temperature transferability, and
representability. TPEs are segmented copolymers composed of hard segments and
soft segments, forming a two-phase microstructure. Thus, the machine-learned
coarse-grained model can be used to understand microphase separation and its
contribution to mechanical behaviors of TPEs, leading to the well-defined
synthesis-structure-property relation. Specifically, this project aims to: 1)
establish the machine-learned coarse-grained model for TPEs through deep neural
networks and an active learning scheme; 2) integrate coarse-grained molecular
simulations and constitutive modeling to achieve a meaningful structure-property
relation of TPEs; 3) explore a novel class of sequence-defined TPEs with
tailored microstructures and mechanical properties. The fundamental
understanding of the synthesis-structure-property relationship will highlight a
clear design path for experimentalists to utilize biodegradable TPEs for a broad
range of applications, e.g., sound and vibration damping materials, shape-memory
materials, and adaptive solar control materials. This computational framework
can be readily adapted and generalized to many other polymeric materials for
understanding their structure-property relations, such as fatigue-resistant
hydrogels and protein-mimetic polymers, with phase-separated
microstructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.