* 2046176
* CAREER: Multispectral broadband photodetectors based on multi-material films with intercalated graphene monolayers as charge collectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Oscar Vazquez-Mena, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 06/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

The information encoded in light is critical for us to detect and respond to
events happening in our surroundings. The capability of our eyes to distinguish
different wavelengths in the visible range, what we see as different colors,
enables us to understand our environment. There is also plenty of information
encoded in light in the infrared and in the ultraviolet ranges that cannot be
detected by our eyes. For example, many dangerous gases, biomolecules, and air
and water contaminants have a light signature in the infrared that cannot be
detected by the human eye. The goal of this NSF CAREER project is to create a
new generation of compact multispectral photodetectors that can be integrated
into portable and personal devices enabling light analysis in the infrared and
ultraviolet. This would allow people to use the vast IR and UV information from
our environment to detect and respond to phenomena surrounding us. Integrating
multispectral photodetectors in mobile phones would enable applications such as
checking for food quality or contamination, monitoring air and water quality,
and facility disease detection in the skin or bodily fluids. On the educational
aspect, this project aims to develop hands-on educational training modules on
fabrication of nanoscale devices, facilitating active student learning in
nanotechnology training and boosting the training of the next generation of
nanoengineers. Developing more hands-on experimental modules with nanomaterials
will facilitate active student learning and provide them with
experimental/technical skills sought by industry that cannot be achieved in
classrooms. Hands-on modules on nanomaterials without sophisticated equipment
will also allow the development of more engaging and active outreach activities
for precollege students, especially for underrepresented students at schools
that may have limited resources and laboratory equipment.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Multispectral photodetection from the ultraviolet (UV) to the mid-
wave infrared (MWIR) is important for many applications like food quality
inspection, health monitoring, autonomous vehicles navigation and remote
sensing. However, current technologies require expensive epitaxial materials for
photodetection, especially in the MWIR, and complex optical components for
spectral analysis that prevent the large-scale deployment of multispectral
photodetectors for personal devices This project aims to create a new generation
of thin-film-based multispectral photodetectors with low-cost materials that can
be integrated into personal devices for multispectral detection and imaging
through the UV-Vis-MWIR spectrum. The principle of operation is that by using
intercalated graphene monolayers at different depths and integrating materials
with different bandgaps, it is possible to achieve broadband photodetection with
multispectral analysis capability. This project aims to use CVD graphene
monolayers as intercalated photocarrier collectors at different depths in light-
absorbing materials for simultaneous detection of multiple spectral bands. This
project also aims to integrate multiple materials with various bandgaps to cover
a large spectral range. The use of intercalated graphene will allow efficient
charge extraction from low-cost processing materials. The project will create a
new generation of compact multispectral photodetector that can be integrated on
a chip without complex optical components. This technology could benefit fields
such as biosensing, biomedical imaging and remote sensing, as well as enable the
integration of multispectral detectors reaching the UV and IR spectrum into
mobile phones or portable devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.