* 2046332
* CAREER: Multiscale Mechanics of Carbon Nanotube-Polymer Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Hessam Yazdani, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 562,555.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support research on
understanding the fracture mechanisms and predicting the mechanical properties
of carbon nanotube-filled polymer composites. These materials have the potential
to play a growing role in the prosperity, security, and global competitiveness
of the United States and propelling the economic performance of major industrial
sectors such as aerospace, manufacturing, biomedical, and civil infrastructure.
Polymer composites are tunable materials whereby changes to their constituents,
processing conditions, and microstructure one can achieve products with distinct
functions. Understanding the processing-structure-property relations and failure
mechanisms of these materials, however, is complicated because they feature a
wide range of compositions, phenomena, and interactions across several scales of
time, length, complexity, and uncertainty. This research aims to unravel these
relations and mechanisms and in turn supplant the traditional trial-and-error
approach to the design of polymer composites by an efficient, machine learning-
assisted, experiment-informed, multiscale computational approach that will
accelerate the discovery of novel polymer composites with improved
manufacturability, reliability, and performance, ultimately benefiting the
economy and society. The educational and outreach components of this project
will contribute to enhancing diversity in STEM multidisciplinary education and
include developing courses in advanced materials and forming sustainable
collaborations between the PI’s research group and industry partners and
professional organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the scientific and
technological challenges remaining in the field of carbon nanotube-filled
polymer composites, one of the least-understood areas is the deformation and
failure of these materials and a poor understanding of load transfer in them at
the filler-matrix interface. This project will further elucidate the phenomena
and mechanisms that underlie the mechanical response of these materials at the
nano- and microscales and quantify their processing-structure-property
relationships by developing a probabilistic framework comprising laboratory
tests, microscopic characterizations, image processing, multiscale modeling and
simulations, and machine learning. The uncertainties involved will be
quantified, and a probabilistic multiscale modeling and simulation hierarchy
will be developed to study high-fidelity models of polymer composites. Machine
learning will be used to perform sensitivity analyses and develop probabilistic
predictive models for the properties of polymer composites. The study outcome
will offer a new route to design heterogeneous, high-performance, and
multifunctional composite materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.