* 2046407
* CAREER:  Consecutive Assembly-and-Mineralization Processed Calcium-Silicate-Hydrate Nacre with High Specific Flexural Strength and Fracture Toughness
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Weina Meng, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program will address the
challenge to transform calcium-silicate-hydrate (CSH) - the ingredient of cement
that is primarily responsible for its strength - and achieve unprecedented
mechanical properties. CSH has high strength under compression, but is
significantly weaker under bending and has low fracture toughness. The irregular
and random nature of the nanostructure of CSH is responsible for its brittle
nature. This research will innovate new CSH nanostructures that are inspired by
the unique architecture of nacre, which is ultra-lightweight and recognized as
one of the strongest biomaterials. The growth of natural nacre will be mimicked
to synthesize CSH with polymers and organics to form highly ordered nacre-like
architectures. This research will create novel cement-based materials with crack
resistance as high as that of natural nacre, which will tremendously enhance the
resilience, sustainability, and durability of civil engineering structures (such
as prefabricated walls and panels of buildings, linings of tunnels or pipelines,
and permanent formwork of bridges), energy infrastructure (such as solar panels,
offshore wind farms), aerospace structures and others. The education and
outreach activities of this project will engage and create opportunities for
K-12 students and underrepresented minorities in STEM disciplines to learn about
biomimetic materials and structures in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this research is to demonstrate the hypothesis that CSH nacre
architecture can be synthesized to achieve high specific flexural strength and
fracture toughness through a consecutive assembly-and-mineralization process
mimicking the growth of natural nacre. The main objectives of this research are
to: (i) develop methods to synthesize and control growth of CSH mesocrystals;
(ii) develop a consecutive assembly-mineralization process for scalable
fabrication of CSH nacre; (iii) characterize mechanical properties of the
synthetic CSH nacre; and (iv) establish links for the fabrication process,
microstructure, and mechanical properties to optimize the CSH nacre. To this
end, a scaffold will first be fabricated by freeze casting and followed by
nucleation and growth of CSH mesocrystals on the scaffold through controlled
mineralization; then, laminated CSH nacre will be synthesized through organic
phase infiltration and hot-pressing. The CSH nacre will be tested and optimized
by experiments, modeling, and machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.