* 2046256
* CAREER: Using a Century Scale Experiment to Decode the Molecular Basis of Crop Competitiveness
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Daniel Koenig, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 02/28/2026
* USD 1,191,352.00

The food supply is dependent on the ability of plant species to survive in a
wide variety of environments. Most crops emerged from limited geographical
ranges but were rapidly disseminated into highly variable conditions across the
globe. Though selection of crop varieties best adapted to specific locales is
critical for maximizing agricultural yields, our understanding of the genetic
basis of crop adaptation remains in its infancy. This is partly because the
process of plant adaptation occurs over the course of decades making it
difficult for plant geneticists to study. To directly observe the process of
adaptation, this project will use the barley composite crosses (CCs) common
garden experiments, a novel series of agricultural genetics experiments begun
nearly a century ago in barley. In these experiments, genetically diverse sets
of barley varieties were competed in multiple locations over the course of
decades. Using modern genomics techniques, this project will uncover and link
the genes that underlie competitive ability revealed in these experiments to
changes in important agricultural traits such as flowering time, plant size, and
yield. Through this project, hundreds of undergraduate students will participate
in the discovery of genetic shifts in the population as part of a reenvisioned
introductory biology curriculum that involves hands-on experiments using
molecular biology techniques. Plant materials, phenotypic observations, and
billions of DNA sequences produced by this project will be made rapidly
available for use by researchers and small grains breeders world-
wide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The longevity of the composite crosses makes them an
unparalleled genetic resource to study the molecular basis of crop adaptation.
The primary goals of this project are to identify genes that underlie crop
fitness in variable environments, to explore the genetic process of adaptation
over time, and to understand how molecular changes translate into phenotypic
differences. To achieve these goals, structural and single nucleotide variants
that segregated at the beginning of the experiments will be identified by
resequencing the genomes of the forty parental barley cultivars using long read
sequencing technologies. The evolution of these variants will be monitored as
the composite cross populations adapt to two distinct environments, one located
in Bozeman (MT), the other in Davis (CA). Using this comparative approach will
allow for the characterization of the rate and mode of genetic change throughout
the genome and will result in the identification of suites of genes that drive
increases in barley fitness. Finally, genotypes will be linked to phenotypes by
creating and using a powerful new barley multiparent mapping population from the
composite cross material to identify the genomic basis of numerous adaptive
traits, to link changes in gene expression to changes in phenotype, and to
reveal how the genetic architecture of trait variation shapes adaptive
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.