* 2046460
* CAREER: Integrating Seascapes and Energy Flow: learning and teaching about energy, biodiversity, and ecosystem function on the frontlines of climate change.
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* James Nelson, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 04/30/2026
* USD 342,985.00

Coastal marshes provide a suite of vital functions that support natural and
human communities. Humans frequently take for granted and exploit these
ecosystem services without fully understanding the ecological feedbacks,
linkages, and interdependencies of these processes to the wider ecosystem. As
demands on coastal ecosystem services have risen, marshes have experienced
substantial loss due to direct and indirect impacts from human activity. The
rapidly changing coastal ecosystems of Louisiana provide a natural experiment
for understanding how coastal change alters ecosystem function. This project is
developing new metrics and tools to assess food web variability and test
hypotheses on biodiversity and ecosystem function in coastal Louisiana. The
research is determining how changing habitat configuration alters the
distribution of energy across the seascape in a multitrophic system. This work
is engaging students from the University of Louisiana Lafayette and Dillard
University in placed-based learning by immersing them in the research and local
restoration efforts to address land loss and preserve critical ecosystem
services. Students are developing a deeper understanding of the complex issues
facing coastal regions through formal course work, directed field work, and
outreach. Students are interacting with stakeholders and managers who are
currently battling coastal change. Their directed research projects are
documenting changes in coastal habitat and coupling this knowledge with the
consequences to ecosystems and the people who depend on them. By participating
in the project students are emerging with knowledge and training that is making
them into informed citizens and capable stewards of the future of our coastal
ecosystems, while also preparing them for careers in STEM. The project is
supporting two graduate students and a post-doc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
transformation and movement of energy through a food web are key links between
biodiversity and ecosystem function. A major hurdle to testing biodiversity
ecosystem function theory is a limited ability to assess food web variability in
space and time. This research is quantifying changing seascape structure,
species diversity, and food web structure to better understand the relationship
between biodiversity and energy flow through ecosystems. The project uses
cutting edge tools and metrics to test hypotheses on how the distribution,
abundance, and diversity of key species are altered by ecosystem change and how
this affects function. The hypotheses driving the research are: 1) habitat is a
more important indirect driver of trophic structure than a direct change to
primary trophic pathways; and 2) horizontal and vertical diversity increases
with habitat resource index. Stable isotope analysis is characterizing energy
flow through the food web. Changes in horizontal and vertical diversity in a
multitrophic system are being quantified using aerial surveys and field
sampling. To assess the spatial and temporal change in food web resources, the
project is combining results from stable isotope analysis and drone-based remote
sensing technology to generate consumer specific energetic seascape maps
(E-scapes) and trophic niche metrics. In combination these new metrics are
providing insight into speciesâ€™ responses to changing food web function across
the seascape and through time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by Biological Oceanography and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.