* 2046361
* CAREER: Mining and Exploiting Web Vulnerabilities of Prototype-based Programming Languages via Object Property Graph
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Yinzhi Cao, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2026
* USD 330,234.00

Prototype-based languages, such as JavaScript or ECMAScript in general, are a
special type of object-oriented programming languages that rely on a
prototypical object to get the initial properties of a new object. Such
programming languages are widely used in the World Wide Web (WWW), such as Web
browser extensions, server-side Node.js applications, and client-side scripting.
While they are popular and successful to improve the Web with abundant new
functionalities, at the same time, prototype-based languages also introduce new
types of object-related vulnerabilities. Examples of such object-related
vulnerabilities on the Web are like prototype pollution that pollutes an object
property via the prototypical chain, and internal property tampering that
tampers an internal property of Web application objects. State-of-the-art works
adopt graph-based structures, such as Control-flow Graph, Data-flow Graph and
Code Property Graph, to represent target computer programs and efficiently mine
vulnerabilities in languages like C/C++ and PHP. However, the detection of
vulnerabilities in prototype-based languages, particularly the aforementioned
object-related ones, is still challenging and remains
unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a flow-, context-, branch- and
path-sensitive abstract interpretation of prototype-based language will be
designed, implemented and evaluated to efficiently detect and exploit
vulnerabilities of prototype-based languages, particularly JavaScript. The
abstract interpretation will generate a special graph structure, called Object
Property Graph, to represent JavaScript objects, scopes, and variables as nodes
and their relations as edges. The advantage of Object Property Graph is that it
can efficiently find the definition and use of certain objects via Abstract
Syntax Tree and all the properties of a given object. Furthermore, the proposed
Object Property Graph will be used to not only detect and exploit JavaScript
vulnerabilities but also guide the generation of additional JavaScript code with
object-related properties to trigger low-level vulnerabilities in JavaScript
engine. The investigator will involve undergraduates, women, K-12 students and
minorities in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.