* 2046977
* CAREER: Engineering approaches to control collective cell migration using electrotaxis
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Daniel Cohen, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 01/31/2026
* USD 555,000.00

The ability to direct the migration of cells in living tissues could accelerate
wound healing or slow the spread of cells in diseases like cancer. Cell movement
in the body has been shown to be influenced by local electrochemical fields.
This behavior, called electrotaxis, can be directed by the external application
of electric fields. Deepening our knowledge of electrotaxis will enable the
development of tools to direct cell migration. This project also includes
several education initiatives, including a yearly, week-long ‘Science
Storytelling’ training workshop to help young scientists learn how to share the
stories behind their research with the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project combines mechanistic understanding with engineering control. It merges
primary skin tissue and new electro-bioreactor technology to establish a
connection between native collective cell behaviors and our ability to control
them. This should help to better apply electrotaxis as a tool for biotechnology.
Aim 1 calls for a comprehensive characterization of how biophysical aspects of a
tissue (shape, size, cell-cell adhesion) and electric field strength act as a
‘gas pedal’ affecting our ability to accelerate migration and increase forward
tissue motion. Aim 2 defines how electrotaxis physically reprograms key
migratory machinery needed for cell migration, with emphasis on determining
necessary end-effectors and possible pharmacological ways to target them to
improve electrotaxis. Aim 3 characterizes how native cell-cell interactions
actually compete with electrotactic control and develops new approaches to
mitigate this problem. Together, these aims will deliver fundamental ‘design
rules’ for electrotaxis and use these rules to demonstrate how next-generation
bioelectric interfaces will enable a fundamentally new way to engineer living
tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.