* 2046512
* CAREER: Geospatial life cycle climate change impacts of solar and ocean renewable energy systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Marie-Odile Fortier, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2023
* USD 400,910.00

Life cycle assessment (LCA) practices are used to determine the climate change
impacts of energy systems. However, these assessments often miss key
geographically specific factors, such as direct land use change (DLUC) impacts,
albedo change as a non-greenhouse gas climate forcer, and geospatial data
relevant to potential electricity generation. The overarching goal of this
project is to systematically integrate these geospatial components in LCA of
conventional and renewable energy systems to improve the accuracy of their
“carbon footprints” at higher spatial resolutions, and to disseminate this
methodology and its results to inform sustainable location-specific design,
siting, and implementation decisions for the energy
transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives are to: (1) first
update the baseline comparison to fossil fuels by including DLUC and albedo
change impacts of their expansion in the US; (2) develop geospatial LCA models
for selected solar and ocean renewable energy technologies and determine their
life cycle climate change impacts on potentially available land and water in the
US; and (3) adapt the geospatial LCA models to future conditions under climate
change. Parametric LCA models of these energy system scenarios will be developed
in open-source Python code, informed by publicly available GIS datasets, the
physics of these technologies, and algorithms developed for flexibility to
variable environmental conditions. In order for the methodology to be
disseminated and used by energy stakeholders and future LCA practitioners, the
education objectives are to: (1) design and share a course in geospatial LCA
modeling; (2) develop and promote a workshop and website on these methods and
their results for industry and policy stakeholders; and (3) provide a research
group structure designed to recruit, train, and retain students from
underrepresented backgrounds in sustainability engineering fields. This project
will develop methodology for determining life cycle climate change impacts of
energy technologies that is more precise than previously used methods in LCA.
The results will be statistically compared against non-geographically-specific
LCA results of the same modeled technologies and against the impacts of fossil
fuels to determine the significance of incorporating geospatial components in
energy system LCAs. The developed geospatial LCA methods can also be utilized in
LCA of other systems beyond energy technologies, such as mining, and can be used
for energy system planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.