* 2046303
* CAREER: Structure, function, and evolution of lipid domains in living cell membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Itay Budin, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2026
* USD 531,532.00

In this project, the PI will develop new tools for interrogating lipid function
and apply them to understanding how organization emerges in biological systems.
Cells and their internal organelles are compartmentalized by thin sheets of
lipid molecules called membranes, which serve as the environment for a range of
molecular processes. The chemical composition of these membranes controls their
properties, is mediated by diet, and can be genetically altered. Understanding
how lipid composition impacts cellular processes is thus of broad importance.
The project’s research will test how specific lipid-lipid interactions drive the
formation of membrane domains and cellular transport networks. The PI will
integrate research systems into an outreach program to improve high school
education in quantitative STEM fields such as physics, which is currently
lagging in many segments of the American population. For this, learning modules
will be developed that harness processes occurring in cell membranes to teach
physics concepts through biological applications. The ability of this approach
to promote physics and quantitative biology will be tested in San Diego-area
schools that primarily serves an underrepresented minority (URM) student
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to translate models
of membrane organization from synthetic models to real cell membranes, where
their biological roles can be evaluated. The project’s research aims harness two
eukaryotic organelles that display micron-scale lateral phase separation: the
yeast vacuole, which patterns into ordered membrane domains that act as
catabolic docking sites upon diet restriction, and the mammalian Golgi, in which
similar domains could act as sites of secretory cargo sorting. For each
compartment, methods for the quantitative manipulation of domain-forming lipid
stoichiometry will be developed using metabolic engineering strategies. This
approach will allow characterization of membrane phase properties in living
cells and elucidation of how they modulate function. Findings will then be
harnessed to 1) explore the function of lipid head-group modifications in domain
formation and 2) reconstruct pathways for the diversification of sterol
structure during eukaryotic evolution. In parallel, an integrative educational
component will be developed that uses cell membranes as an instructional system
to integrate concepts in the quantitative sciences with biological applications
for high schoolers. The new Lesson Study model-based education program for San
Diego-area high school teachers will increase training in the quantitative
sciences by URM students and provide continuing in-person mentorship by project
personnel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.