* 2046570
* CAREER: Towards Predictive Modeling of Emergent Correlations and Dynamics in Strongly Interacting Quantum Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Hitesh Changlani, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2026
* USD 318,956.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports an
integrated research, education, and outreach program in theoretical and
computational condensed-matter physics. The main aim of the project is to
advance our understanding of quantum matter composed of electrons that interact
strongly with one another. These systems are at the heart of many fundamental
physical phenomena, ranging from magnetism to superconductivity (flow of
electrons with no resistance). The problem at hand can be explained with an
analogy from everyday life: one might learn to play individual musical notes yet
not know how to put them together to produce a melody. Similarly, we now know
the quantum-mechanical laws that govern individual electrons and nuclei but find
it difficult to predict the emergent behavior of many such interacting
components. Just as a collection of atoms organizes itself into a solid, liquid,
or gas depending on external conditions, electronic matter can exist in
"valence-bond solid," "quantum spin liquid," or "Fermi gas" phases, among other
possibilities. Reliably predicting the behavior of electronic systems will aid
future technologies and searches for quantum materials with desirable
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his team will investigate
geometrically "frustrated" magnetic materials found in nature and laboratories
worldwide. Frustration arises when multiple spatial arrangements of electron
"spin" orientations each have similar collective energy, so there is no clear
winner. This feature results in unusual quantum dynamics that have been observed
in modern-day experiments but for which theoretical explanations are limited.
Thus, a major focus of this proposal is to develop efficient computer algorithms
to predict how such quantum materials behave under different conditions (change
in temperature and application of a magnetic field) and how they respond to
external probes (involving light or neutrons). The PI and his team will also
employ existing state-of-the-art numerical methods to address outstanding
fundamental questions associated with this class of magnetic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's education and outreach programs are
synergistically coupled to his research. The focus is on communicating the
workings of computational methods for quantum systems to graduate students and
the wider research community. With input from expert authors, the PI and his
team will write an e-book that will train the next generation to embrace a
rapidly evolving lexicon of quantum-mechanical concepts. Through multiple
outreach activities at his home institution, including open houses and public
seminars, the PI will convey the importance of quantum physics in our everyday
lives. To inspire more students to pursue higher education and careers in
science, the PI will conduct tutoring and mentoring activities at a local K-12
school that enrolls a large number of students from underrepresented minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports an integrated research,
education, and outreach program in theoretical and computational condensed-
matter physics. The main aim of the project is to advance our understanding of
strongly correlated quantum systems, those not approximated by a non-interacting
model of electrons. Reliably predicting their behavior from computer simulations
remains a major challenge in physics, chemistry, and materials science.
Additionally, the quantum mechanics of correlated systems in the time domain,
central to both equilibrium and non-equilibrium phenomena, is not as well-
characterized and understood as its time-independent counterpart. Many
experiments collect a wealth of dynamical information, but one needs theoretical
inputs to interpret them. For example, evidence for fractionalized spinons in
one dimension is indirectly inferred from comparison of neutron scattering data
and theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his team will investigate
geometrically frustrated magnets, which harbor valence-bond-solid, quantum-spin-
liquid, and spin-nematic phases. Efforts in this area will further the PI's goal
of predicting properties such as transition temperatures, magnetization
profiles, and dynamical responses, given minimal knowledge of the quantum
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his team will perform research in the
following directions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. They will numerically simulate and
analyze spin dynamics at zero and finite temperature for spin-orbit-coupled,
spin-ice, and spin-1 magnets on kagome and pyrochlore lattices in an applied
magnetic field. Comparisons to measurements from dynamical probes such as
inelastic neutron scattering and terahertz spectroscopy experiments will be
carried out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. They will explore a toy lattice model of
frustration that harbors "three-colored" exact ground states. The model offers a
way to understand non-equilibrium dynamical phenomena (such as glassiness) and
has potential pedagogical value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. They will develop the
"density-matrix-downfolding" technique, a form of Hilbert-space operator
renormalization, to generate effective Hamiltonians. This method will help
connect real materials to strongly-correlated lattice
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's education program will focus on
communicating the workings of computational methods for quantum systems to
graduate students and the wider research community. With input from expert
authors, the PI and his team will write an e-book focused on many-body-
wavefunction and density-matrix based approaches. Through multiple outreach
activities at his home institution, including open houses and public seminars,
the PI will convey the importance of quantum physics in our everyday lives. To
inspire more students to pursue higher education and careers in science, the PI
will conduct tutoring and mentoring activities at a local K-12 school that
enrolls a large number of students from underrepresented minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.