* 2046527
* CAREER: Rational design of non-heme iron halogenases
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Ambika Bhagi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2026
* USD 742,100.00

Fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine are highly reactive elements called
halogens. Attaching halogens to other molecules (halogenation) is an important
chemical reaction. However, attaching halogens to a specific atom chemically is
difficult, imprecise, and often exhibits low yields. With the support from the
Cellular and Biochemistry Engineering (CBE) Program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET) and the Chemistry of
Life Processes (CLP) Program in the Division of Chemistry (CHE), this project
represents an attempt to overcome these problems using enzymes designed to add
halogens to molecules. An enzyme that naturally adds chlorine and bromine to
molecules with high specificity will be redesigned to add fluorine as well. The
scientific communication skills of students and post docs engaged in the project
will be strengthened through coaching and instruction. The participation of
underrepresented minority students will be designed to stimulate their
scientific curiosity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SyrB2 is a non-heme iron halogenase
that catalyzes chemo- and regio-selective chlorination/bromination of amino acid
threonine using environmentally-friendly oxygen, alpha-ketoglutarate, and
chloride/bromide as starting materials. Its reaction scope and substrate
promiscuity will be broadened by rationally modulating the enzymeâ€™s primary and
secondary coordination sphere as well as protein-protein interactions. Objective
1 focuses on developing ligand activators that expand the reaction scope to
include fluorination. Objective 2 designs hydrogen-bond interactions to a
halohydroxoferric intermediate that expands its substrate promiscuity to other
amino acids. Objective 3 engineers decoy peptides that eliminate the dependency
of SyrB2 on its protein partner for delivering the substrate and triggering
catalysis. The project will advance structural, functional, and mechanistic
knowledge of non-heme iron enzymes and establish the framework for the rational
and computational design of iron-dependent enzymes for sustainable synthetic
chemical processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.