* 2046812
* CAREER: Reaction Kinetics Analysis of the Lebedev Process
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Thomas Schwartz, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2026
* USD 513,995.00

The project explores the potential of using biorenewable ethanol as an
alternative to conventional petroleum resources for production of 1,3-Butadiene
(BD) - an important chemical precursor used to produce synthetic rubbers
utilized in car tires, paper coatings, textile backings, and adhesives. Recent
shifts in petroleum resources have placed pressure on the BD market, opening the
door to on-purpose production of BD. A particularly promising technology is the
Lebedev process which manufactures BD from ethanol. However, the process relies
on a complex, multicomponent catalyst and suffers from low product yields. The
project will develop a molecular-level picture of the reaction network used to
produce BD from ethanol, which in turn is important for developing new catalysts
that can achieve high BD yields. Thus, the project has potential to ensure
security and U.S. competitiveness in BD production while supporting the clean-
energy transition to biorenewable feedstocks. Additionally, the investigator
will develop new course materials to teach undergraduate students about
catalytic reactor design and biobased chemicals production. The project team
will also develop a module to educate high school students and the public about
the production of renewable chemicals from woody
biomass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following on the early work of Union Carbide, many
groups have used MgO-SiO2 as a low-cost platform from which to develop next-
generation catalysts for the Lebedev process. However, to date a rigorous
reaction kinetics analysis of BD production by MgO-SiO2 has not been performed.
Based on recently published results from the investigatorâ€™s team, coupled with
observations in the literature, the rate of BD formation over pure MgO-SiO2
catalysts is hypothesized to be controlled by ethanol dehydrogenation, while
selectivity to BD in the presence of transition metal promoters is hypothesized
to result from C-C bond formation catalyzed by acid-base site pairs. The
literature is conflicted about the C-C coupling mechanism and the nature of the
requisite active sites, which the study will clarify in three main thrusts.
First, steady-state reaction kinetics measurements using model MgO-SiO2
catalysts containing specific types of acid-base site pairs will be used to
identify rate-controlling steps and to clarify which sites are responsible for
the kinetically significant reactions in BD production. Next, these catalysts
will be spectroscopically characterized by FTIR, XPS, LEIS, and SSNMR to
identify site requirements and abundant surface intermediates. Finally, a
microkinetic model will be used to unify the macroscopic kinetics observations
with mechanistic insight provided by kinetic isotope effect and isotope tracer
studies and DFT calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.