* 2046359
* CAREER: A Quantitative Framework for Analyzing and Mitigating Microarchitectural Side Channels
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Mengjia Yan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 01/31/2026
* USD 312,951.00

Microarchitectural side-channel attacks that breach processor security and
broadly affect computer systems have become one of the major security threats.
Those attacks exploit the fact that software, when executing on modern
processors, leaves traces on microarchitecture structures, and the traces can
reveal private user information. Current defenses against microarchitectural
side-channel attacks aim to reduce information leakage but unavoidably incur
performance overhead, because they lose the capability of fully exploiting
performance optimizations in computing systems. This project will develop a
toolset to enable productive trade-offs between security and performance in
mitigating microarchitectural side-channel attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project tackles fundamental research problems in designing, evaluating, and
using channel obfuscation techniques. The technical approach is to frame
microarchitectural side channels, a computer architecture security problem, as a
communication problem, and constructs quantitative channel models for
microarchitectural structures. The first project thrust constructs the
quantitative channel models, characterizing and quantifying the impacts of
complex hardware events. The second thrust uses the channel models to measure
the information leakage of the applications running on obfuscated architectures.
The third thrust explores co-design channel obfuscation techniques with existing
mitigation and detection solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop a toolset to mitigate microarchitectural side-channel attacks
efficiently. The toolset can benefit a wide range of people who design, manage,
and use computing systems, including computer architects, system administrators,
and software developers. In addition, this project will initiate an effort on
course offerings in the area of hardware security at Massachusetts of
Technology. This project will also offer research opportunities to undergraduate
students and under-represented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will store all publications, code, and data-sets on public-facing websites,
hosted at Massachusetts of Technology for at least 3 years after the end of the
project. This information will be made available via commercial websites. Links
to these websites will be mirrored at
http://people.csail.mit.edu/mengjia/projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.