* 2046445
* CAREER:CAS:Confined Nano-Environments for the Stabilization of Molecular Electrocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2026
* Noemie Elgrishi, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2026
* USD 685,000.00

In this CAREER project, co-funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Dr. Noemie Elgrishi of the Department
of Chemistry at Louisiana State University is uncovering the rules governing
changes in electron transfer after encapsulation of redox active molecules in
confined spaces. The long-term goal of this project is to develop a strategy to
control the stability, selectivity, and activity of fuel-forming molecular
electrocatalysts through encapsulation in nano-containers. This project has
applications in energy storage as well as any other electrocatalytic process
relying on molecular catalysts. The project lies at the interface of inorganic
and analytical chemistry. It is well suited to train undergraduate and graduate
students in a wide range of synthesis and characterization techniques, including
electrochemistry which is a key challenge. At their core, energy technologies
rely on electricity production and storage, for which electrochemical knowledge
is fundamental. The educational plan will further contribute to this goal
through improving undergraduate electrochemical education through modules and
in-class demonstrations in freshman chemistry classes as well as through the
implementation of lab “field trips” in a dedicated an upper-level
electroanalytical chemistry class. Through the outreach plan, Dr. Elgrishi will
continue engaging with the community and promote interest in STEM careers to key
demographics by developing simple hands-on electrochemistry demonstrations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies are aimed at increasing our fundamental
understanding of electron transfer in confined spaces; this is critical
knowledge to further the development of electrocatalysis. The systems chosen are
composed of molecular metallo-cages within which electro-active complexes and
catalysts are encapsulated. Electron transfer will be probed using
electroanalytical and spectroscopic techniques, both in electron tunneling and
hopping conditions. The parameters impacting the fate of the encapsulated
complexes after electron transfer will also be investigated. The long-term goal
of this project is to develop a strategy to control the stability, selectivity,
and activity of fuel-forming molecular electrocatalysts through encapsulation in
nano-containers. Collectively, these investigations will provide an improved
understanding of fuel-forming catalysts upon immobilization. Understanding the
effect of the fundamental processes of site isolation, controlled encapsulation,
and pore size will help bridge the gap between homogeneous and heterogeneous
molecular catalysis. This project will pave the way for further studies on
rational tailoring of the second coordination spheres of electrocatalysts. These
studies have the potential to impact the many areas of chemistry in which
molecular electrocatalysts play a key role, including for energy storage
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.