* 2046230
* CAREER: Robust, Interpretable, and Fair Allocation of Scarce Resources in Socially Sensitive Settings
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Phebe Vayanos, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 04/30/2026
* USD 527,682.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will contribute to
the advancement of national prosperity and economic welfare by improving
critical public sector systems that allocate scarce resources to satisfy basic
needs. These systems operate in complex, uncertain, time-dependent environments,
and as public sector services, they must be transparent, satisfy potentially
conflicting stakeholder objectives, and be constructed to perform as intended in
a variety of environments when deployed. To address these problems, this project
constructs a computationally efficient framework to design policies that are
robust to uncertainty, interpretable, and fair. The systems will learn and
correctly balance stakeholder value judgements and account for underlying
biases, incentives, and disparities. The central use case that will guide the
research will focus on allocating scarce housing resources to those experiencing
homelessness. The project will be facilitated by a collaboration with the Los
Angeles Homeless Services Authority and with homelessness experts. The plan to
integrate research and education includes the design of a new course on
“Analytics for Social Impact” and of an online experimental platform to educate
students and the general public about resource allocation in socially sensitive
settings. Outreach activities will be focused on the promotion of diversity,
equity, and inclusion in STEM fields and include a long-term partnership with
the STEM Academy of Hollywood and a new collaboration with the Code.org non-
profit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance data-driven robust
optimization models that cope well with information incompleteness and non-
stationarity, and derive tractable models that offer probabilistic performance
guarantees. This project will provide a methodology for learning and aggregating
incomplete and conflicting stakeholder preferences and offer new fair machine
learning (ML) algorithms. The research will develop a novel robust queuing
theory framework that leverages learned preferences, outcome predictions, and
observational data to design policies guaranteed to work as planned when
deployed in the open world. Finally, the project will provide tools that help
committees evaluate policies, anticipate their consequences, and understand the
trade-offs between fairness, efficiency, and interpretability. The framework
contributes to the robust optimization literature in several regards. It
provides a modeling and solution scheme for multi-stage robust optimization
problems with decision-dependent information discovery, exponentially many
contingencies, and non-linear objective. It is the first study on models and
methods for robust and fair ML. Finally, it provides a method for performing
counterfactual policy evaluation and optimization from noisy observational data
in the robust queuing theory framework. The research contributes to AI and
marketing with new optimization-based techniques for preference elicitation and
aggregation, to ML with general purpose robust and fair tools, and to queuing
theory with causal inference-based approaches for system evaluation and
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.