* 2046868
* CAREER: Investigating the deep origin and evolution of the bird beak by synthesizing the fossil record and comparative embryology of archosaurian reptiles
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Bhart-Anjan Bhullar, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 07/31/2026
* USD 301,123.00

Our planet teems with life in a vast array of shapes and sizes, interconnected
in myriad ways by ecology and by descent. One way to understand how and why
Earth’s biodiversity came to be is to trace the history of a great evolutionary
radiation deteremine the key events that contributed to its success. Among land
vertebrates, birds stand out in terms of species number, engineering, and
geographic spread. This project will explore both the history and the embryonic
development of one of the signal innovations that underpins bird diversity: the
beak. In doing so, the project will discover the way in which the beak was built
during evolution and the way in which it is assembled anew during the early
existence of each individual bird. The avian beak is a “key innovation,” a sort
of technological advance that enabled subsequent success. It is a remarkably
effective and versatile biological tool whose complex and efficient architecture
has been modified for taking in food as disparate as nectar (hummingbirds) and
flesh (birds of prey). The diversity of birds is, in many ways, a diversity of
beaks. The beak was also integral to the evolution of bird flight: the first
beaks, in the dinosaurian ancestors of birds, seem to have acted as “surrogate
hands” to replace the fingers fused and incorporated into the wing. This project
will use fossils that document 300 million years of reptile evolution to
determine the steps that led to the evolution of the bird beak. They will, in
particular, seek to discover how pre-existing anatomical structures, especially
the predatory jaws of ancient archosaurs were co-opted and rearranged to make
the beak, and will search for signatures of the classic evolutionary (and
engineering) phenomena of tradeoffs and co-dependencies (integration and
modularity). The project also investigates how the embryonic beak is formed in
modern birds and how its development differs from that of the reptilian snout —
in particular, whether comparisons of modern embryos with fossils and fossilized
embryos can tell us about which parts of the bird beak form by late “tweaking”
of, or addition to, a fundamentally reptilian embryonic anatomy and which are
truly “new.” The grand narrative of the way in which birds, living dinosaurs,
came to be so diverse and abundant in the modern world is naturally compelling,
and the data to be generated are often striking and beautiful. The project will
incorporate the findings of their work, including digital images and 3D prints
of these data, into the courses they teach at Yale and into kits and curricula
designed for K-12 classrooms, with a focus on low-income urban schools. Beyond
exchange of materials and knowledge, the project's investigators will visit
classrooms and will, moreover, conduct on-campus tours of research and
collections facilities for K-12 students, many from underrepresented groups in
STEM, and their teachers, with the intention of building long-term relationships
with schools, teachers and students. The project also will lead to the design of
exhibits featuring the discoveries from this work in part of the newly renovated
Yale Peabody Museum. Finally, the project team will conduct a series of online
and in-person public lectures and question-and-answer sessions throughout the
duration of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The avian beak is a marvel of
biological engineering and a key innovation that enabled the radiation of birds.
This project will examine the morphological assembly of the beak from stem
reptiles through to crown-clade birds and, simultaneously, the embryonic
assembly of the beak as compared to that of the reptilian snout. In particular,
the project will test the hypothesis of co-option followed by further novelty
and constraint release in the origin of the avian head from the ancestral
archosaurian head, then the origin of the neognath jaw apparatus from the
ancestral avian kinetic system. This will be accomplished using a combination of
3D CT imaging of fossils and extant taxa, and reconstruction of soft tissue
anatomy using phylogenetic bracketing. Analyses of shape and transformation will
be three-dimensional and quantitative. The project will further test hypotheses
of integration and modularity of skeletal elements surrounding major soft tissue
structures using a variety of methods, and in particular will elucidate
constraint and tradeoffs resulting from spatial packing or competition for
space. This will be accomplished by quantitatively analyzing evolutionary
trajectories and developmental trajectories (in part reconstructed using high-
fidelity confocal imaging of entire immunostained embryos). Finally, the project
will seek to unravel the relative contributions of the distinct ontogenetic or
developmental processes of terminal addition and early transformation in the
evolutionary origin of the avian skull, using an integrative approach that
incorporates embryos, fossils, and fossil embryos. In particular, the project
will include both evolutionary sequences of reconstructed ancestors (from fossil
data) and ontogenetic sequences (fossil and extant) in combined analyses and
will quantitatively assess the correspondence or non-correspondence of these
sequences. Ultimately, the project will present a comprehensive picture of the
sequence of evolution and development leading to the distinctive avian
condition, and will gain insight into the transformational phenomena and
evolutionary dynamics in operation during its genesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project was jointly funded with the Sedimentary Geology and Paleobiology Program
in the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.