* 2046770
* CAREER: Robots that Plan Interactions, Come and Go, and Build Trust
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Ryan Williams, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 03/31/2026
* USD 348,737.00

After decades of fundamental advances, we are beginning to see meaningful
influence of autonomous robots on crucial social and economic problems. While
tremendously exciting, these advances are primarily seen in single robot
systems, a natural progression given the highly complex nature of multi-robot
systems. In order to scale to real-world problems, this Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) project advances multi-robot system theory to allow robots
to plan their interactions intelligently, gracefully enter and exit systems, and
participate in trustful decision-making processes with other robots and human
teammates. In addition, the theoretical work in this project applies to multi-
robot multi-human search and rescue. Indeed, when robots and humans search for a
lost person in large wilderness, the theoretical advancements listed above will
prove invaluable. Finally, this project includes a comprehensive education and
outreach plan consisting of: curriculum focused on autonomy that crosses
departmental boundaries; pedagogical programs with an emphasis on persons with a
disability; K-12 academic experiences for underrepresented students in
engineering; and channels for national and international education and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing new theory and
technologies, including: a framework based on independence systems for modeling
robot interaction structures over time with sampling and gradient-based methods
for efficiently computing interaction plans; a combinatorial optimization
framework for modeling optimally open multi-robot systems yielding plans for
robots entering and exiting systems while guaranteeing the correctness of
underlying collaborative objectives; a framework for trust-building in
collaborative multi-robot multi-human decision-making based on multi-armed
bandits, a concept we call the trustful multi-armed bandit; a set of search and
rescue case studies for evaluating our research thrusts; and a portable,
indoor/outdoor, multi-scale testbed for experimental validation of heterogeneous
multi-robot teams. This project addresses fundamental challenges in four areas
critical to the flexibility, scalability, and resilience of autonomous
coordination: (1) systems that plan their interactions in a manner that adapts
to high-level mission objectives and the deployment environment, while
respecting low-level collaboration requirements; (2) systems whose composition
changes over time while remaining resilient to such changes; (3) systems that
select actions that actively build trust from other systems over time; and (4)
systems that are prototyped and tested under realistic conditions across varying
scales of deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.