* 2046259
* CAREER: Mechanical and Structural Adaptations of Blood Vessels in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Daniela Valdez-Jasso, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 02/28/2026
* USD 551,341.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will focus on better
understanding the adverse changes that occur in the arteries of the lung during
pulmonary arterial hypertension. This high blood pressure in the pulmonary
arteries has a high mortality rate; the only cure is a lung transplant. COVID-19
may also increase the risk of developing this chronic disease. Previous work has
shown that accumulation of fibrous tissue in the arteries during disease
progression is accompanied by an increase in their mechanical stiffness, which
impairs lung blood flow. The specialized cells that synthesize the fibrous
matrix of the pulmonary arteries are thought to be stimulated by changes in
their mechanical environment. However, the biological mechanisms by which the
diseased arteries respond to increased blood pressure and how the structural
changes in the vessel wall affect their mechanical properties remain poorly
understood. This work will use novel bioengineering measurements and
mathematical analysis to improve understanding of the mechanics of disease
progression and identify new therapeutic targets. The integration of
mathematics, engineering, and biology in this research will also be applicable
to other diseases. This research will be complemented with an outreach program
that teaches students how skills in biology, mathematics and engineering can be
combined to discover solutions to chronic health problems. Undergraduate
students will gain hands-on access to the laboratory facilities used in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test the hypothesis that the
dynamic changes in pulmonary arterial wall mechanics and extracellular matrix
stiffness during pulmonary arterial hypertension impair hemodynamics and
regulate adventitial matrix remodeling and stiffening via interactions between
profibrotic mechano-signaling pathways. A multiscale approach to this research
will integrate experimental and modeling studies by (1) measuring and modeling
the time courses of changes in pulmonary arterial hemodynamics, morphology and
physiology in vivo in a rat model of the disease; (2) measuring the nonlinear
biaxial mechanical properties and structure of arterial tissue and collagen
matrix during disease remodeling and use microstructural constitutive models to
relate these structural changes to vascular stiffness; and (3) measuring how
changes in vessel strain and structural properties regulate profibrotic
phenotypes and gene expression and predict them with a mathematical model of the
cell regulatory networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.