* 2046778
* CAREER: Developing novel structural techniques to untangle bacterial ribosome biogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Joseph Davis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 02/28/2026
* USD 494,762.00

The ribosome, which is responsible for virtually all cellular protein
production, is a complex RNA and protein composite consisting of ~50 subunits
that cells must assemble rapidly and efficiently to support growth. While
biochemical and structural studies of fully mature ribosomes have been crucial
in understanding how this machine functions, we still lack a clear understanding
of how they are built. The overall goal of this research is to determine how
bacterial ribosomes are constructed, and specifically, how a class of helper
proteins known as RNA helicases aid in this process. Given its size, highly
parallel assembly pathway, and central role in supporting all cellular life, the
ribosome is an ideal model system to understand how cells rapidly and
efficiently construct molecular machines. This NSF CAREER supported work is key
to improving our basic understanding of how such machines are built, and may
prove vital in the synthetic biology community’s ongoing endeavors to engineer
molecular machines with biotechnology applications. The educational goal of this
project is to increase representation of Black biologists in Ph.D. programs by
fostering relationships between the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
and Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU). Specifically, this
project will support the training of talented undergraduate students during
MIT’s summer and winter extramural research programs and recruitment of
“cohorts” of these students to MIT’s Ph.D. programs. This model of early
engagement and subsequent enrollment of cohorts of Ph.D. students aims to
produce a self-sustaining community of Black scientists at MIT. This program is
modeled after successful similar program initiated ~15 years ago between MIT and
the University of Puerto Rico, which has created a vibrant community of Puerto
Rican scientists at MIT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific scientific
goals of this project are to: 1) isolate and determine the composition of
bacterial ribosome assembly intermediates bound by ribosome-biogenesis
associated helicases; 2) elucidate how these factors function by determining
high resolution structures of their ribosomal substrates and products; and 3)
investigate how and whether these helicases act in concert to catalyze the
assembly process. As ribosome biogenesis is rate-limiting for bacterial cell
growth, understanding this process could enable future work to up- or down-
regulate ribosome assembly as a means to control bacterial growth, which will
broadly impact biotechnology fields including fermentation, bioremediation, and
antibiotic development. More broadly, this project will help to define general
assembly principles that cells employ to synthesize, fold, and assemble large
macromolecular complexes such as the ribosome. Finally, through this project we
will improve and employ novel structural biology tools to: 1) directly isolate
and structurally characterize complexes from cells in a minimally-perturbative
fashion; and 2) determine continuous conformational trajectories for complexes
that are undergoing large-scale molecular motions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.