* 2046505
* CAREER: Developing New Scientific Instruments for Classroom Observation: A Multi-modal Machine Learning Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Jacob Whitehill, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2026
* USD 707,980.00

This project will harness artificial intelligence (AI) to improve both the
quality of classroom teaching and the precision of educational research by
providing teachers and scientists with new methods of observing the inter-
personal dynamics between teachers, students, and their peers. Decades of
research have demonstrated that the quality and quantity of interactions between
teachers and students can have a major impact on student engagement, attitudes
toward learning, and downstream academic and socio-emotional outcomes. Despite
the progress that has been made in studying classroom interactions and their
impact on students' learning, as well as in developing effective interventions
to help teachers teach better, the status quo of educational measurement is
currently a significant roadblock to further progress in both educational
research and teacher training. Specific problems with contemporary methods
include ignoring the possibly different classroom experiences of individual
students and minority subgroups, and providing only limited actionable feedback
for teachers. This project will depart from standard observation protocols,
which typically describe the "average" classroom experience of the "average"
learner, and instead focus on characterizing over time the fine-grained
experiences of every student in the classroom. The scientific instruments
developed during this project will also be used to help teachers to identify
potential biases when interacting with particular students in their
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, the team will make
advances in multi-modal (vision, speech, natural language) machine learning to
devise new architectures that analyze videos of school classrooms and perceive
fine-grained interactions. The envisioned AI systems will (1) identify who is
interacting with whom, when, and how in a school classroom; (2) find the key
events during a teaching session that are most important for teacher feedback;
and (3) summarize interactions for each student along different dimensions to
find students who need more attention and to uncover possible bias. Based on
these new analyses, the team will develop (4) predictive models to estimate
socioemotional and academic outcomes outcomes. Finally, the team will (5) devise
new teacher training experiences that help teachers to perceive classroom
dynamics more accurately. The project will result in contributions to the fields
of computer vision, speech analysis, machine learning, and education, and will
offer new insights into automatic speaker diarization, person tracking,
sentiment analysis, and classroom observation analysis. The scientific and
educational agendas provide opportunities for inter-disciplinary training of
research assistants; they will also enable and benefit from collaboration
between the research team and teachers in both Massachusetts and
Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.