* 2046472
* CAREER: A paired experimental-computational approach to elucidate stress responses in early-branching eukaryotes
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2025
* Jennifer Guler, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2025
* USD 834,708.00

Cells sense their surroundings and use this information to adapt to stressful
conditions. These responses can determine whether a cell dies or survives to
change according to the new environment (i.e. different temperature, nutrient
levels, or chemical makeup). This project will use a single cell organism to
understand more about how cells respond to stress. Specifically, Plasmodium
cells survive in a wide range of environments as they live inside or outside
host cells and within different animals. These cells use some of the same
approaches as multi-cellular animals, yet there are notable differences. Due to
their ability to acquire what they need from their host, many parasites
streamline their efforts as they evolve; therefore, Plasmodium responses may
represent the minimal components required for survival in diverse environments
and could provide insight into how other single cell organism adapt to stress.
The Broader Impact of the work includes the intrinsic research as this group or
organisms infects a wide range of host cells where they can cause such
afflictions as malaria. Additional activities seek to improve public literacy by
integrating research with an educational outreach program using virtual
educational tools, which describe timely biological topics in an accurate and
exciting way. This is particularly important during a global pandemic, where a
basic understanding of disease transmission can drastically improve adherence to
public health guidelines and quality distance learning could diminish the
impacts of school closings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute
to the understanding of cellular mechanisms that drive adaptation and survival
in response to environmental stress. These responses are critical for early-
branching eukaryotic protozoa, such as Apicomplexans, that thrive in a variety
of environments during their complex life cycles. Apicomplexan protozoa are
expected to harbor the basic components required for a robust stress response
due to their early divergence from higher eukaryotes and the physiological
buffering provided by their intracellular parasitic lifestyle. Plasmodium, one
Apicomplexan genus, retains a heat shock response and translational inhibition,
yet nutrient signaling pathways lack key homologues (i.e. the mTOR kinase). This
project will bolster the use of computational tools for cross-species
comparisons and generate open access multi-omics data sets and mutant parasite
lines for use by the research community. Furthermore, identifying aspects of the
Apicomplexan stress response that are divergent from higher organisms will
challenge prevailing views of the stress response field by highlighting the
critical, basic capabilities needed to survive in diverse
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.