* 2046020
* CAREER: Structural Control of Spin-Orbit Coupling
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Turan Birol, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2026
* USD 308,809.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education activities that aim to develop fundamental
understanding of the interplay between the orbital and spin degrees of freedom
of electrons, called the spin-orbit coupling, in solid state crystalline
materials. While every atom, and hence every material, has some spin-orbit
coupling, the symmetry of the arrangement of atoms in certain crystalline
compounds may lead to specific types of spin-orbit effects that are beneficial
for future technological applications. These applications include the spin
transistor, which enables the control of the spin-current of the electrons. If
realized on a commercial scale, the spin transistor could lead to a spintronics
revolution in the electronics industry. The PI and his team will utilize
computer simulations and a field of mathematics, referred to as the group
theory, to understand how the crystal structure can be externally manipulated to
induce different spin-orbit effects. This fundamental understanding is expected
to lead to the prediction of new materials that could help realize spintronics
technologies on a commercial scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
research efforts, this award also supports the training and education of
graduate and undergraduate students and the development of a new teaching
approach for concepts related to crystal structures. This new approach will take
advantage of the widespread and low cost availability of 3D printers, which will
be used to make models that will facilitate learning for undergraduate and
graduate students. The computer files for these models will be disseminated
publicly along with a set of accompanying exercises for the students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports research and educational activities that aim to develop fundamental
understanding on the origin of different spin-orbit coupling related effects in
nonmagnetic crystalline materials and the connection of these effects with the
space group symmetry. These include the well-known Rashba and Dresselhaus
effects, as well as numerous higher order terms in the electronic Hamiltonians.
While there are many spintronics device proposals that take advantage of spin-
orbit coupling, there is a gap between the model Hamiltonians and the real
materials where the desired spin-orbit effects are often small, or the
Hamiltonians have higher order terms that complicate the observed phenomena.
This award aims to fill this gap by extracting realistic models with materials
specific parameters by a combination of first principles calculations (Density
Functional Theory and Dynamical Mean Field Theory) and group theory. Group
representations will be utilized to elucidate the coupling between crystal
structural distortions and the electronic structure, and novel means to achieve
the electric field control of spin-dependent electronic structure and materials
that realize these means will be discovered. Additionally, the effect of strong
spin-orbit coupling in the crystal structures of strongly correlated transition
metal oxides and their phonon spectra will be studied using first principles
correlated electron approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to supporting
the education of a PhD student, the award also provides support for the
development of educational materials for more effective teaching of
crystallographic concepts to materials science, physics, and chemistry students.
The educational part of the award aims to develop low cost educational models of
crystal structures and tools for teaching symmetry-related concepts. This will
be achieved by using commercially available setups for additive manufacturing.
With the help of an undergraduate student, the PI will develop a library of 3D
symmetry and structure models, which can be produced at low cost by widely
available 3D printers. This library will be made publicly available along with a
set of accompanying exercises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.