* 2046746
* CAREER: Sequence Defined Peptoid Materials for Selective Biodegradation
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Adrianne Rosales, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2026
* USD 329,331.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cells in the human body produce
many types of molecules that degrade materials in their environment. These
molecules can be small and non-specific, such as highly reactive radicals, or
they can be large and more targeted, such as enzymes. The ability to sense which
degradative molecules are present through simple bench top assays would enable
more efficient characterization of disease states such as cancer or
inflammation. This project will therefore study the degradation behavior of
peptoids, a class of synthetic molecules that offers the potential to degrade
selectively one type of biomolecule (radical species) but not another (enzymes).
This selectivity will enable the design of peptoid-based sensors to non-
invasively identify which degradative molecules are present in a biological
environment, and this knowledge will also impact the design of new materials
with well-defined degradation properties for use in biomedical implants. The
proposed project will also include educational and outreach activities at the
high school, undergraduate, and graduate student level to broaden the
participation of diverse groups in biomaterials research. Specifically, it will
develop a mentoring program to facilitate interactions among students from
underrepresented populations in STEM at the annual Texas Biomaterials Day.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reactive
oxygen/nitrogen species (ROS/RNS) and matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) are
critical drivers of extracellular matrix remodeling, especially during disease
and inflammation. Degradable peptides and proteins are commonly exploited as ROS
and MMP sensors; however, a key challenge is cross-reactivity and limited
selectivity toward one type of degradative species. Non-natural peptoids (or
N-substituted glycines) offer an attractive platform with which to address these
limitations due to their proteolytically-stable N-substituted polyamide backbone
and potential selective susceptibility to ROS/RNS. In addition, peptoids
preserve the monomer sequence definition of biomolecules but utilize an expanded
class of side chain functionalities, which may access higher specificity to MMP
degradation in hybrid substrates. The proposed research activities will combine
synthesis with mass spectrometry and new degradation assays to: 1) define the
selectivity and sensitivity of non-natural peptoids toward biologically relevant
oxidative mechanisms of degradation, 2) determine monomer sequence effects on
the specificity of hybrid substrate degradation by MMPs, and 3) assess peptoid-
based biomaterials as platforms to simultaneously detect mixtures of ROS and
MMPs. These studies will lead to fundamental insights regarding peptoid
degradation behavior in complex biological environments and enable the
development of peptoid-based sensors and materials for applications in tissue
engineering, disease modeling, and diagnostic screening. In addition, the
proposed educational activities will establish a new mentoring program to
enhance the participation of students from Minority Serving Institutions and
Historically Black Colleges and Universities in Texas at the annual Texas
Biomaterials Day. Best practices from this mentoring program will be shared via
webinar to facilitate the broad implementation of similar programs at the nine
other Biomaterials Days across the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.