* 2046244
* CAREER: A Model-Based Rosetta Stone to Decipher the Stratigraphic Expression of Glacial Isostasy
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Jessica Creveling, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 05/31/2026
* USD 369,599.00

Rising sea levels will be among the most severe impacts of a warming climate on
society. To assess the sensitivity of polar ice caps and sea-level change to
increase in temperatures, this CAREER award examines how sediments accumulating
on the shallow seafloor archive sea-level change. As ice sheets melt, the
earth’s surface bends predictably in response to the shrinking weight of the ice
sheets and ocean waters flooding continent edges. This bending causes local sea-
level change to differ from the rise predicted if melt water evenly filled the
world’s oceans, like a bathtub. The sea-level rise in response to a melting ice
sheet will differ across the globe, with some sediment archives retaining a more
accurate measure of sea-level change than others. This research will use
computer models to make global maps of differences in sea-level change for two
past geological epochs with temperatures higher than 21st century projections.
Such maps will clarify the circumstances for which geologists can leverage the
apparently different magnitudes of sea-level change from sediment archives
around the globe to provide more accurate reconstructions of past ice sheet melt
location and scale. This project advances climate understanding by creating a
‘Rosetta Stone’ to decode the magnitude of ancient sea-level change retained in
coastal geology of past warm periods so as to refine future sea level
projections. The integrated education plan will generate novel curriculum on the
science and ethics of sea-level change to inspire university students to
participate in a growing workforce addressing sea level projection and
mitigation. The education plan will engage non-STEM undergraduates to create and
disseminate artistic outreach products explaining geographic differences in sea-
level change to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaboration between solid
earth geophysicists and Quaternary stratigraphers has revealed that glacial
isostatic adjustment (GIA) concurrently creates and destroys accommodation, such
that the stratigraphic record of glacial–interglacial cycles should appear
different from place to place; in turn spatial differences in contemporaneous
local sea level deduced from the stratigraphic archive should provide insight
into the magnitude and melt source of a deglaciation. This proposal undertakes
numerical GIA simulations to ‘fingerprint’ spatial deviations from glacioeustasy
for literature-proposed magnitudes and melt sources for the mid-Pliocene warm
period and the Oligocene inception of the Antarctic ice sheet. These spatially
variable sea-level records will then serve as inputs into a software that models
how sedimentation and subsidence modulate how GIA manifests in stratigraphy. The
results will serve to decode spatial patterns in sea level retained in ice-age
stratigraphy applicable across the geological
timescale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.