* 2046642
* CAREER: Mortgage and Healthcare Discrimination During COVID19 Pandemic and Use of Text Data in Economics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Patrick Button, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2026
* USD 236,829.00

Economic studies of discrimination against under-represented groups have focused
almost exclusively on labor market, and in rare cases, on housing markets. Yet
there are several areas in which under-represented groups face discrimination
that are equally harmful society as a whole. This CAREER research will use four
projects and modern economic approaches to study discrimination against under-
represented groups in broad areas of economic activity. The first project
investigates discrimination against under-represented groups in access to metal
health services, the second project investigates whether discrimination in
mental health care has been exacerbated by the COVID19 pandemic, while the third
project investigates discrimination against under-represented groups in mortgage
markets. The researchers develop new analytical tools to deal with economics
research that uses text data in the fourth project. This research will develop a
large scale mentoring program for under-represented graduate and undergraduate
students in economics. The research project provides a broader understanding of
the causes and consequences of discrimination in several areas than has been
studied before and therefore provide inputs into policies to reduce
discrimination against under-represented groups. This research will therefore
help to establish the USA as the global leader in the fight against
discrimination. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This five-year CAREER development project
is a comprehensive research and education program on quantifying, understanding,
and mitigating discrimination against under-represented groups. The project
includes two audit field experiments to study access to mental health care,
based on under-represented minority status and mortgage loans, based on a sub-
set of under-represented groups. These audit field experiments use the
experimental method to isolate discrimination from other factors and observing
discriminatory behavior in actual scenarios. The audit field experiments also
make important scientific contributions since little is known about
discrimination in access to healthcare or discrimination against under-
represented people in broad areas of social and economic interactions. Both
projects extend the methodology of audit field experiments by using
computational linguistics and machine learning methodologies to detect subtle
discrimination in language. The audit field experiment of access to mental
health care also includes a timely extension to quantify access to mental health
care during the COVID-19 pandemic, by exploring how the intensity of the
pandemic and pandemic-related policies, such as shelter-in-place ordinances,
affect access to counseling and therapy appointments. These research projects
are paired with educational plans that seek to increase research and mentorship
opportunities for under-represented minorities. The results of this research
project will provide inputs into policies to reduce discrimination against
under-represented groups. This research will therefore help establish the USA as
the global leader in the fight against discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.