* 2046287
* CAREER: Bio-inspired Multi-joint Design and Control for Efficient and Lightweight Wearable Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Tommaso Lenzi, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 02/28/2026
* USD 584,258.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will promote the progress
of science and advance the national health and prosperity by providing new
knowledge related to wearable robotics. Wearable robots, such as powered
exoskeletons, promise to improve our productivity, health, and independence by
augmenting, preserving, and restoring our ability to move. However, existing
powered exoskeletons are heavy and inefficient, which largely prevents them from
being used in real life. Existing powered exoskeletons apply assistance to each
wearer's joint separately, which requires many actuators and large batteries. In
contrast, the powered exoskeletons created in this project will use bio-inspired
actuation systems that concurrently assist multiple wearer’s joints, much like
human muscles. Because one exoskeleton actuator assists multiple wearer’s
joints, fewer actuators will be needed. Because energy is transferred between
joints instead of being dissipated, smaller and lighter actuators and batteries
will be needed. The multidisciplinary research team of roboticists, movement
scientists, and clinicians will work closely with individuals with disabilities,
broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in research and
positively impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ambulation
requires considerable energy to accelerate and decelerate the limb segments and
to dynamically support the body against gravity. Human ambulation is highly
efficient and stable because of the passive dynamics of the leg and the elastic
properties of the muscles, and also because many muscles span multiple joints,
actively transferring energy between joints. In contrast, existing powered
exoskeletons are designed and controlled considering each actuated joint as a
separate unit, independent from the others, even when multiple joints are
actuated. This approach disrupts the natural dynamics of ambulation, resulting
in less efficient and less stable gait. The goal of this project is to address
this fundamental gap by developing energy-conserving mechanisms and control
algorithms inspired by human ambulation. We will optimize the energy exchange
across multiple joints for the design and control of powered exoskeletons by
studying how humans adapt to the assistance concurrently provided by a powered
exoskeleton to multiple leg joints, on different anatomical planes, or during
different ambulation activities. We will then design powered exoskeletons that
can allow for energy transfer between different joints, conserving energy within
the system, while improving metabolic cost, muscle effort, and stability of the
wearer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-directorate
Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the
Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.