* 2046049
* CAREER: Alterations in Marine Bivalve Shell Formation by Environmental Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Wei Xu, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 486,296.00

Shellfishes use shells to protect themselves from predators and obtain nutrients
from the water. Shells are tough since the compounds in them are harder than
rocks. However, the toughness of shells can be easily affected by environmental
conditions during the shell formation. Shells can become fragile when the shell
formation occursin adverse conditions, such as high carbon dioxide (CO2) level
or low salinity in water. With the effects on shells, the production of some
shellfish species with high market values, such as the oysters, will be possibly
declined in the coastal areas. The research goal of this CAREER proposal is to
understand how the CO2 and salinity of water modify the Eastern oyster shell
formation from a genetic level so that a method to help the oysters overcome the
environmental effects during the shell formation. The result of this study will
be applied to oyster aquaculture in the Gulf of Mexico. The project will also
help with restoration of shellfish habitats on the coast. In addition, the
project will involve the training of students from historically underrepresented
groups in science at Texas A&amp;M University – Corpus Christi via the
educational goals of the project. The project will also provides research
opportunities to community college students, as well as research opportunities
for middle/high school science teachers in the biological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well known that the shell development
during the early life stages of bivalves is vulnerable to environmental
stressors, but there is little understanding of the genetic responses of
bivalves to environmental changes during shell development. The research goal of
this CAREER project is to determine the molecular mechanisms by which bivalve
shell formation is altered under ocean acidification (OA) and salinity
fluctuation. The proposed approach is to 1) characterize changes in oyster
shells under the stress of OA and salinity fluctuation by measuring the shell
morphological changes, analyzing changes in shell composition, and identifying
changes in matrix protein production of the shells; 2) identify the signaling
pathway for shell formation response to OA and salinity stress by conducting
transcriptomic analysis and calcium imaging with the primary cell cultures from
the mantle tissue of the Eastern oyster; and 3) enhance the tolerance of the
Eastern oyster shell formation to the environmental impacts by creating
mutagenesis and transgenic strains. The education goals of the proposed project
are to increase diversity in higher education and biological research, focusing
particularly on encouraging Hispanic/Latino students to pursue advanced degrees
in STEM fields. The approach will be to 1) create an innovative class for
undergraduate and graduate students that involves multiple off-campus experts
and facilities in teaching and student-learning outcome assessment; 2) providing
research opportunities to undergraduate students and community college students;
and 3) organizing a summer biological science section for middle/high school
students and a training section for elementary/middle school teacher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.