* 2046386
* CAREER: Achieving Unprecedented Measurement Accuracy by a New Radio-Muon Method for Multi-Messenger Particle Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Frank Schroeder, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 05/31/2026
* USD 381,514.00

This award will fund the development of a novel method, combining radio and muon
detection of cosmic-ray air showers, that will maximize the measurement accuracy
of leading astroparticle observatories for the type and mass of the cosmic-ray
particles. These cosmic rays are mostly atomic nuclei accelerated by unknown
natural objects in the Universe to energies far beyond human technology. Recent
measurements provide compelling evidence for a mixed composition of cosmic
nuclei over the complete energy range over which such measurements are available
today. Disentangling this mixture by a better classification of the primary
particles will enable us to search for their origin in various ways: proton-
enhanced cosmic-ray astronomy, correlations of mass-dependent anisotropies with
source candidates, and the selection of neutrino and photon candidates for
pointed astronomy. The development of this radio-muon method will boost the
measurement accuracy to enable cosmic-ray astronomy as an additional tool of
multi-messenger particle astrophysics. The project contains an educational plan
contributing to a globally competitive STEM workforce, including measures to
improve the diversity of historically underrepresented groups in physics. Two
successful educational projects will be enhanced by contents related to the
research plan and by measures to improve the diversity of incoming STEM
students. These are the yearly IceCube masterclass for senior high school
students, and a renowned international summer school for graduate students in
particle astrophysics. Moreover, the successful biannual science fair of the
Pierre Auger Collaboration for school students of all levels will be supported.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This radio-muon method will be optimized using
simulations, experimentally validated, and applied to world-leading cosmic-ray
observatories. With this, the radio-muon method will leverage the potential of
ongoing detector upgrades. Using the large-scale radio upgrade and underground
muon detectors of the Pierre Auger Observatory, the radio-muon method will be
used to search for the sources of the highest energy, extragalactic cosmic rays.
The method can be applied to the energy range of the Galactic-to-extragalactic
transition to find expected mass-sensitive anisotropies that will hint to the
origin of the most energetic Galactic cosmic rays. In addition, the radio-muon
method will enable multi-messenger observatories for the detection of photons,
neutrinos, and cosmic rays with a single experiment comprised of radio and muon
detectors. Thus, this award addresses and advances the science objectives and
goals of the NSF's "Windows on the Universe: The Era of Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics" program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.