* 2046311
* CAREER: Bispectral mode decomposition for discovery of triadic interactions in laminar-turbulent transition
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Oliver Schmidt, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Modal decomposition techniques are at the forefront of scientific discovery from
large experimental and numerical datasets of complex flow fields. These
techniques include the proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) and the dynamic
mode decomposition (DMD), which extract the energetically and dynamically most
relevant flow features. Both methods yield accurate low-dimensional
representations of complex flow dynamics. However, neither POD nor DMD give
direct and quantitative insight into the nonlinear interactions that dictate
these dynamics, and the common practice remains to use peaks in power or cross
spectra as ad-hoc indicators for the presence of nonlinear interactions. The
proposed work on bispectral mode decomposition (BMD) directly addresses the
broader need for the capability to systematically identify and quantify
nonlinear phenomena in aeroscience, natural science, and environmental
engineering. The research activities are tightly interwoven with a comprehensive
education and outreach plan that targets early-career researchers,
nonspecialists, and students at the high-school and college levels. The broad
dissemination of the research methodology and outcomes is facilitated by
providing a free, open-source numerical tool for bispectral mode
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BMD is a recently developed modal decomposition
technique that extracts flow structures associated with triadic nonlinear
interactions, the fundamental mechanism of energy transfer in turbulent flows.
First, the two classical transition scenarios of the zero-pressure-gradient
boundary layer are revisited. The initial stages of these paths to turbulence
are well understood, both on a phenomenological and theoretical level. By
unambiguously separating from high-fidelity numerical data the temporal and
spatial scales involved in the nonlinear breakdown process, this research aims
at completing our understanding of the transition processes. By either
confirming or refuting the hypothesis that nonlinearity is at the root of early
transition in streamwise corner flows, the proposed work furthermore addresses a
long-standing discrepancy between theoretical predictions by linear models and
experimental observations of this ubiquitous flow. Part of this effort is the
computation of direct numerical simulation (DNS) databases for each flow under
investigation. The exploratory study of BMD as a means of estimating nonlinear
transfer functions, lastly, aims at enabling future generations of reduced-order
models of complex flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.