* 2046205
* CAREER: Designing an Interactive Partner to Support Pair Programming
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Sandeep Kuttal, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 03/31/2023
* USD 431,199.00

Voice-assisted devices showcase the potential of conversational virtual
assistants that have human-like interactions. This research seeks to develop an
Alexa-like programming partner to transform how programming is learned and how
programming is done. The research draws on and expands underlying ideas from
human-computer interaction, artificial intelligence, and software engineering to
address the problem of designing a conversational agent that supports pair
programming, where a human and agent engage in rich collaborative interactions
on programming activities. Pair programming increases code quality, efficiency,
knowledge transfer and self-efficacy, and through developing pair-programming
partners, the work will impact software development as well as teaching and
learning programming, while helping retain underrepresented groups in computer
science programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance programmer-
computer interactions by creating a human-centered interactive partner that
supports pair programming. Foundational research will be performed to: (i)
understand the feasibility of a pair programming partner, (ii) investigate the
design space of anthropomorphic conversational agents, (iii) determine the
intent of human programmer utterances and design appropriate agent responses and
(iv) implement a robust and supportive conversational agent. Anthropomorphic
properties of the conversational agent will arise by integrating diverse
interaction mechanisms (visualizations, dialogue styles, and agent actions),
state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms, and creativity and problem-solving
strategies. Tight data collection, design, evaluation and refinement cycles for
key architectural components will incrementally evolve functionality to realize
the robust conversational agent for programming. Integration of research and
educational activities will contribute to the creation of a sound and practical
pair programming agent that enhances student engagement, learning, and
programming skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Human-Centered Computing (HCC) and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.