* 2046095
* CAREER: Understanding the Interactions Between Surfactants and Metallic Nanoparticles Using Molecular Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Sumit Sharma, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 05/31/2026
* USD 408,604.00

Nanoparticles are approximately 1000 times smaller than the width of a human
hair. Metallic nanoparticles have been found to be useful for many applications,
such as for destroying cancer cells in our bodies, enhancing the imaging of
human organs, catalyzing chemical reactions to reduce unwanted byproducts,
improving the performance of paints and coatings, and fabricating nanoscale
electronic devices and photovoltaic cell components. In each of these cases,
nanoparticles of application-specific shape are required. Surfactants (soap-like
substances) tend to attach strongly and pack densely on to metal surfaces. This
enables the synthesis of metallic nanoparticles of a desired shape when
surfactants are attached to specified surface regions of the growing nanocrystal
to control the relative growth rates of its facets. Attached surfactants also
influence how these nanoparticles cluster together to form ordered arrangements,
a key enabler of nanomanufacturing processes. Currently, there are significant
gaps in our understanding of surfactant/metallic nanoparticle interactions that
have stymied progress in the envisioned applications. Part of the difficulty
lies in the extremely small size of nanoparticles, putting the observation of
many of the processes at work out of reach of experimental studies. Another
challenge lies in the sheer number of factors that affect the attachment and
packing of surfactants on metallic nanoparticles. In this work, we will use
computer models to perform a systematic study of how surfactants of different
chemical makeup attach to different faces of metallic nanoparticles. In this
project, computer models will probe the behavior of the systems at the length-
scale of a molecule, thus providing a detailed understanding of these dynamic
processes, making it possible to optimize nanoparticle growth conditions for the
desired applications. This research will be accompanied by a significant
educational component. An educational strategy-based computer game will be
created for middle and high school students to guide them towards STEM-based
fields. Elements of the research will be incorporated in the teaching
curriculum, and educational outreach activities will be performed to engage
members of the Appalachian region of Ohio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
research objective of this CAREER project is to develop a fundamental
understanding of the interactions between metallic nanoparticles (MNPs) and
surfactant molecules in aqueous media using molecular simulation. MNPs have
increasingly attracted interest owing to their unique electrical, thermal, and
optical properties, and have found applications in bioimaging, drug delivery,
molecular sensors, nanofabrication, photothermal therapy, and heterogeneous
catalysis. These diverse technological applications often involve the
interactions of MNPs with surfactants. Due to their strong affinity towards
metal-water interfaces, surfactants adsorb at these interfaces in high-density
ordered morphologies. These surface structures are stabilized by hydrophobic
interactions between the alkyl tails of surfactants as well as the strong polar
head-metal interactions. Straightforward molecular dynamics simulations have
been unsuccessful in studying these morphologies because of the kinetic barriers
associated with their formation. In this research, we will employ novel free
energy estimation strategies in molecular simulation to study the thermodynamic
stability of the adsorption morphologies of surfactants on the facets of MNPs in
a range of shapes and sizes. We will develop rare-event sampling techniques to
identify the molecular processes involved in the formation of these morphologies
over timescales relevant to nucleation processes. Finally, to understand how the
adsorption morphologies affect the interfacial properties of MNPs, we will study
surfactant-mediated aggregation of MNPs via molecular simulations. The PI is
invested in several educational objectives that are closely tied to the
research. To increase motivation and curiosity among middle and high school
students for the STEM fields, the PI plans to develop an educational strategy-
based computer game which will require a player to make engineering and economic
decisions in simulated scenarios, including the use of surfactants to reduce
petroleum pipeline corrosion. The PI already has developed an initial version of
the software and tested it on an initial cohort of students. The PI will work
closely with a local high school to enlighten students about the STEM fields
through various activities, including engaging the students in STEM-related
discussions and inviting them to visit the experimental and computational
research groups at Ohio University. Educational outreach activities will be
performed to engage members of the Appalachian region of Ohio. The PI will
incorporate aspects of the research stemming from this CAREER program into
curriculum development at graduate and undergraduate levels, and will recruit
undergraduate students, especially those from underrepresented sections, for
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.