* 2046104
* CAREER: Commutated-LC Circuits for Next-Generation RF-Domain Signal Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Jin Zhou, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Wireless communications and sensing have become ubiquitous. With the
proliferation of wireless technologies, however, the electromagnetic (EM)
spectrum has become increasingly congested. New concepts and technologies, such
as artificial intelligence assisted collaborative radio networks, simultaneous-
transmission-and-reception-based wireless systems, and large antenna arrays,
have emerged to efficiently utilize the spectrum, which necessitate signal
processing in the radio frequency (RF) domain. Linear periodically time-variant
(LPTV) switched-capacitor circuits have been studied extensively in the past
decade as they enable high-quality, widely tunable, and non-reciprocal RF signal
processing components on chip. However, existing LPTV circuits are fundamentally
limited to low-order, short-delay, and sub-6 GHz operations. This project, by
introducing new commutated-inductor-capacitor (commutated-LC) circuits, aims to
tackle the fundamental limits of existing switched-capacitor circuits, which has
the potential to substantially reduce the cost and size of next-generation
wireless systems, thereby benefiting society through increasing access. The PI
will develop new courses at the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
(UIUC) that will integrate the research outcomes of this project. Introductory
high-school-level curriculum development in collaboration with established UIUC
outreach programs is also planned. The PI established an institute of electrical
and electronics engineers (IEEE) Solid-State-Circuits chapter at UIUC and will
organize seminars, short courses, and other events in collaboration with other
faculty and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the introduction of
inductors or magnetic fields to commutated circuits provides new degrees of
freedom to existing LPTV switched-capacitor circuits, opening new design spaces
at both architecture and component levels. The intellectual merit of this
project is in the advancement of knowledge and understanding related to (1)
theoretical frameworks of high-order, long-delay commutated-LC circuits
operating at beyond 6-GHz RF, (2) practical design considerations with silicon-
based implementations of the commutated-LC circuits, and (3) development of
next-generation wireless systems with unique RF-domain signal processing
capabilities enabled by the commutated-LC circuits. Specifically, this project
will investigate the commutated-LC circuits in the mixing region for
reconfigurable filtering front-ends that cover a wider frequency tuning range,
operate at a higher RF, and provide steeper filter roll-offs. It will also study
the commutated-LC circuits when they are used as delay elements, targeting on
breaking the limit of delay-frequency product in existing switched-capacitor
delays. Leveraging this new delay component, this project will develop next-
generation simultaneous-transmission-and-reception systems and many-element
antenna arrays. Finally, this project will study the impact of local oscillator
circuitry on commutated-LC circuits in terms of operation frequency, noise, and
power consumption. New high-frequency oscillators with low phase noise and phase
noise cancellation techniques will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.