* 2046627
* CAREER: Mechanics of Next-Generation Composites using Cellulose and Bioinspired Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Anamika Prasad, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 11/30/2022
* USD 323,153.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will lay the research and
educational foundations to usher plant-inspired design to address challenges for
next-generation composites. As existing composites reach their functionality
limits, sometimes with disruptive consequences on earth, engineering design
needs to shift to sustainable materials. Furthermore, a biobased economy is also
necessary for the viability of rural America. The project is uniquely positioned
to address both these challenges through (1) research focus on the fundamental
mechanics of plant cell wall and their interfaces to drive innovation in
flexible composites, and (2) educational focus on rural and Native American
communities to increase their preparedness for the high-skilled STEM workforce
of the future. The remarkable ability for plants to survive and adapt to their
environment can be attributed to their cell wall, balancing constraints from
strength, fluid flow, and thermal regulation. The overarching research goal is
to decode these principles for the cell wall of a fast-growing plant stem and
use it to design new composites. Such flexible plant-inspired materials can have
broad implications in tissue engineering, robotics, wearable electronics, and
defense industries. The project will also collaborate with a science museum to
develop and disseminate culturally integrated materials science curricula for
underrepresented communities. Simultaneously, the project will also create
research opportunities for undergraduates to increase their engagement and
retention, and advance lasting benefits to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall research goal is to create new engineering insights into the
organization of primary cell wall structure in a fast-growing plant stem and use
these insights to guide the design and manufacturability of cellulose-reinforced
composites for flexibility and temperature sensitivity. The research objectives
are to (1) create a micromechanics-based multiscale computational framework of
the primary cell wall to identify the underlying mechanics driving their
thermomechanical response, (2) experimentally investigate the fiber-matrix (here
cellulose-pectin) interfaces within the cell wall under variable environmental
constraints to guide the computational framework and develop predictive models,
and (3) develop an electrospinning-based manufacturing platform to create cell-
wall inspired flexible fiber-reinforced structures. The research will focus on
the thick-walled xylem vascular tissue due to its multifunctionality for
strength, water conduction, and temperature management. By taking a systematic
and holistic approach from multiscale mechanics to interface characterization
and manufacturing, this project will address unanswered questions to design
next-generation multifunctional flexible composites. The project outcomes will
open the field for a machine learning-based predictive platform for applications
to broader engineering systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by CMMI and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.