* 2046586
* CAREER: The Mechanics of Subsurface Urban Heat Islands
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Alessandro F Rotta Loria, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2026
* USD 559,236.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will investigate the impact
of rising temperatures in the subsurface of urban areas on the performance of
soils and geotechnical structures, and create tools that will inform novel
methods to design and protect civil infrastructure in present and future cities.
The ground is warming at a fast rate in many urban areas worldwide due to heat
flows radiating from buildings and underground transport â€“ a phenomenon known as
subsurface urban heat islands. As the deformation of soils and geotechnical
structures is critically affected by temperature variations, subsurface heat
islands represent a silent hazard for urban areas. This project will add new
scientific and educational dimensions to a fundamental subject affecting urban
infrastructure through the creation, analysis, and interpretation of large
datasets incorporating sensing, experiments, and computations. The broader
impacts of the research will shape an emerging, interdisciplinary field to
develop transformative strategies to plan, design, and manage the underground of
cities. Through an integrated educational and outreach plan, this project will
inform and train the present and future engineering workforce on approaches to
cope with the critical phenomenon of subsurface heat islands in cities across
the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will shed light on the mechanics
of subsurface urban heat islands, linking the mechanical response of soils
subjected to temperature rise at the scale of the representative elementary
volume with the response of geotechnical structures at the scales of individual
buildings, city blocks, and districts. By leveraging a unique sensing network
that monitors temperature in the subsurface of Chicago and extensive
experimental work, this project will develop and validate physics-based and
data-driven modeling tools to unravel the influence of subsurface urban heat
islands on the deformation of the shallow underground. The research has three
objectives: (1) analyze the long-term, thermally induced deformations of soils
underneath or around buildings and infrastructure due to subsurface heat
islands; (2) investigate the long-term performance of geotechnical structures
and the resulting impacts on buildings and infrastructure due to the thermally
induced deformations of soils; and (3) predict the evolution and impacts of
subsurface heat islands for different site-specific features. This project will
engage a wide range of demographics on the pervasive phenomenon of subsurface
urban heat islands through collaboration with the Chicago Museum of Science and
Industry and the Illinois Green Alliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.