* 2046744
* CAREER: Finite Temperature Electronic Structure Methods for Predicting Material Phase Diagrams
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Brenda Rubenstein, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2026
* USD 650,000.00

Brenda Rubenstein of Brown University is jointly funded by the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry, and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) to develop new
methods for modeling the finite temperature electronic properties of correlated
materials. In applications ranging from catalysis to astrophysics to material
science, molecules and materials can be subjected to high temperatures.
Nevertheless, relatively few theories exist to predict how these materials will
behave at such temperatures,thwarting our ability to engineer materials such as
high-Tc superconductors and next-generation thermally-responsive technologies.
As part of this project, the Rubenstein Group will develop a suite of
complementary theories and simulation techniques that will enable the high-
accuracy modeling of complex materials at finite temperatures. In addition to
this research, the Rubenstein Group will bolster its ongoing efforts to actively
mentor historically-underrepresented high school students in Rhode Island
through the science fair process via the Rhode Island American Chemical Society
Project SEED and Advocate Programs (which Dr. Rubenstein leads) and grant area
high school students opportunities to engage in real experiments through the
Brown University Chemistry Department’s STEM Day Program. Dr. Rubenstein also is
developing a new Accelerating Chemical Discovery course and related textbook
with the aim of familiarizing undergraduates in the chemical sciences with how
data science can be leveraged to solve everyday problems in
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central aim of this proposal is to develop a
suite of new finite temperature electronic structure techniques to elucidate the
electronic phase diagrams of correlated materials. In plasmonic catalysis,
astrophysics, materials science, and many other applications, molecules and
materials are subject to high temperatures at which their electrons populate a
wide distribution of energy levels. Nevertheless, most electronic structure
methods to date have focused on the ground state, and those methods that do
account for temperature either do not accurately account for electron
correlation or have overwhelmingly been developed to study lattice models that
do not capture the unique qualities of real materials. To rise to this
challenge, the Rubenstein Group recently developed a new, fully ab initio, fully
correlated finite temperature Auxiliary Field Quantum Monte Carlo (FT-AFQMC)
method that proved to be able to yield exact results on a wide variety of
benchmark molecules and simple solids. In this CAREER proposal, the Rubenstein
Group aims to extend this technique to the study of heavier materials, including
iron oxide, nickel oxide, vanadium oxide, and chromium triiodide, whose finite
temperature electronic phase transitions have yet to be fully understood, while
also developing a set of novel supporting mean field, selected CI (configuration
interaction), and sampling techniques. These will not only improve FT-AFQMC’s
performance, but can also serve as cheaper, stand-alone methods in their own
right.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.