* 2046481
* CAREER: Facilitating Autonomy of Robots Through Learning-Based Control
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Minghui Zheng, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 286,513.00

Drone techniques have achieved significant progress in the past decades.
However, it is still very challenging to massively bring heterogeneous drones by
many different manufacturers to real-world applications. One main reason is
that, whenever a new drone is built, the planning and control algorithms for the
drone usually have to be designed very carefully and the actions for the drone
to take usually have to be laboriously programmed with considerable tuning
effort. To remove, if not lessen, such limitations, this Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) project establishes a novel learning-based framework that
equips drones with new capabilities of "learning from the experience" of other
drones despite their different dynamics and platforms. This approach to design
of planning and control of drones will significantly reduce the design, test,
evaluation and certification of drones, uniquely and efficiently customized for
applications in their operating environment. The integrated research-and-
education activities will provide students in the Western New York area with
hands-on experience and internship opportunities on drone techniques, toward
better preparing the future workforce for the unmanned aerial system industry in
the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a novel
learning-based feedforward control framework and equip drones with new
capabilities for learning three particular skills, i.e., (1) how to generate a
dynamically feasible trajectory, (2) how to sense and compensate external
disturbances, and (3) how to learn from others' learned experience, called
"dynamic learning." These three skills are crucial for drones to perform complex
tasks, and the foundation for understanding of how one robot could efficiently
learn from the experiences gathered by other robots with different dynamics. Key
to this approach is an architecture that automatically adjusts the original
outputs of the baseline planners and controllers by adding feedforward learning
signals to improve drone's flight performance. This learning framework is
neither to completely replace the existing planning and control methods nor to
compete for the highest optimized performance possible but rather to provide an
elegant learning mechanism that is highly adaptable and reasonably efficient
involving minimal hardware modification and software reconfiguration for
commodity drones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.