* 2046292
* CAREER: Active Learning of Second-Life Battery Systems by Combining Reinforcement Learning Principle and Device Physics
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Xinfan Lin, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 580,223.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project aims at developing a
transformative active learning framework, which is critical for enabling second-
life battery and other energy system applications. Reuse/repurposing of retired
electric vehicle (EV) batteries has been considered as a critical approach for
facilitating transportation electrification and renewable power generation,
which are two cornerstones of the emerging clean energy revolution essential to
our national prosperity. EV batteries are mandated to retire with 80% remaining
capacity, and direct disposal would mean a substantial waste of the remaining
value. Repurposing these batteries for the less-demanding stationary storage,
e.g. to store the renewable but intermittent solar/wind energy, could
significantly improve the cost and sustainability of both EV and renewable power
generation industries. A key challenge facing repurposing is the risk of
unsafe/unhealthy battery operation due to the damage and degradation suffered
from the first use. Therefore, current repurposing practice requires tedious and
costly manual testing and grading of each retired battery module. Still, such
one-time testing can only guarantee safety and performance at the beginning but
not during subsequent operation. A key enabler for battery repurposing at a much
larger scale is the advanced technique for accurate, fast, automatic, and
continuous estimation of battery states and parameters. The research component
of this project will be integrated with an education plan with the theme
“Connecting Emerging ML/AI with Traditional Control” to achieve the PI’s
overarching education goal of promoting machine learning (ML) and artificial
intelligence (AI) education among engineering students and professionals,
especially underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
explore active learning of second-life batteries, where the input current is
regulated to optimize the information content of the response battery voltage to
improve the speed and accuracy of estimation. The key innovation is a generic
active learning framework, which combines the principle of reinforcement
learning with device physics to overcome the fundamental limitations in the
current practice of active learning. This is among the first attempts to use
reinforcement learning for estimation, which presents a series of fundamental
research problems in information state computation, reward and learning
architecture design, and convergence analysis. The second part of the research
focuses on promoting the learning performance for multi-modular systems through
module collaboration. The goal is to address fundamental challenges of
reinforcement learning, e.g. the need for massive training data and slow
convergence, by enabling data sharing and cooperative search among
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.