* 2046109
* CAREER: Is phytohormone crosstalk the mechanism that predisposes drought-stressed conifers to bark beetle attack?
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Thomas Davis, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 05/31/2026
* USD 300,003.00

Large bark beetle outbreaks have occurred across the landscape of western North
America during the past two decades with dramatic ecological and economic
impacts for public and private lands. There is growing evidence that trees are
predisposed to bark beetle attack by environmental conditions, especially water
stress. Consequently, regional droughts could set the stage for rapid beetle
population growth that leads to outbreaks and large-scale forest mortality.
However, it remains unclear exactly why drought-stressed trees become more
susceptible to bark beetle attack--one possibility is that drought stress
inhibits the ability of trees to defend themselves. Although trees do not have
an adaptive immune system like animals, many conifers are able to recognize and
respond to cell damage from insects by producing toxic chemicals in their resin.
Production of these toxins are signaled by hormones that may be functionally
impaired when water stress occurs prior to beetle attack. The goal of this work
is to examine how drought stress interferes with hormone production and
sensitivity in conifers and determine whether this interference underlies
patterns of forest mortality across landscapes. Broader impacts include elements
of experiential learning in STEM, mentoring of underrepresented student
populations, development of new educational materials for school-age children,
and science communication to broad audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To survive
biological and environmental stress events, plants have evolved biochemical
signaling pathways to reprogram their phenotypes appropriately in response to
specific challenges. Although insect herbivore outbreaks are often preceded by
environmental stress events that reduce the ability of plants to resist
herbivory, physiological mechanisms underlying these interactions are not
understood. This is an important gap in the field of plant-insect interactions
as it precludes our ability to connect pattern with process in many natural
ecosystems. One process-based explanation for this pattern is that conserved
hormone receptors drive reduced sensitivity of plants to defense elicitors when
environmental stress precedes a biological challenge. This project will identify
controls over conifer tree defenses and develop new theory in chemical ecology
using multiple Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmanni) populations, the North
American spruce bark beetle (Dendroctonus rufipennis), and a beetle-associated
symbiotic fungus (Leptographium abietinum) as the study system. The research
plan addresses four interconnected research hypotheses: (1) trees respond
differently to different types of biotic challenge through producing hormones,
(2) sensitivity to these hormones drives chemical and physical defenses, (3)
hormone-driven defensive induction reduces beetle population performance, and
(4) environmental stress suppresses the ability of trees to respond to hormones
and thus mount an appropriate defensive response. Addressing these collective
hypotheses will elucidate the signaling mechanisms that link patterns of
ecosystem disturbance with basic physiological processes and describe
population-based variation in hormone sensitivity and defensive induction in a
long-lived tree species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.