* 2046957
* CAREER: Subsurface critical zone architecture controls on hydrologic partitioning across spatial scales
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Margaret Zimmer, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2026
* USD 473,656.00

The global water cycle is accelerating in the face of climate change, however
improving our predictions requires that we refine our understanding of how
Earthâ€™s subsurface regulates water movement and storage. Currently, we do not
fully understand what controls how precipitation is allocated to soil water and
groundwater recharge, streamflow, or plant water use. This research and
education program will quantify how key hydrologic processes are controlled by
the dynamic interactions between subsurface structure (e.g. depth to bedrock,
porosity) and hydrologic forcings (e.g. precipitation amount and intensity).
This field and modelling effort will be based in a semi-arid oak woodland in
central coastal California and project outcomes will inform current water
resource management efforts by regional water managers. This program will remove
barriers for undergraduate participation in earth science research and showcase
real-world applications through stakeholder-based undergraduate research
experiences. Through development of online high school and undergraduate
curriculum at the intersection of hydrologic sciences and environmental justice,
the project will contribute to the development of a strong and diverse workforce
in the earth sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This program will reach beyond
traditional catchment hydrology boundaries to transform our understanding of how
the vertical extent of the subsurface, from shallow soil down to unweathered
bedrock, controls ecosystem water availability for plant water use, groundwater
recharge, and downstream surface water resources. To meet this goal, this work
will empirically test a conceptual model that relates differences in within-
hillslope subsurface structure across contrasting aspects (south and north
facing slopes) to dominant drivers of key hydrological processes. Specifically,
project outcomes will be the identification of how differences in depth to fresh
bedrock and gradients in material properties within hillslopes modulate
subsurface water storage, and how this in turn regulates streamflow and
evapotranspiration. This internal hydrologic regulation will help us better
understand what controls plant water use, solute export, and water residence
times from the hillslope to watershed scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.