* 2046869
* CAREER:  Population and evolutionary dynamics of bacteriophage-symbiont-host interactions: Development of a multi-layered model microbiome
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Susanne DiSalvo, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 03/31/2026
* USD 262,033.00

The overarching goal of this project is to establish a tractable host-symbiont-
bacteriophage system in which to interrogate the mechanisms, phenotypic
outcomes, and evolutionary dynamics of multi-partner interactions. Results from
this system may provide fundamental insight into how these interactions play out
on larger scales, such as within the mammalian gut microbiome. Results may also
inform phage-based therapies by illuminating long-term consequences of phage
administration. As the rise of antibiotic resistance threatens our ability to
treat bacterial infections, interest in using bacteriophages as natural
antibiotics has significantly increased. As such, this research meets the
mission of the NSF in that it promotes the progress of science. This system and
the multidisciplinary nature of the experimental approach is ideal for linking
teaching and research. It can be effectively integrated into multiple biology
courses and tailored to scale levels of technical and conceptual complexity.
Interweaving elements of this project between research and teaching courses will
provide novel hands-on research experiences to a large pool of biology students.
Thus, in addition to providing insight into the biological process and outcomes
of multi-partner associations, this project provides students the ability to
develop research skill sets. These Broader Impacts serve the NSF mission of
advancing national prosperity by training students for entry into the bioeconomy
work force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteriophages are likely to have powerful
impacts on the fitness and evolution of bacterial symbionts and their host
organisms. However, the intra-host location of endosymbionts may shield them
from phage infection or modify infection outcomes. Despite their potential
significance, few studies have explored the impact of phages on host-symbiont
interactions or investigated the role of the host ecosystem in mediating
symbiont-phage interactions. The goal of this project is to establish a
tractable host-symbiont-phage ecosystem to interrogate the mechanisms,
phenotypic outcomes, and evolutionary dynamics of these interactions. The
research strategy utilizes a natural microbial symbiosis between the social
amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum and Paraburkholderia bacteria. Facultative
Paraburkholderia symbionts establish intracellular infections in amoeba hosts
and infection characteristics vary across symbiont strains. This project will
investigate the historical impact of phages on symbiont evolution and traits by
analyzing Paraburkholderia and related bacterial genomes for prophage and phage
defense elements, while ongoing phage isolation from soil-based screening will
illuminate relative environmental abundance and diversity of symbiont specific
phages. Ultimately, Paraburkholderia infected amoeba will be exposed to phages
and continuously cultured to assess the dynamics, fitness outcomes, and
evolutionary trajectory of all parties by 1) quantifying population abundances
and symbiont infection patterns and 2) analyzing phenotypic and genomic
characteristics of evolved and ancestral isolates. Results from this system may
provide fundamental insight into how these interactions play out in other
symbiosis systems and on larger scales, help inform phage-based therapeutics,
and be of relevance to microbial ecology, virology, evolutionary biology, and
bacterial pathogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.