* 2046059
* CAREER: Mapping Anthropocene Geomorphology with Deep Learning, Big Data Spatial Analytics, and LiDAR
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Aaron Maxwell, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 08/31/2026
* USD 340,555.00

Geospatial data (e.g., aerial and satellite imagery, digital elevation data, and
weather observations) are being generated at an astounding rate. One example,
the US Geological Survey’s Landsat Earth observation program, collects about a
terabyte of data daily, and their 3D Elevation Program (3DEP) is working toward
generating the first-ever high-detail elevation dataset for the entire country,
which is scheduled to be completed by 2023. While these “big data” projects
present many opportunities, it is currently very difficult to extract actionable
information from them in an efficient manner that supports scientific research
and informed decision making. While recent advances in artificial intelligence
and machine learning show great promise in analyzing such data, there is a need
to further research and develop these techniques for application to digital
mapping tasks, such as detecting landslides, monitoring resource extraction, and
documenting landscape change. This research will develop state-of-the-art “deep
learning”-based techniques to derive valuable information on human modifications
to the landscape using geospatial data, including elevation models and historic
maps, to fundamentally advance geomorphic mapping science. In addition to
supporting and training graduate students at West Virginia University, the work
will engage future high school STEM teachers, in-service teachers, and high
school students by developing training and instructional materials that will
help enable the next generation of data scientists, geospatial professionals,
and coders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the application of
geospatial data analytics and advanced computational methods to extract high
spatial resolution information from geospatial data over wide regions to further
understanding of natural landscapes and anthropogenic landscape change. It
specifically explores semantic and instance segmentation deep learning methods
based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which are able to model spatial
context information, for extracting geomorphic features and historic mining from
geospatial data, including historic topographic maps, light-detection and
ranging (LiDAR) point clouds, and additional terrain representations (i.e.,
hillshades and other topographic derivatives). Ultimately, this project will
contribute to operationalizing deep learning for geomorphic mapping using the
increasing abundance of quality digital terrain data with the eventual goal of
generating accurate datasets at regional to global extents that will allow for
documentation, quantification, and modeling of geomorphic hazards and natural
and anthropogenic landscape change. This project is jointly funded by
Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.