* 2046159
* CAREER: Nanoparticle-mediated genome engineering of plants and plastids
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Markita Landry, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 12/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Genetic engineering of plants is at the core of sustainability efforts, drug
synthesis, and agricultural engineering. The predominant bottleneck facing
efficient plant genetic engineering is biomolecule delivery into plant cells
through the rigid and multi-layered cell wall. This constraint limits the
species of plants that can be genetically engineered. In this project,
nanoparticles will be developed to deliver genetic material into the plant
chloroplast, which is a gene-containing organelle responsible for
photosynthesis. The project will first focus on the development of molecular
biology tools and nanoparticles that can traverse the plant cell wall and
deliver biomolecules into plant chloroplasts. Next, the project will test
efficiencies of nanoparticle-based chloroplast delivery tools and compare them
with conventional tools, with the goal of achieving higher genetic
transformation efficiencies. The project will conclude by incorporating genome-
editing biomolecules into nanoparticles to demonstrate genome editing in the
chloroplast. The potential impact of the proposed approach will be to enable
genetic engineering of the plant chloroplast, thus enabling the discovery and
study of chloroplast genes and the potential use of chloroplasts for producing
valuable protein products. For outreach and education, an international virtual
conference will be developed that brings together scientists, policymakers, and
the public to discuss scientific topics and the dissemination of literature in
the media. An undergraduate course will be developed to expose undergraduate
students to the peer-review process and hypothesis-driven research, and high
school teachers will be brought into the laboratory for hands-on research
training during the summer. These efforts will increase scientific literacy in
the public, universities, and schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
the importance of creating transgenic plants, plant systems, particularly non-
model plant species, remain difficult to genetically transform. The dominant
bottleneck to plant transformation is the delivery of the molecular biology
tools needed for plant transformation or gene silencing: DNA, RNA, and protein,
across the plant cell wall, particularly for chloroplast-targeted genetic
manipulation studies. In this project, nanoparticles will be developed and
functionalized to adsorb and deliver plasmid DNA to plant chloroplasts in a
species-independent and high-efficiency manner. To this end, in Objective 1,
genome editing plasmid DNA vectors will be developed and delivered to model
plant leaves and tissues to test genome editing efficiencies and to confirm a
lack of transgene integration. This objective will confirm the ability of
nanomaterials for chloroplast genetic transformation with efficiencies that
surpass those of conventional tools. Objective 2 will subsequently develop, and
codon optimize a luciferase-based plasmid reporter system to enable expression
of luciferase in plant chloroplasts, with a goal of exceeding transformation
efficiencies achievable with biolistic DNA delivery. Lastly, in Objective 3, a
genome editing plasmid will be developed based on knowledge gained in Objectives
1 and 2 to target endogenous chloroplast genes in both model and non-model plant
species. The ability to genetically manipulate chloroplasts, particularly in
non-model plant species, will broaden the range of plants that can currently be
studied. Genetic manipulation of the plant chloroplast genome will in turn
uniquely enable the study of genes coding for most photosynthetic proteins,
especially in non-model plants. This project will also leverage features unique
to the chloroplast including a lack of gene silencing pathways, to enable high
efficiency expression of transgenes. This latter feature makes chloroplasts an
attractive target for biosynthetic production of commodity chemicals, drugs, and
even larger protein products such as antibodies and biologics. Orthogonally,
because the proposed approach is non-pathogenic in nature, the broader impact of
this approach could enable more seamless regulatory oversight of transformed
plant tissues in crop species. This project will also develop three efforts to
increase scientific literacy. In the first effort, an international virtual
conference will be developed that brings together scientists, policymakers, and
the public to discuss scientific topics and the dissemination of literature in
the media. In the second effort, an undergraduate course will be developed to
expose undergraduate students to the peer-review process and hypothesis-driven
research. In the third effort, high school teachers will be brought into the
laboratory for hands-on research training during the summer. These efforts will
increase scientific literacy in the public, universities, and
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.