* 2046626
* CAREER: Search for Dark Matter in Final States with Jets and Missing Transverse Momentum using the CMS Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Zeynep Demiragli, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 03/31/2026
* USD 553,780.00

The Standard Model (SM) of particle physics has been a successful theory,
explaining experimental observations involving weak, electromagnetic, and strong
interactions over the last few decades. However, as experiments probe deeper
with increasing energies, it is evident that the SM is an incomplete theory; for
example, it fails to account for astronomical dark matter. This work at the CMS
Experiment at the CERN LHC, seeks to explore multiple avenues to discover and
characterize the nature of dark matter particles and to contribute to the High-
Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC) upgrade. Research and education activities will be
integrated by providing international collaborative research opportunities for
undergraduate students and by developing a new course that uses open-source data
for the upper-division undergraduate curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One goal
of this project is to explore signatures with one or more jets and an overall
momentum imbalance to discover and characterize dark matter particles. In
addition, the Higgs boson will be used as a tool for discovery by searching for
its decay to invisible particles. Techniques to suppress the effects of
additional proton-proton interactions in jet and missing transverse momentum
reconstruction both at the real-time event selection (trigger) and analysis
levels will also be explored to maximize the sensitivity to the dark matter
searches. The High Luminosity LHC will increase the discovery potential for new
particles, providing unprecedented sensitivity to dark matter processes.
However, the projected 200 proton-proton interactions per bunch crossing at the
LHC will pose severe challenges as the data rates in CMS will grow significantly
and the readout of the sub-detectors will be very demanding. To adequately
handle the challenging operating conditions and high data bandwidths, nearly all
sub-detectors of the CMS experiment will be upgraded. The work will develop new
readout electronics for the Inner Tracker sub-system of the CMS detector as an
important element of the HL LHC upgrade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to
establish procedures for recasting physics results and to provide a publicly
available software implementation of the searches for new particles. The planned
work provides an educational opportunity through experiential learning to
undergraduate and graduate students who will participate in the electronics
development project. In addition to direct research experience, the PI aims to
integrate education and research through a redesign of the academic components
of a Boston University study abroad program at CERN that encapsulates academic
courses and hands-on research opportunities. The PI will also host the
Conference for Undergraduate Women in Physics at Boston University, using it to
foster dialogue with high schools through the involvement of STEP-UP Ambassadors
in the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.