* 2046669
* CAREER: Combining Engineering, Biomechanics, and Genetic Analysis to Enable the Design of Structurally Superior Grain Crops
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Douglas Cook, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 03/31/2026
* USD 648,188.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will combine modern tools
from the fields of biomechanics, structural engineering, and genetics to provide
new understanding of the factors that contribute to stalk strength of grain
crops. The long-term goal of this work is to intentionally optimize (i.e.,
design) the architecture of grain crops. These new varieties will have the
potential for exceptionally high yield and biofuel production. Maize (corn) is
the largest crop in the US and will be the primary subject of this research.
Tools and techniques from structural engineering will be used. These include
structural tests, the use of new devices for measuring stalk strength in the
field, and focused measurements of the geometry and mechanical properties of
maize stalk tissues. Genetic techniques will include the use of breeding
experiments to generate a population of maize stalks having a broad range of
structural and genetic diversity. This population will be analyzed to determine
the influence of specific genes on maize stalk strength and other key
characteristics. Finally, structural and genetic information will be combined to
create powerful new computational models of maize stalk strength. These new
models will allow optimization studies. The results will suggest ways for
achieving grain crops that are high-yielding while also being suitable for
second-generation biofuel production. To carry out this work, students will
receive training and extensive mentoring and professional development alongside
their scientific training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of this
research are: (1) generate genetic and structural diversity through selective
breeding and transgenic experiments; (2) perform biomechanical measurements of
physical specimens; and (3) use computational modeling to investigate optimal
stalk archetypes. Specimen diversity will be created using test-cross and inter-
cross breeding experiments. Biomechanical measurements (bending tests,
mechanical tissue tests, and morphological measurements) will be performed on
these specimens as well as on transgenic varieties previously generated. This
information will be used to quantify the influence of specific candidate genes
identified in previous studies. Finally, a parameterized computational modeling
platform will be created to allow sensitivity and optimization analyses. This
research is expected to provide valuable new insights on the influences of
structural factors and candidate genes on the structural resilience of crops,
thus enabling new breeding approaches that seek to follow the optimization
results provided by this study. This work is co-funded by the Plant, Fungal and
Microbial Developmental Mechanisms program in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences, Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.