* 2046819
* CAREER: Laser-Induced Solvothermal Synthesis for the Direct-Write, Microscale Additive Processing of Metals and Oxides
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Lauren Zarzar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2026
* USD 534,324.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project contributes to the
development of manufacturing methods for microscale devices containing mixed
material compositions. Additive manufacturing, which is the ability to 3D-print
materials of arbitrary shape, is currently revolutionizing the way in which
products are made. However, most additive manufacturing methods, especially for
metals and oxide materials, are conducted on the millimeter scale or larger.
Small length scales are important for products such as sensors, electronics, and
medical diagnostic devices which are becoming miniaturized and portable.
Further, most additive manufacturing methods are tailored for fabrication of
parts containing a single material and are not well-suited for parts combining
multiple different materials. This research initiative will explore the use of
laser-based manufacturing to address such challenges. The ability to additively
manufacture microscale parts with tailored composition will enable advances in
areas such as healthcare, chemical and biomedical sensing, and energy storage.
This research will use techniques from multiple different fields of study,
including chemistry, materials science, optics, mechanics, and thermal modeling,
to tackle the manufacturing challenges from a range of angles. Educational
initiatives will be pursued, including outreach to diverse students at the K-12
level, summer camp development, and curriculum innovation at undergraduate and
graduate levels. The educational outreach will focus on examining how light is
used in manufacturing methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the focal
volume of a laser will be used as a high-temperature femtoliter-scale
solvothermal reactor, wherein materials will be synthesized and deposited at the
laser focus from fluid precursors. This method will exploit solution phase
chemistry, but confine the synthesis to the microscale, thereby taking advantage
of the three-dimensional control inherent in laser direct-write manufacturing.
This method will be studied for processing a wide variety of inorganic materials
directly from solution precursors, including metals, oxides, alloys, ceramics,
and composites thereof. A key focus of the research will be on the manufacturing
of high entropy oxides. Aims include synthesis of high entropy materials,
characterization and modeling of the thermal reaction environment, exploration
of effects of processing conditions such as laser power, scan parameters, and
precursor chemistry, and investigation of parallelization and scalability for
high-throughput fabrication. Educational initiatives will aim to draw
connections between commonplace activities (e.g., photography) and light-enabled
manufacturing methods (e.g., photolithography) such that students and the public
will gain appreciation for the technological innovations that enable the
fabrication of so many of the devices used in daily
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.