* 2046220
* CAREER: Understanding and Modeling of Cryogenic Semiconductor Device Physics down to 4.2K
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Hiu Yung Wong, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 06/30/2026
* USD 500,016.00

Cryogenic semiconductor devices and Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductors
(cryo-CMOS) that operate at temperatures down to 4.2K are crucial to the success
of certain emerging technologies. For example, cryo-CMOS are suitable peripheral
circuits candidates for quantum computers (QC) as well as for deep space
exploration. However, critical elements of cryo-CMOS device physics remain
unclear and their design is still mostly based on analytical equations.
Moreover, cryogenic electronics education is not particularly present in most
Electrical Engineering programs. The objectives of this project are, therefore,
to close the critical knowledge gaps in cryo-CMOS device physics, develop new,
efficient and effective models to facilitate cryo-CMOS innovation in Technology
Computer-Aided Design (TCAD) that has been the powerhouse of CMOS development
for decades, and to educate a diverse cryogenic electronics workforce.
Successful implementation will enhance cryogenic experiments at San Jose State
University, an underrepresented minority (URM)-serving institution in the
California State University (CSU) system and will train students in state-of-
the-art cryogenic measurements and simulations. A diverse research team of URM
undergraduate students will perform the measurement, TCAD simulations, and code
development. A new cryo-CMOS and QC session will be created in the Silicon
Valley Women in Engineering (WiE) Conference. Students will co-present the
findings at the seminar of the Electron Device Society to the engineers in
Silicon Valley. A free summer course to introduce cryo-CMOS and QC will be
introduced to socially and economically disadvantaged high school students in
the local area, and build a pipeline of future students in quantum computing to
create a diverse workforce and become an economic driver for vulnerable
communities. The new classes and outreach course evaluation results will be
published to share with education communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve
the goals, 65nm test chips with innovative test structures will be measured down
to 4.2K. TCAD and ab initio simulations will be used to verify various cryogenic
theories. A new autoencoder framework will be developed for automatic
calibration. Additional chip with known fabrication conditions will be used to
verify and improve the research results. This work will settle a long-standing
controversy in the field, namely the origin of abnormal subthreshold swing (SS),
resulting in important breakthroughs and generating new knowledge in cryo-CMOS
device physics. An accurate, complete, and practical set of TCAD models will be
developed to facilitate the development and optimization of cryo-CMOS for
emerging technologies such as quantum computers. The finding of the origin of
abnormal SS will lead to new research in interface and band structure
engineering, potentially opening up an entirely new research field. Accurate and
robust simulation models for mobility and field-dependent ionization will be
derived which will facilitate the development of novel cryogenic electronic
devices. The proposed complete set of models and robust settings will enable
TCAD to accelerate the development of automation tools for high performance and
reliable cryogenic integrated circuit designs. The success of this project will
pave the path to sub-4.2K modeling of cryo-CMOS for the ultimate co-integration
of quantum computers and CMOS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.