* 2046284
* CAREER: Dynamics and Vulnerability of Mineral-Organic Associations in the Rhizosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Marco Keiluweit, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2022
* USD 86,387.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soils are the largest and most
dynamic terrestrial carbon reservoir - storing more than twice as much carbon as
atmosphere and biosphere combined - and, thus, directly respond to and drive
global climate. Up to 90% of soil carbon is stored in organic compounds
intimately associated with reactive minerals. Such mineral-organic associations
(MOAs) can protect carbon compounds against microbial or enzymatic attack for
centuries to millennia. Consequently, current carbon cycling models assume that,
once formed, MOAs and carbon protected therein are relatively inert to
environmental disturbance. However, plant roots and associated microbes in the
rhizosphere have a well-known ability to transform minerals through dissolution
and exchange reactions. Yet, the impact of such root- and microbially-mediated
reactions on MOAs and carbon protected therein remain elusive. A better
understanding the response of otherwise stable MOAs to rhizosphere processes is
critical to improving predictions of the vulnerability of this vast soil carbon
reservoir to environmental change. Without a robust representations of root-
driven MOA destabilization, models will insufficiently project soil carbon-
climate feedbacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objectives of this NSF
CAREER project are to develop mechanistic understanding of the dynamics and
vulnerability of MOAs in the rhizosphere and to train diverse, creative, and
technically skilled environmental scientists to meet the most pressing
environmental challenges of the 21st century. The project aims to (i) identify
the molecular mechanisms, (ii) define biogeochemical drivers, and (iii) assess
environmental controls of root-driven MOA destabilization within rhizosphere
soil. To experimentally resolve root-microbe-mineral interactions in dynamic
rhizosphere microenvironments, this study will develop novel in-situ profiling
approaches. These research objectives are closely aligned with outreach and
education activities at multiple levels, structured around the study of
important plant-microbe-soil interactions. Built on strong engagement with local
partners and commitment to interdisciplinary education, this project will launch
a collaboration with Holyoke Community College to increase representation of
low-income and minority students in UMass's environmental science degree program
and create a new course incorporating Design Thinking approaches, providing
graduate students and postdocs with the creative problem-solving and
collaborative skills urgently needed to solve the complex environmental
challenges facing society today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.