* 2046453
* CAREER: Two-Dimensional Covalent Organic Framework (2D COF) Membranes: A New Platform for Liquid Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Devin Shaffer, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2026
* USD 459,089.00

Liquid separations are central to the health and prosperity of the nation
through their use in treating drinking water, manufacturing therapeutics, and
purifying industrial chemicals. Current approaches to achieve these liquid
separations are challenged by high energy consumption, low production rates, and
imperfect separation performance. Covalent organic frameworks are polymers with
ordered porous structures that can function as membranes to efficiently separate
complex liquids, such as removing salt from water or filtering impurities from
organic liquids. This research project will engineer ultrathin covalent organic
framework membranes with tunable pore properties to achieve liquid separations
based on specific characteristics of the liquids. The fundamental knowledge that
is gained about engineering the properties of covalent organic framework
membranes will enable them to be specifically designed to achieve more effective
liquid separations for applications in the energy, environmental, and health
fields. The research program is integrated with the professional development of
pre-service science and math teachers who will engage in individual research
projects and will develop inquiry-based curriculum for the public high schools
in which they typically serve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is
to engineer two-dimensional covalent organic framework (2D COF) membranes with
tunable pore properties and to model their performance for liquid separations
based on size, charge, and adsorption. Large-area membranes with varying
thicknesses will be fabricated by interfacial polymerization of orthogonally
soluble monomers at a confined interface. Control over 2D COF pore structure
will be achieved by direct integration of variable-length monomers into 2D COFs
during their controlled interfacial polymerization and by engineering the
stacking of 2D COF monolayers through introduced steric hindrances. Pore surface
modifications by post-fabrication chemical functionalization will enable control
over pore chemistry. The separation performance of the resulting 2D COF
membranes will be tested for organic mixtures and aqueous solutions, including
organic solvent nanofiltration, brackish groundwater desalination, and uranium
adsorption. The experimental results will be used to develop and validate pore-
flow models for 2D COF membrane separations that include steric and non-steric
mechanisms. Eight pre-service secondary STEM teachers from the teachHOUSTON
program will engage in the research by conducting individual research projects
and developing related STEM curriculum. The projects are designed to cultivate
an inquiry mindset and prepare the pre-service teachers to enact inquiry-based
STEM curriculum in public high schools in the greater Houston area. The research
results will also be integrated into a Membrane Separations graduate course that
will help close the gap in training for separation scientists from disparate
chemistry and engineering fields. A water treatment learning activity will be
developed to introduce new filtration concepts to the broader community and to
stimulate interest in separation science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.