* 2046926
* CAREER: An engineered nanosensor to measure in vivo protease activity in traumatic brain injury
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Ester Kwon, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2026
* USD 405,002.00

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) affects millions of Americans annually. A major
challenge in the development of TBI therapies is an incomplete understanding of
the progressive disease that is initiated by TBI. Therefore, the goal of this
CAREER award is to engineer technology to measure TBI-associated activity and
use this technology to understand the molecular mechanisms that underlie TBI.
New understanding of TBI-associated molecular mechanisms can guide the
development of new therapies for TBI and other brain disorders. The research
will provide research-based training opportunities for a diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate students to prepare them to enter the science
technology engineering and mathematics (STEM) workforce. Ideas and concepts from
the research will be incorporated into lesson plans in collaboration with high
school teachers in order to promote broad participation in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One existing challenge in the development of new
therapeutics and clinical management of TBI is a lack of biomarkers that can
measure the severity of disease and predict long-term outcomes. Proteases are
key molecules in TBI disease progression and are candidates for therapeutic
inhibition in TBI. Therefore, the measurement of TBI-associated protease
activity may be critical to understand long-term biological outcomes and provide
a greater understanding of disease. However, currently, there are no tools to
measure protease activity in a living organism after TBI. The goal of this
CAREER proposal is to engineer technology to measure protease activity in vivo
and study the role of protease activity in TBI disease progression and
therapeutic treatment. As a second goal, the technology will also be developed
as a diagnostic to complement existing diagnostic paradigms in TBI. The proposed
‘nanosensor’ technology that will be developed is based on the ability of
nanometer scaled materials to passively accumulate into the injured brain across
the damaged blood-brain barrier and respond to elevated protease activity after
TBI. Design criteria that will be engineered into the nanosensor include the
ability to detect multiple proteases, be measured from biological fluids, and be
actively targeted. The technology will be used to study protease activity in
response to varying severities of TBI and in the presence of pharmacologic
inhibition. The nanosensor will also be designed to integrate with a paper-based
assay for a low-resource, rapid readout as a diagnostic tool that complements
existing imaging and behavioral diagnostics in the clinic. This research will
yield a multiplexed and targeted nanoscale sensor of protease activity. Due to
the integral role proteases have across multiple diseases, including infectious
diseases, tools to measure protease activity and a greater understanding of
protease activity in disease have the potential to be broadly
applicable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.