* 2046468
* CAREER: Nitride Synthesis via Controlled Decomposition of Precursors under Moderate Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Siddha Pimputkar, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 02/28/2026
* USD 297,389.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Nitrides are a fascinating class of functional
materials that remain largely unexplored due to demanding synthesis constraints:
of the 447 predicted stable ternary nitrides, less than half have been
synthesized. This research develops and applies a novel synthesis approach based
on controlled decomposition of a nitrogen-containing precursor thereby driving
the crystallization of the remaining nitride materials. This decomposition-based
approach is hitherto unexplored and offers a paradigm shift in single crystal
nitride synthesis with a clear path towards inexpensive scaling of the method.
Application of an extensive library of existing precursor materials allows for
synthesis of a wide range of ternary and even more complex nitrides.
Technologically important nitrides will be synthesized providing materials for
super-hard materials, catalysis and (opto-)electronic devices. Students are
being trained in equipment development, crystal synthesis, and machine learning
techniques preparing them for employment in (single crystal) material synthesis
and semiconductor industries. To promote recruitment and retention of female,
underrepresented minority and at-risk students in science and engineering, the
Boldly Utilizing Innovation to Lead in Developing Engineers for Research and
Science (BUILDERS) initiative is engaging and connecting middle/high school and
undergraduate students via synthesis workshops providing hierarchical mentorship
and educational opportunities for the broader audience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Many computationally predicted stable
nitrides with intriguing properties have been proposed. Their single crystal
synthesis from solution is challenged due to limited synthesis process parameter
windows and insufficient solubility of nitrogen or cations at temperatures below
their decomposition temperature. These limitations are overcome using a new
synthesis pathway based on decomposition of lithiated nitride precursor from a
melt. Liquification and controlled decomposition of the precursor results in the
deposition of a crystalline nitride and is achieved via controlling the lithium
vapor pressure, nitrogen overpressure and temperature gradients, while alloy
composition is achieved via control of the melt composition. The newly developed
synthesis equipment is suitable to operate up to at least 100 atm and 1000 C. In
situ data is fed through a machine learning algorithm to continuously and
automatically control synthesis conditions to yield targeted material
compositions. This approach does not rely on dissolution and diffusion of
nitrogen through the flux from the gas phase leading to transformative
opportunities in rapid, scalable synthesis of nitride single crystals. Students
are obtaining in-depth, hands-on experience about the synergistic relationships
between equipment development, in situ technologies, machine learning algorithms
and resulting targeted material synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.