* 2046015
* CAREER: Predicting Transport, Mixing, and Reaction in Three-dimensional Heterogeneous Fractured Media Across Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Peter Kang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 366,325.00

About 99% of global unfrozen freshwater is stored in groundwater systems, and
about 75% of near-surface groundwater aquifers on earth are fractured. Recent
field studies have shown the presence of emerging contaminants such as
microplastics, viruses, and harmful bacteria in groundwater, and fractures are
often major pathways through which contaminants migrate long distances at
anomalously fast rates. However, conventional groundwater models ignore fracture
flow, and as a result, often fail to predict contaminant transport in the
subsurface. To secure sustainable water resources, there is urgent need for a
new model that predicts flow and transport in fractured media. This project
presents an integrated research, education, and outreach plan that will advance
the current practices of modeling fractured media and teaching fractured rock
hydrogeology. This project will first combine visual laboratory experiments and
direct numerical simulations to elucidate fundamental physical laws that govern
flow and transport at single fracture scales. The identified key single-fracture
scale processes will then be incorporated into field-scale models. Finally, the
developed models will be validated through field experiments at a fractured
aquifer site. The project has three major outreach and teaching activities that
are directly synergistic with the proposed research: (i) a professional
hydrogeologists’ working group will be formed to bridge the gap between
academia, industry, and government agencies in the area of fractured rock
hydrogeology, (ii) visual groundwater teaching tools will be developed for K-12
and college-level education, and lastly (iii) accessible modules based on a
contaminated fractured aquifer site will be developed for a new urban field
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional groundwater models often treat
aquifers as two-dimensional continuous porous media, thereby missing critical
complexities that govern flow and transport in fractured aquifers. Recent
studies have shown that complex three-dimensional (3D) flows can alter the
overall mixing and reaction dynamics up to the field scale, but the underlying
processes and how they scale up in fracture networks are still not well
understood. This project will establish a mechanistic understanding of 3D flow
effects on Transport, Mixing, and Reaction (TMR) at single-fracture scales and
translate that knowledge across scales to predict processes at fracture network
scales. This project first combines visual laboratory experiments and direct
numerical simulations to elucidate how the interplay between fracture
heterogeneity (e.g., fracture roughness and aperture variability) and flow
boundary conditions (Reynolds number) controls 3D flows and TMR at single
fracture scales. The single-fracture scale processes will then be incorporated
into fracture network-scale models, and an upscaled modeling framework that
predicts TMR will be developed. A comprehensive data set will be generated and
analyzed with machine-learning-based methods to yield a powerful map that links
upscaled model parameters to key medium properties and flow conditions. The
developed upscaled model will be validated through controlled field tracer
experiments at a fractured aquifer site. Overall, this project will transform
how we understand and model fractured media and will provide a new foundation
for modeling coupled biogeochemistry and fluid flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is co-funded by the Hydrologic Sciences and Education and Human
Resources programs in the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.