* 2046079
* CAREER: Effects of Community Cultural Wealth on Persistence of Black and Hispanic Women in the P-20 Computing Workforce Pipeline in Texas
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Shetay Ashford-Hanserd, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 01/31/2026
* USD 920,013.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of early-career faculty
who have the potential to serve as academic role models in research and
education, to lead advances in the mission of their department or organization,
and to build a foundation for a lifetime of leadership in integrating education
and research. This project will examine the effects of community cultural wealth
on the persistence of Black and Hispanic women in computing education and the
workforce. Participants in the study include a national cohort of students
enrolled in computer science coursework and degree programs from eighth grade
through undergraduate study. A post-graduate component includes continued study
of persistence into graduate study or the workforce. Project goals include
contributions to the knowledge base on the influence of community cultural
wealth on persistence in computing education and the workforce in the United
States and a robust compilation of quantitative and qualitative data that can be
used to study educational and career trajectories for women in computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated research and education plan applies methods
from cultural anthropology to investigate the lived experiences of women of
color in computing and combines longitudinal, mixed-methods approaches with the
ACCEYSS (Association of Collaborative Communities Equipping Youth for STEM
Success) integrative conceptual framework, developed by the principal
investigator in previous work. Few studies have considered the role of community
cultural wealth on the persistence of Black and Hispanic women and girls in
computing. Not only will findings from this study contribute to fundamental
research in STEM education, but products, professional development workshops,
and an annual conference will build capacity for K-16 educators, researchers,
policymakers, and industry leaders in formal and informal settings to positively
impact the persistence of Black and Hispanic youth in STEM and computing. This
award is supported by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-
Serving Institutions (HSI) and EHR Core Research (ECR) Programs. The HSI program
aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. ECR
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.