* 2046286
* CAREER: Catalytic Activation of Alkenyl C-H Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Keary Engle, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 656,000.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Keary Engle of the Scripps Research Institute is developing new
catalytic processes to upgrade chemical feedstocks containing alkenes (molecules
that contain a carbon–carbon double bond (C=C)) to more complex value-added
molecules for materials, agrochemical, and chemical biology/medicinal chemistry
applications. Palladium-based catalysts that are capable of selecting specific
alkene carbon-hydrogen bonds (C-H) bonds and activating these for C-X bond
formation are being studied. Insight into how these catalysts work is also being
investigated to differentiate key features from related catalytic
transformations. In parallel, Dr. Engle and his research team are leading
synergistic activities to expand access to cutting-edge educational experiences
for underserved students and to enhance the diversity and global competitiveness
of the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce. These
efforts include developing open-access graduate courses and learning resources,
expanding programming offered through a STEM pipeline consortium that serves
diverse undergraduate students from local two- and four-year colleges in San
Diego, and involving undergraduate and high school interns from historically
underserved groups in research activities. Overall, this research program is
helping to improve the efficiency and sustainability of industrially relevant
chemical processes, while bolstering the future STEM workforce of the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalytic reactions that convert carbon–hydrogen
bonds into new carbon–carbon and carbon–heteroatom bonds enable the rapid
synthesis of valuable target compounds with reduced waste generation compared to
traditional approaches. Keary Engle and his team at the Scripps Research
Institute are developing palladium-catalyzed C(alkenyl)–H activation reactions
and studying the factors that promote C(alkenyl)–H activation versus other
reaction manifolds that typically emerge from alkene–palladium(II) species.
These catalytic transformations are simultaneously being optimized to convert
readily accessible mono- and disubstituted alkene starting materials into more
highly-substituted alkene products that are otherwise difficult to prepare with
defined regio- and stereochemistry. Activities further include mechanistic
studies, directing group investigations, and the use of alkene isomerization
strategies to understand the catalytic process and to broaden the reactivity to
include a significant variety of alkene substrates for these catalytic systems.
This multidisciplinary project will integrate insights from mechanistic
organometallic chemistry, and organic synthesis, providing a holistic and
innovative training experience for a diverse group of high school students,
undergraduates, Ph.D. students, and postdoctoral
fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.