* 2046583
* CAREER: Untangling Inter-Area Communication in the Brain Using Multi-Region Neural Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Kanaka Rajan, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 549,323.00

Human and animal behaviors like learning, remembering, and deciding require the
interactions of neurons and circuits across regions of the brain. However,
despite the importance of these interactions, remarkably little is known about
the processes regulating these brain-wide communications. This research builds
computer models of the brain based on measurements taken from humans and animals
performing behaviors, and uses those models to identify how different brain
regions communicate and work together to produce behaviors. This work will
identify shared and distinct features of brain-wide communication to guide new
experimental studies and enable new computer models to better define brain
functions. Additionally, this project promotes community engagement, diversity,
and inclusion through two complementary programs: "Comp-ic Book Neuroscience,"
which brings research findings from computational neuroscience into under-served
classrooms in New York City through the jargon-free and visually appealing
medium of comics; and the Student Outreach for Neuroscience Integrated with CS
(SONiC) program, an annual lab-based summer school to give NYC-area senior
college and graduate students hands-on experience with visualizing and modeling
brain data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While rapid advances in neuroscience have
catalyzed a deeper understanding of individual brain regions and their
functions, these regions generally do not operate in isolation. Yet, little is
known about processes regulating the brain-wide communication underlying many
behavioral outputs. To reveal fundamental principles of brain-wide
communication, this project will produce (1) a new, scalable, robust, and
flexible class of multi-region recurrent-neural network (RNN) models with inter-
area communication; and (2) analysis methods to infer the direction and
magnitude of interactions within and between areas. Multi-region RNNs will be
constrained with real neural data to uncover mechanisms of the real biological
system, for instance, how the cooperative activity of neurons within and across
brain regions gives rise to complex behaviors like decision-making. Reverse-
engineering these models will reveal how multi-area brain circuits use
biological plasticity to acquire a new skill. Finally, RNN modeling of human
electrophysiology data will help identify inter-area communication processes
that are conserved or divergent across multiple species. Wider adoption of the
new models and tools will transform the understanding of how interacting brain
areas function cohesively to orchestrate complex behaviors and inform future
experimental paradigms. The research will also promote cross-fertilization
between neuroscience and artificial intelligence/machine learning communities,
and provide quantitative techniques shared in the broader neuroscience
community. Furthermore, the project will foster an inclusive, welcoming
environment for a diverse new generation of computational
neuroscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.