* 2046105
* CAREER: CAS: Electrocatalytic Bilayer Interfaces for Controlled Proton Transport and Tandem Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Christopher Barile, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 03/31/2026
* USD 685,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Christopher Barile of the University of Nevada, Reno will investigate
methods to improve chemical reactions central to renewable energy and
environmental technologies. To that end, Professor Barile will study new
approaches to durable, efficient, and inexpensive electrocatalysts. More
specifically, polymer layers will be used to control and modulate catalysts
supported on electrode surfaces. This approach will afford a more detailed
picture of how these catalysts operate. In addition, the research strategies
pursued will be broadly important because the results will impact other areas
that are of fundamental interest and importance in chemistry and biology. In
conjunction with the research conducted, Professor Barile and his group will
develop an online science demonstration database, SciDemoWiki, using a framework
analogous to Wikipedia to improve science education. Additionally, Professor
Barile will lead a team to educate high school students in Northern Nevada by
creating an outreach center called SIERRA (Sparking Interest in Energy Research
in the Reno Area). Students participating in this outreach will learn about the
central role chemistry plays in green energy technologies and addressing climate
change. These efforts are designed to improve science literacy across all grade
levels by increasing the quantity and quality of science demonstrations
performed in classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical
Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Christopher Barile of
the University of Nevada, Reno is studying electrochemical bilayer interfaces to
control proton transfer dynamics and catalyst selectivity. These architectures
will be used to interrogate molecular, nanostructured, and metal
electrocatalysts for carbon dioxide and nitrate reduction reactions, processes
instrumental in decreasing greenhouse gas emissions and in purifying water. By
modulating proton transfer kinetics with fluoropolymer membranes and through
tandem catalysis, the Barlie team seeks to control the predominant mechanistic
pathway for the electrocatalytic reaction under study. Laboratory research will
be complemented by the development of a new online Wiki-driven science
demonstration database, SciDemoWiki, as a community-facing pedagogical tool. At
the same time, the project will launch an outreach center in Northern Nevada
called SIERRA (Sparking Interest in Energy Research in the Reno Area) to teach
high school students about chemistryâ€™s central role in advancing renewable
energy technologies and addressing climate change. These efforts aim tol improve
science literacy across all grade levels by increasing the quantity and quality
of science demonstrations performed in classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.