* 2046277
* CAREER: Affordable Versus Vacation Housing Resilience: Mechanisms that Shape Housing Vulnerability and Recovery in Coastal Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Sara Hamideh, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 05/31/2026
* USD 578,991.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will yield improved
understanding of the mechanisms that cause disparities in vulnerability between
affordable primary housing and second homes-vacation rentals in United States
coastal areas. Growing population and development in many coastal areas,
combined with rising sea levels, more intense and frequent storms and flooding
under climate change, mounting economic inequalities, and aging infrastructure
all pose increased risks to coastal housing stocks and, in turn, economies. In
many coastal areas of the United States, affordable primary housing is
shrinking, aging, and deteriorating while seasonal vacation housing is growing
and improving. Affordable housing is disproportionately damaged by storms,
displacing residents who are more likely to be poor, elderly, racial and ethnic
minorities, and service industry workers. While disparate patterns of
vulnerability are visible, the mechanisms underlying them are little understood,
which hinders improvements to housing policies. This project will integrate
theories and techniques from multiple fields to explain how development policies
and funding mechanisms within the context of tourism economies create and
exacerbate disparities in housing vulnerability. This project will engage
students from underrepresented groups as well as students drawn from affected
local communities in disaster research, outreach, and policy development. It
will also assist planners and policy makers by exploring the potential
effectiveness of alternative housing programs and policies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Housing and disaster studies have rarely identified or
explained disparities between affordable primary housing and second
homes/vacation rentals as two distinct housing submarkets in tourist-based
communities. This CAREER project adopts a convergence approach by integrating
theories and techniques from housing and disaster studies in urban planning,
sociology, economics, and structural engineering to understand the drivers of
housing vulnerability patterns, considering both markets. It also examines the
likely effects of potential program or policies changes. The project will first
examine planning and funding mechanisms that shape housing vulnerabilities,
including disaster recovery programs and policies. It will then analyze relevant
patterns and explore interactions between housing and tourism and the
consequences of those interactions for housing vulnerability. Although housing
vulnerability is a multidimensional phenomenon, disaster studies often consider
housing solely in terms of physical structures. This study will develop and
apply a holistic multidisciplinary vulnerability metrics framework to combine
physical, sociological, and economic assessment of housing
vulnerability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.