* 2046120
* CAREER: Biomechanics of Amphibious Fish Fins and Mechanical Principles of Stiff Lightweight Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Madhusudhan Venkadesan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 05/31/2026
* USD 685,410.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will use engineering to
discover the biomechanical specializations that allow amphibious fish to move on
land. This is of scientific interest because these fish use their thin and
lightweight fins to apply very large forces to move on land. Through biological
experiments, engineering device design, and mathematical modeling, the project
seeks to uncover relationships between the form and function of fins used to
move on land. The knowledge gained in this project will impact several fields.
Understanding the mechanics of walking fish will help address the substantial
challenges in designing agile robots capable of traversing diverse environments.
This is important for future use of such robots for search and rescue operations
and remote ecological studies to go where it is impossible or unsafe for humans
to go. Learning about amphibious fish is also critical for understanding how
terrestrial vertebrates evolved from an aquatic ancestor that used its fins to
move on land around 400 million years ago. The project’s synergistic education
and outreach activities include curriculum development, a multi-year scaffolded
mentorship plan for high school students, and student-developed hands-on museum
exhibits on amphibious fish that will also serve as novel teaching aids for
school teachers. These will be designed to broaden participation in STEM from
K-12 through college and incubate the next generation of interdisciplinary
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary research objective is to
discover how the mudskipper, an amphibious fish, has specialized its fin design
and biomechanics to withstand forces for moving on land and test the hypothesis
that they resist ground forces using the nonlinear effect of curvature-induced
stiffness. The curvature-induced stiffness principle helps human feet withstand
ground forces, and aquatic fish fins also manifest elements needed for that
effect. But the anatomical manifestations are quite different in fins and feet,
raising the question of how amphibious fish stiffen their fins on land. The
project will combine experiments with theory to investigate the multi-scale,
hierarchical, and composite structure of the fins of amphibious (mudskippers and
bichirs) and aquatic fish (gobies and mackerels) from the whole organism
(~10–100 millimeters) down to the fin’s internal structure (~10–100
micrometers). The specific aims, with fundamental impact on locomotion
biomechanics and fish fin structural mechanics, are to (i) measure in vivo
forces on mudskipper fins using a novel optical force sensor, (ii) identify
critical stiffness-contributing anatomical elements using in vitro mechanical
tests on amphibious and aquatic fish fins, and (iii) discover the
specializations of amphibious fish fins and derive generalizable biomechanical
principles of a fin morpho-functional space by combining 3D micro-computed
tomography (microCT), in vivo force, and in vitro stiffness data with multi-
scale, composite-elastic fin models. Discoveries on the fin’s form-function
relationships could be crucial for biologists studying the development and
evolution of fins and limbs. Also, novel appendage designs may considerably
enhance the effectiveness of multi-terrain robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.