* 2046936
* CAREER: Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Two-Dimensional Topological Materials for Quantum Device Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Wenzhuo Wu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports research in the
scalable nanomanufacturing of two-dimensional topological materials and the
control of their structures and properties for high-performance quantum devices.
The target materials are tellurene nanoribbons, which have potential
applications in nanoelectronics, mid-infrared photonics, and wearable sensors.
The project employs droplet-based flow reactors to identify the nucleation and
growth mechanisms in these materials and gain the critical process-structure-
property knowledge required for optimal production of tellurene nanoribbons with
desired properties. The capability to manufacture high-quality two-dimensional
quantum materials contributes significantly to the nation's economy and advances
prosperity and welfare. The award aligns well with NSF's Quantum Leap Big Idea
because two-dimensional crystals are candidate materials for next-generation
quantum technologies in sensors, computing and communications. The research is
holistically complemented by establishing an inclusive and flexible educational
and outreach program based on curriculum development, industrial experience in
college education, K-12 students, women and underrepresented minority outreach
for training a high-quality future manufacturing workforce. This project allows
advances in the knowledge base in material science, quantum engineering,
nanotechnology and advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional
quantum spin Hall materials, such as tellurene nanoribbons, host topologically
protected edge states that can enable fast charge transport with minimum power
dissipation for high-speed, energy-efficient electronics. The critical
challenges to deploying these materials are to manufacture them without
expensive epitaxial substrates and control over their dimensions, phase, and
defect content for practical applications. Continuous flow processes based on
droplet reactors present multiple benefits over conventional batch approaches to
fabricate nanomaterials. It enables excellent process homogeneity and
reproducibility, rapid screening of reaction parameters, fully automated
control, and customized products with high throughput at reasonable costs.
Typically, the flow-synthesized nanomaterials are nanocrystals with particle-
like morphologies. The scientific understanding and technical capability for
manufacturing two-dimensional materials using flow processes are missing. This
research is to discover the fundamental basis for producing, engineering, and
deploying tellurene nanoribbons for practical quantum spin Hall device
applications through scalable substrate-agnostic continuous nanomanufacturing
processes. This project's research objectives are to (i) establish the droplet-
based flow manufacturing capability for producing two-dimensional tellurene
nanoribbons with controlled properties, (ii) develop a physics-based, data-
driven theoretical framework for guiding and understanding the experiments, and
(iii) characterize the materials and devices to identify the process-structure-
property-performance relations. The continuous flow process employs in-situ and
ex-situ characterization combined with theoretical exploration to understand the
chemical pathways critical to engineering the nucleation and growth of tellurene
nanoribbons with tailored properties for quantum device
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.