* 2046681
* CAREER: Synthesis of Functional Biomolecules from Tunable N-aryl Peptide Precursors
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Caroline Proulx, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 04/30/2026
* USD 685,000.00

With the support of the SYN program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Caroline
Proulx of North Carolina State University (NCSU) will pursue fundamental
research in bioorganic chemistry, with a focus on developing new methods for the
synthesis of peptide- and protein-mimicking libraries. Peptides play vital roles
in modulating biological function. Their ability to bind to their targets with
high affinity and selectivity is dependent on both their chemical composition
and conformation. As such, tools to rapidly modify and control both are required
to streamline drug discovery efforts. In this project, novel methods are
developed to achieve these goals. Selective chemical transformations are
developed for late-stage peptide functionalization, and methods are developed
for their subsequent cyclization/ligation under mild aqueous conditions.
Strategic incorporation of functional groups is explored to control the
conformation and stability of the resulting peptide or protein mimics. Broader
impacts of the project will include continued mentoring and training of ACS
Project SEED high school students and NSF REU students during the summer, as
well as educational presentations in high schools across North Carolina. Virtual
lab tours and other videos will also be produced in collaboration with the
Science House at NCSU. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award, Dr. Caroline
Proulx will develop new methods to access conformationally-constrained, highly
functionalized ketoxime and kethydrazone peptides starting from tunable N-aryl
peptide precursors. These substrates are expected to undergo triggered ligations
under catalyst-free aqueous conditions that also exhibit high functional group
tolerance. This project aims to introduce a wide array of side chain chemistry
at the site of ligation using late-stage peptide functionalization reactions.
The alpha-carbon substituent will be used to better mimic natural amino acid
side chains, fine-tune stability of the linkage, and control E/Z ratios in the
resulting kethydrazone or ketoxime-linked peptides. In addition, the N-aryl ring
will be tuned to enable one-pot, sequential ligation for the synthesis of
protein-length material. In the longer term, this work seeks to lay the
groundwork for the establishment of structure-folding-function rules for this
new class of unnatural peptide- and protein-mimicking oligomers for chemical
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.