* 2046835
* CAREER: Nucleic Acid-Peptide-Mineral Hybrid Assemblies and Nano-Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2025
* Fei Zhang, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2025
* USD 418,740.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life at various scales can be viewed
as a dynamic self-assembling system. Living organisms have developed their
unique strategies to build soft and hard tissues and the resulting hybrid
materials have excellent properties that remain far beyond those of their
artificial counterparts. To engineer nature-inspired self-assembled molecular
systems and functional materials, which can communicate with cells and regulate
biological events, is one of the grand goals that is highly relevant to
scientific areas ranging from synthetic biology, nanotechnology, regenerative
medicine, to materials science. This project aims to develop self-assembling
Nucleic Acid-Peptide-Mineral (NAPM) hybrid molecular tiles as building blocks to
create robust, programmable, smart, and functional biomaterials and nanodevices.
The unique structural programmability of DNA will be integrated with the
advantageous mechanical properties and functionality of minerals, peptides, and
RNA to diversify and enhance the chemical and physical functionality of DNA
nanostructures. This new platform will expand the programmable assembly in DNA
nanotechnology from the nanometer scale to microns, furnish knowledge on the
self-assembly of novel hybrid tiles, and lead to the discovery of new
functionalities associated with these hybrid systems. In addition, this project
integrates research with graduate and undergraduate education and introduces
innovative programs for high schools, K-12 students, and community-wide
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to develop a hybrid molecular tile system
employing minerals and peptides that are integrated into programmable DNA
nanostructures to generate new self-assembling hybrid materials. The main
scientific challenges to address are: (1) how to develop a general method to
rigidify DNA nanostructures while maintaining the programmability of DNA, (2)
how to create the surface preference for controllable precise deposition of
different types of minerals, (3) what are the self-assembly behaviors of these
new hybrid tiles and how to guide their assembly to create novel structures at
micron scales, and (4) how to achieve dynamic responsive reconfiguration in this
new system. In this project, these challenges will be tackled by developing
structurally strengthening deposition methods of minerals employing regulating
peptides and RNA molecules to produce NAPM hybrid tiles; developing geometric
matching and molecular programming rules for the hybrid tiles to direct their
self-assembly; and engineering novel reconfiguration mechanisms by integrating
switchable nucleic acid structures to reversibly change the size, shape, and
surface chemistry of the hybrid materials responding to external stimuli. This
project will finally create hybrid materials that inherit the programmability of
DNA and RNA while displaying enhanced mechanical properties. It will also
develop a toolkit for integrating the physicochemical and mechanical properties
of inorganic materials with biological materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.