* 2046294
* CAREER: Plan-based Simulation of Human Story Understanding
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Rogelio Cardona-Rivera, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 06/30/2026
* USD 223,192.00

Storytelling is a fundamental part of the human experience: we tell stories and
interpret stories almost daily to share perspectives, teach one another, and
communicate between ourselves in more compelling ways. But while narratives are
a form of information to which our minds are predisposed, an open question
remains: how do people understand stories? By establishing the foundations for a
science of narrative that is focused on prediction, this effort aims to afford
(to scientists, technologists, and the broader public) the ability to
systematically construct stories that resonate with audiences as one intends.
This is useful where we already see the use of narrative, when having a higher
degree of predictive control in its design would benefit society: the
advancement of personalized learning, rehabilitation therapy and healthcare
communication, intelligence analysis, automated news generation, and human-aware
artificial intelligence (AI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In AI, inventing
systems that can model and explain how we process stories is the long-standing
grand challenge of “story understanding.” However, this challenge has been
broadly approached with methods that ignore the cognitive processes through
which humans understand stories. To elevate narrative design from imprecise
practices into a systematic and predictable methodology requires a broad,
interdisciplinary, and cognitively-grounded effort to reformulate the foundation
for story understanding AI. This project outlines a pathway toward using AI
planning to generate narratives that predictably elicit a trajectory of mental
effects that shape an individual’s story understanding over time across three
key cognitive processes that form its basis: event-based mental model updating,
inferencing, and memory. The research team will architect algorithms that
predict (1) under what conditions people generate inferences about what they
read, key to maintaining them engaged, (2) how story structure helps or hinders
updating a person’s mental model of a story relative to human inferencing and
memory, and (3) how understanding is mediated by said structure in relation to a
person’s experience and skill at processing stories (a presently unanswered
question in story psychology). Along the way, the effort will make foundational
contributions to AI by developing a formal model of time needed to generate
plan-based stories, and re-defining the narrative planning process to simulate
how humans iteratively revise their beliefs about a story over the course of its
narration. Alongside domain experts and psychologists, the research team will
pilot, refine, and evaluate the AI software in two domains: interactive
narratives for skills training (integral to education) and public science
communication (integral to outreach)—both require the engineering of stories for
the purpose of more-effective communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.