* 2046889
* CAREER: The Algebra, Geometry, and Topology of Infinite Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Priyam Patel, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2026
* USD 330,292.00

This mathematics research project focuses on questions in geometry and topology,
both of which are concerned with the study of the shapes of objects. The project
studies the properties of surfaces, which fall into two categories: finite-type
and infinite-type. The theory of finite-type surfaces has been historically more
developed than that of infinite-type surfaces, partly because there is a simple
classification of all finite-type surfaces. The primary goal of the research
project is to significantly deepen understanding of infinite-type surfaces,
which are ubiquitous in topology, geometry, and dynamics. The first part is
aimed at characterizing their geometric symmetries (isometry groups). The second
and third parts concern their topological symmetries (mapping class groups),
with the long-term goal of completely classifying the different types of
topological symmetries. The educational component of this project consists of
three parts. The first part is a research training and professional development
graduate student workshop for members of groups underrepresented in algebra,
geometry, topology, and number theory. This workshop is aimed at early-career
graduate students and intended to serve as a bridge between successful programs
like the EDGE summer program and research-focused workshops for advanced
graduate students. One of the goals is to support the participants in their
transition between coursework and research-based mathematics. The second part of
the educational component is the expansion of an existing high school outreach
program in Salt Lake City that will serve students from the most diverse
districts of the city. The third part is a speaker series featuring prominent
individuals from groups underrepresented in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research focus of this project is on infinite-type surfaces and their groups of
symmetries. Infinite-type surfaces arise naturally in many contexts, such as in
the study of group actions on the plane, and are intimately related to the study
of quasiconformal maps. The first part of this project, aimed at characterizing
isometry groups of infinite-type surfaces, is inspired by Felix Klein's
suggestion from 1872 that groups of geometric symmetries be used to better
understand the geometry of Riemann surfaces. The results regarding isometry
groups are used in-turn to produce algebraic invariants of the mapping class
group. This group can be thought of as the group of topological symmetries of
the surface and is the focus of the second and third parts of the project. In
particular, the second part is aimed at producing algebraic invariants of the
mapping class groups of infinite-type surfaces via subgroup constructions, and
the third part focuses on using the actions of mapping class groups on
hyperbolic graphs to produce a Nielsen-Thurston type classification for these
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.