* 2046226
* CAREER: Optimizing Scalability and Reconfigurability in Silicon Photonic Switch Fabrics
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Mahdi Nikdast, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 04/30/2026
* USD 348,953.00

Our daily lives depend heavily on efficiently moving and processing data
generated by different applications, from social networks and online shopping to
healthcare and educational applications to emerging applications such as
autonomous driving. The rapid growth of such data is putting increased pressure
on datacenter networks, where enormous amounts of data must be processed. To aid
in this task, the underlying datacenter network switches, which are responsible
for moving data from one server to another, should provide the fastest possible
switching with high bandwidths, while minimizing the energy required. To address
these requirements, this project involves transformative research to design and
optimize a new class of network switches based on silicon photonics technology
that will be capable of transferring large amounts of data with ultra-low
latency. The project includes research on this new technology and its system
application in large-scale datacenter networks. It will incorporate
opportunities for students (including underrepresented groups) at K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate levels to work on real-world problems. It also
includes a new outreach program to K-12 schools in Northern Colorado and
Southern Wyoming with low college-attendance rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project proposes a long-term, integrated program of research to optimize the
scalability and reconfigurability in silicon photonic switches for future high-
performance computing and datacenter systems. In particular, the researchers
propose comprehensive optimizations across the entire design space of silicon
photonic switches, including device, network, and control layers, to realize
ultra-fast reconfigurable, large-scale, and energy-efficient silicon photonic
switches. At the device layer, a new class of interferometric silicon photonic
switching devices will be designed and optimized to realize fast switching
elements with ultra-low optical losses and crosstalk noise. At the network
layer, topology-aware optical power loss and crosstalk noise models will be
developed to be integrated into a new network-optimization platform, creating
and optimizing various types of high-radix networks specifically for large-scale
silicon photonic switches. The new research at the control layer will analyze
traffic flows in the switch fabric to develop an ultra-fast and energy-aware
switch reconfiguration solution. Last, a new open-source silicon photonic switch
cross-layer design and co-optimization tool will be developed to incorporate the
new models and optimization solutions at each design
layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.