* 2046523
* CAREER: In Operando Investigation of Laser Powder-fed Directed Energy Deposition: Process Physics, Microstructure Evolution, and Mechanical Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Atieh Moridi, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 01/31/2026
* USD 636,910.00

The disruptive innovation of additive manufacturing relies on its ability of
mass customization of complex-shaped products that are impossible or difficult
to make by conventional manufacturing methods. However, poor processing
repeatability is one of the major obstacles to its widespread use, especially
for critical load-bearing metallic components. The huge variability, for laser
powder-fed direct energy deposition in particular, is due to extremely high
heating and cooling rates, which occur during stochastic interactions of the
powder flow stream with a shape-changing liquid metal pool and cause far-from-
equilibrium and highly dynamic phenomena that are extremely challenging to
study. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports the study
of using high-energy, high-speed x-rays to achieve fundamental understanding of
the aforementioned transient phenomena. Experiments at different time and length
scales will be performed to establish process and characteristic relationships
to predict quality, repeatability and properties of additively manufactured
parts. The educational and outreach activities aim to promote a full
participation of women and underrepresented minorities in advanced manufacturing
and to develop a well-trained, diverse and sustainable manufacturing workforce.
Over the project course, the PI will work with middle school girls,
undergraduate women and underrepresented minorities through organizing workshop
series on additive manufacturing with hands-on activities, attending lunch
series and mentoring students in a 10-week summer program,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research objective of this project
is to transform the powder-fed direct energy deposition by understanding the
fundamental physics of the process. A custom-built directed energy deposition
apparatus will be interfaced with the facility at Cornell High Energy
Synchrotron Source to perform unique experiments. Synchrotron hard x-ray imaging
and diffraction techniques with unprecedented spatial and temporal resolutions
are combined to study the powder flow stream, melt pool dynamics and non-
equilibrium phase transformation of titanium and nickel-based alloys, as well as
pore formation. Moreover, experiments with time-resolved x-ray measurements will
be conducted to investigate the influence of cyclic heat treatments, intrinsic
to additive manufacturing, to the microstructure and residual stress evolution.
Correlations between compositions, processing parameters, process signatures and
the resultant microstructure, porosity and residual stresses will be
established. The findings will be used to overcome the long-lasting limitations
of additive manufacturing by i) reducing anisotropy within the accessible
process parameter range by promoting equiaxed solidification, ii) minimizing
residual stresses and distortions by managing the heat accumulation during the
process, iii) maximizing the process efficiency while minimizing melt pool
discontinuities and iv) constructing process maps with the best combination of
part properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.