* 2046694
* CAREER: Multifunctional Peptide Nanocarriers for Delivery of Nucleic Acid Therapeutics
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Angela Alexander, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 02/28/2026
* USD 345,793.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal aims to
develop a new class of peptide-based biomaterials. The peptide-based technology
will enable modular design of biomaterials able to form ordered nanoparticle
aggregates with multiple functionalities in order to overcome significant
barriers to delivery of bioactive molecules. The PI will characterize the
structure, charge, and stimuli-responsiveness of the designed nanomaterials and
determine the effect of these characteristics on enhancing cell-specific uptake
and bioactivity of delivered cargo. The technology will provide a novel
biomaterial platform with applications in transporting a variety of nucleic
acids used to regulate gene expression. The proposal integrates a comprehensive
education plan with a core objective of increasing the participation of
underrepresented minorities in bioengineering. The education plan will enable
early engagement of high school students through hands-on learning modules and
engagement of undergraduates through early exposure to bioengineering concepts
and laboratory research. The plan includes partnerships with minority-serving
institutions to establish a pipeline toward graduate degrees in bioengineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI’s long-term research goal is to develop
novel bioresponsive nanocarriers through the investigation of modular self-
assembled peptides. In pursuit of this goal, the research objective of the
proposal is to develop and characterize a novel class of multifunctional
peptide-based biomaterials. These nanocarriers will consist of a modular design
including various classes of peptides, such as cell penetrating, fusogenic and
targeting peptides, each with the ability to overcome a significant barrier to
delivery, including insufficient cellular internalization and lack of endosomal
escape. The peptide-based nanoparticles will be characterized to determine 1)
the bioresponsiveness of the peptide secondary structure in inducing endosomal
escape and 2) the size, charge, and serum stability of the nanocomplexes. The
modular peptide components will be combined to create a multifunctional
nanomaterial that will be evaluated to assess cell-biomaterial interactions, in
particular, biocompatibility, cellular uptake, and endosomal activity. The
peptide-based technology has applications in delivery of nucleic acid therapies,
such as small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) or ribonucleoproteins (RNPs). The PI’s
long-term educational goal is to increase participation of underrepresented
minorities in bioengineering. The proposed educational objectives are to: 1)
engage high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in bioengineering
research, 2) provide underrepresented minority first-year students early
exposure to bioengineering topics, and 3) partner with minority-serving
institutions in S.C. to create a pipeline program towards graduate degrees in
bioengineering. Outcomes will include leading a team of undergraduates in
development of hands-on bioengineering and nanodelivery lab modules that will be
implemented in local underserved high schools. Furthermore, undergraduates will
be recruited to participate in summer research projects through partnerships
with minority-serving institutions in the state to establish a collaborative
effort toward enhancing participation of underrepresented students in graduate
programs in bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.