* 2046800
* CAREER: Ecosystem Impacts of Microbial Succession and Production at Antarctic Methane Seeps
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Andrew Thurber, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 12/31/2026
* USD 645,412.00

Part I: Non-technical description: &lt;br/&gt;Methane is one of the more
effective atmospheric gases at retaining heat in the lower atmosphere and the
earth’s crust contains large quantities of methane. Research that identifies the
factors that control methane’s release into the atmosphere is critical to
understanding and mitigating climate change. One of the most effective natural
processes that inhibits the release of methane from aquatic habitats is a
community of bacteria and Archaea (microbes) that use the chemical energy stored
in methane, transforming methane into less-climate-sensitive compounds. The
amount of methane that may be released in Antarctica is unknown, and it is
unclear which microbes consume the methane before it is released from the ocean
in Antarctica. This project will study one of the few methane seeps known in
Antarctica to advance our understanding of which microbes inhibit the release of
methane in marine environments. The research will also identify if methane is a
source of energy for other Antarctic organisms. The researchers will analyze the
microbial species associated with methane consumption over several years of
field and laboratory research based at an Antarctic US station, McMurdo. This
project clearly expands the fundamental knowledge of Antarctic systems, biota,
and processes outlined as a goal in the Antarctic solicitation. This research
communicates and produces educational material for K-12, college, and graduate
students to inspire and inform the public about the role Antarctic ecosystems
play in the global environment. This project also provides a young professor an
opportunity to establish himself as an expert in the field of Antarctic
microbial ecology to help solidify his academic
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical description: &lt;br/&gt;Microbes
act as filter to methane release from the ocean into the atmosphere, where
microbial chemosynthetic production harvests the chemical energy stored in this
greenhouse gas. In spite of methane reservoirs in Antarctica being as large as
Arctic permafrost, we know only a little about the taxa or dominant processes
involved in methane consumption in Antarctica. The principal investigator will
undertake a genomic and transcriptomic study of microbial communities developed
and still developing after initiation of methane seepage in McMurdo Sound. An
Antarctic methane seep was discovered at this location in 2012 after it began
seeping in 2011. Five years after it began releasing methane, the methane-
oxidizing microbial community was underdeveloped and methane was still escaping
from the seafloor. This project will be essential in elucidating the response of
microbial communities to methane release and identify how methane oxidation
occurs within the constraints of the low polar temperatures. This investigation
is based on 4 years of field sampling and will establish a time series of the
development of cold seep microbial communities in Antarctica. A genome-to-
ecosystem approach will establish how the Southern Ocean microbial community is
adapted to prevent methane release into the ocean. As methane is an organic
carbon source, results from this study will have implications for the Southern
Ocean carbon cycle. Two graduate students will be trained and supported with
undergraduates participating in laboratory activities. The researcher aims to
educate, inspire and communicate about Antarctic methane seeps to a broad
community. A mixed-media approach, with videos, art and education in schools
will be supported in collaboration with a filmmaker, teachers and a visual
artist. Students will be trained in filmmaking and K-12 students from under-
represented communities will be introduced to Antarctic science through visual
arts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.