* 2046972
* CAREER: Sign-to-Speech: An Edge-IoT Platform and Software Library for Real Time Sign Language Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Mahanth Gowda, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2026
* USD 506,000.00

This project will advance the state-of-the-art in cross-disciplinary areas
including motion signal processing, machine learning (ML), sign language
modeling, and real-time ML with dynamic device/edge partitioning, to develop new
technology for automatic Sign Language Recognition (SLR) and translation to
spoken language that enables more seamless communication between deaf and
hearing people. The technology will incorporate wearable devices (such as a
smartwatch, smart ring, and earphones) that are gaining in popularity, and will
have broad impact through its introduction in deaf communities along with a sign
language equivalent of voice assistants such as Amazon Alexa. The project will
establish a pipeline of collaboration with deaf students, as well as courses
based on SLR technology that will be disseminated through MOOC platforms such as
Coursera. Additional impact will derive from workshops on wearable computing
that will be conducted at the K-12 level, and a "sign-to-speech" library that
will be publicly released for extensibility of the new technology to multiple
sign languages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve its goals this research will
include three thrusts: Development of ML models with efficient training that can
perform accurate SLR by fusing multimodal input data from wearable devices that
capture body motion and facial expressions; Implementation of efficient ML
models by means of optimal partitioning between end-device and edge resources to
achieve the best tradeoff in real time performance and SLR accuracy; Design of
systematic user studies with fluent sign language users both for generating
training data for ML models as well as for validation of accuracy, usability,
and acceptability of the technology within the deaf
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.