* 2046630
* CAREER: Quantum Size Effects on Thermal Radiation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Sheila Edalatpour, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2026
* USD 526,858.00

Quantum-scale (i.e., nanometer and sub-nanometer scale) materials exhibit
thermal radiation properties that are significantly different from ordinary bulk
materials. This phenomenon is caused by the change in the electronic band
structure of the materials at the quantum scale. Thermal radiation of quantum
materials can be engineered for highly efficient waste heat recovery using nano-
gap thermophotovoltaics as well as for radiative cooling and smart windows.
Additionally, thermal radiation at the quantum scale has significant impact on
thermal management of transistors and ultra-compact electronics. Despite this
significance, how thermal radiation is emitted and exchanged at the quantum
level is not well understood. This project will elucidate the fundamental
mechanisms underlying thermal radiation in the quantum regime. This research can
lead to technological breakthroughs in energy harvesting and conservation. This
will impact society by conserving limited energy resources and protecting the
environment. Students with disabilities, female students from rural areas of
Maine, and high school teachers will be directly involved in this research. A
new course and three lab sessions on radiative heat transfer will be developed
at the principal investigatorâ€™s department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum size
effects on thermal radiation are significant for two chief reasons. First,
optical and electronic (and thus thermal radiative) properties of quantum
materials (i.e., materials that are engineered at the atomic length scale) can
differ drastically from bulk materials. This opens up a great opportunity for
designing materials with tailored thermal radiative properties beyond the
fluctuational-electrodynamics regime. Second, radiative heat transfer at the
atomic length scale can play a significant role in thermal management of devices
such as transistors, ultra-compact circuits, quantum computers, solar cells, and
medical imagers. At atomic scale separation gaps, quantum size effects such as
phonon and electron tunneling arise. These effects can modify radiative heat
transfer compared to the fluctuational electrodynamics predictions. Although the
effect of phonon tunneling on radiative heat transfer between two dielectric
media has been studied, radiative heat transfer between metallic media in the
presence of electron tunneling is not fully understood. This research project
will elucidate quantum size effects on thermal radiation by (1) establishing a
theoretical framework for modeling thermal radiation of quantum materials, (2) a
theoretical study of thermal radiation by quantum materials of different
dimensions, (3) experimental demonstration of quantum size effects on the
magnitude and the spectrum of thermal emission, and (4) studying the effect of
electron tunneling on radiative heat transfer at quantum-scale separation
gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Thermal
Transport Processes Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.