* 2046849
* CAREER: Manipulating Topology and Correlations in 2D Heterostructures by Dynamic Structural Control
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Javier Sanchez-Yamagishi, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 02/28/2026
* USD 386,876.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The way electricity flows in a material
depends on how its atoms are arranged. Normally, the arrangement of atoms is
frozen in a crystal pattern that cannot be easily changed. This project studies
how to dynamically change the crystal pattern in a material, with the goals of
controlling the flow of electricity and understanding its quantum properties.
The specific materials studied are only a few atoms thick, so-called two-
dimensional or “2D” materials. 2D materials can be stacked like sheets of paper
and the individual sheets can easily slide and rotate, which changes the
internal crystal pattern. The research team is developing techniques to rapidly
modify the crystal pattern in a 2D material stack so that the effects on
electricity flow can be studied. These studies will be performed in a cryogenic
refrigerator at temperatures near absolute zero where the quantum behavior of
the electrons carrying the electricity is more apparent. The success of this
project will advance knowledge of quantum electrical properties which is key to
developing new electronic technologies for computers and wireless communication.
This research project will go hand-in-hand with an educational mission focused
on mentoring students, increasing participation of students from
underrepresented minorities, and public outreach by science demos and physics-
based video games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Heterostructures of 2-dimensional (2d) materials exhibit a
wide range of electronic phenomena that depend sensitively on the physical
structure of internal twisted interfaces. The research team has developed
techniques to dynamically modify the physical structure of 2d material devices
in-situ that are enabled by the low friction sliding between 2d layers. This
project proposes to apply these dynamic structural control techniques to (1)
investigate dynamic electronic effects that arise from sliding moiré
superlattices, and (2) systematically study correlated and topological physics
of multi-moiré systems by in-situ control of twist angle and layer displacement.
The successful outcome of this research would lead to the development of
topological charge pumps for manipulating electrons in insulators, as well as a
deeper understanding of how moirés can modify electronic behaviors. The research
project will provide a foundation for educational activities focused on training
students as independent scientists. The principal investigator will implement a
codified Ph.D. curriculum that prepares students for diverse career
opportunities, with an emphasis on both technical skills, such as
nanofabrication and programming, as well as soft skills, such as management and
communication. This training program will serve as a venue for increasing the
participation of students who are underrepresented in STEM. Furthermore, this
activity includes multiple approaches to increasing public engagement in the
sciences, including a high school science summer program, the distribution of
quantum materials demos to elementary school students, and the development of
physics-based video games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.