* 2046248
* CAREER: Building Creative Writing Assistants for Machine-in-the-Loop Storytelling
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Mohit Iyyer, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2026
* USD 189,875.00

This CAREER project focuses on building text generation systems that interact
with people to improve their writing and also help them learn to write. Such
“machine-in-the-loop” writing assistants are potentially transformative
technologies for improving the writing quality and productivity of human
authors, as well as providing new tools for writing pedagogy through
cyberlearning applications. However, they have been relatively underexplored by
the natural language processing community due to major difficulties in modeling,
evaluation, and data collection. The technologies developed in this project
address these challenges by (1) developing platforms that leverage existing
online author communities to enable the design and evaluation of machine-in-the-
loop writing assistants; (2) advancing text generation modeling to improve the
quality of generated text; and (3) enabling assistants to rewrite and reorganize
human-authored text through developments in automatic paraphrasing. In addition
to aiding authors in online communities, the writing assistants developed
through the project are deployed in K-12 classrooms to advance writing pedagogy.
The project incorporates undergraduate students, including those outside of
computer science, in natural language processing research, and provides
significant outreach to underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
make meaningful progress on the development of machine-in-the-loop writing
assistants, the project includes a collaboration with Protagonist Labs, which
runs online platforms for collaborative storytelling in both creative and
pedagogical settings and already has incorporated systems built by the
investigator’s team into user-facing interfaces. User interaction on such
platforms allows fine-grained evaluation of novel text generation methods, which
include neural language models that integrate context compression, context
retrieval, and discrete latent variables into the generation process to improve
overall coherence and relevance. In addition to producing new text, fully-
featured writing assistants must also be able to rewrite user text into a
specified form, such as a target writing style or suitability for a target
audience. To this end, the project introduces new paraphrase generation models
at a variety of units of text, including phrases, sentences, and paragraphs.
This research effort aims to spur research into interactive text generation
systems, and as such its outputs will include publicly-released pretrained
models and open-sourced code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.