* 2046037
* CAREER: An electrokinetically driven micro-device for rapid purification and characterization of exosomes
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Leyla Esfandiari, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Cancer is among the leading causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide, yet
about 46% of patients forsake routine screening because of the invasive nature
of such procedures, including tissue biopsy. Therefore, there are significant
efforts in basic and clinical research to develop a liquid biopsy, a minimally
invasive paradigm for the detection of circulating biomarkers from biofluids.
Among circulating biomarkers, exosomes, small particles released by cells that
help cells communicate with each other, have drawn a great deal of attention.
Exosomes are highly abundant in all biofluids including blood, saliva and urine,
and they can provide crucial information to the type of cell, such as a tumor
cell, that released them. However, using exosomes as biomarkers for cancer and
other diseases has been challenging due to the lack a technology that can
reliably isolate and characterize exosomes in a cost-effective and timely
manner. This research will lead to a rapid and accurate micro-fabricated device
that can quickly and cheaply purify and characterize exosomes from biofluids
based on their electrical properties. The immediate focus of this project is to
isolate and characterize exosomes related to cancer; however, exosomes are
associated with many other diseases, including diabetes, cardiovascular disease,
infectious diseases and neurodegenerative disorders. Thus, this novel device
could be utilized for a wide range of medical diagnoses and biomedical research,
potentially providing frequent, affordable, and early testing for patients.
Furthermore this interdisciplinary project crosses the traditional boundaries
between electrical engineering, micro/nanofluidics, biology and physics, which
will provide students with a unique educational experience during their academic
training. This project will expose K-12 students to the field of biomedical
microsystems through memorable and exciting hands-on projects and active
learning experiences. The education plan will broaden the participation of
students from underrepresented groups by recruiting and training female
scientists and engineers through the Women in Science and Engineering (WISE)
program. These undergraduate students will work closely with graduate students
to conduct this research, and they will be mentored by the principal
investigator. This project will also educate the public about how micro-
nanotechnologies can advance medicine through a YouTube channel and “ThinkTV”
program, which will be broadcast in Southwest
Ohio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exosomes (30–150 nm) are released from many cell
types into the extracellular space, are distributed in all biofluids. Their
compartmental composition and function depend on the originating cell type and
they play an important role as a molecular cargo in cell-cell communication.
Tumor-derived exosomes have potential use as circulating biomarkers in liquid
biopsy for early stage diagnostics and routine clinical monitoring of cancer
progression in difficult to access tumor sites. However, rapid and efficient
detection of exosomes is challenging owing to their heterogeneity and the
complexity of biological samples. The ultimate goal of this CAREER project is to
investigate the use of indirect dielectrophoresis (DEP) and impedance probing to
purify and identify circulating cancer-derived exosomes from biofluids. This
research will employ a novel DEP device on chip to isolate exosomes from
biofluids and measure their electrical impedance over a wide frequency spectrum
(500 KHz-50 MHz) to establish their dielectric properties. The dielectric
properties of the exosomes will then be correlated with their molecular content,
biochemical properties, and functionalities in terms of pro-inflammatory
responses. This research could ultimately enable minimally invasive liquid
biopsies in a clinical setting. It could also open a new avenue for diagnostics
and personalized therapeutics based on the ability to quickly isolate and
analyze exosomes based on their dielectric properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.