* 2046269
* CAREER: Tunable Metal Oxide Materials via Coordination Assembly of Molecular Clusters
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Alina Schimpf, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2026
* USD 477,425.00

Non-technical summary: Solid-state metal oxides are a class of materials vital
to current and emerging technologies. Making these materials with targeted and
predictable properties, however, remains a challenge due to the lack of precise
control over individual atom location. In this project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research,
Prof. Schimpf uses the assembly of pre-formed molecular building-blocks as a
route to metal oxides with well-defined, broadly tunable compositions and
precisely tailored properties. This research consists of an iterative cycle of
synthesizing materials, measuring properties and designing hypotheses to
understand the structure-property relationships observed in these molecular-
assembled metal oxides. The studies lead to new understanding of the factors
that (1) govern the ability to synthesize metal oxides with diverse or complex
compositions from pre-formed building-blocks and (2) dictate the properties of
the resulting solid-state materials. This project also provides a platform for
community college students to gain research experience designing and studying
energy-relevant materials. The UC San Diego-based researchers work with faculty
at Hispanic serving community colleges in the San Diego area to design projects
for and mentor students at these institutions. The goals of these efforts are to
attract students to careers in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) and to prepare them for future steps along this career path.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary: This project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research,
uses the coordination assembly of molecular metal oxide clusters to facilitate
access to new and widely tunable metal oxide materials with diverse compositions
and tailored properties. Unlike statistically doped semiconductors, molecule-
based materials offer access to complex metal oxide compositions with precisely
known atom positions, enabling careful structure-property evaluations. The
researchers employ an iterative process to design and understand the modular
properties of cluster-based metal oxide frameworks consisting of polyoxometalate
(POM) anions bridged with metal cations. This process allows evaluation of which
metal and cluster characteristics are important in dictating the assembly and
resulting properties of metal oxide frameworks. Factors that are investigated
include metal charge, oxidation state and hard/soft acidity and cluster charge,
size and stability. Through a collaboration, theoretical modeling supports
explanations of observed structure-property trends and resulting predictions for
rational materials design principles. Results from this research are anticipated
to provide guidelines for the rational design of molecule-based metal oxides
with targeted properties. This project also forms the foundation to provide
research experiences for community college students. Community colleges in the
San Diego area serve a large percentage of students from disadvantaged racial,
ethnic or economic groups, and thus offer an opportunity to engage an
underrepresented part of our population in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) research and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.