* 2046444
* CAREER: An adaptive framework to accelerate real-time workloads in heterogeneous and reconfigurable environments
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Zhenhua Liu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2026
* USD 314,800.00

Artificial intelligence and machine learning are enabling real-time decisions
based on live data for interactive scientific discovery and mission critical
applications such as autonomous driving and smart grid. They are increasingly
powered by heterogeneous and even reconfigurable accelerators. The
reconfigurability and heterogeneity of accelerators, together with stringent
performance requirements and complex dependencies in real-time workloads, bring
daunting operational challenges. These issues, if left unaddressed, would slow
down scientific discovery and waste lots of computing resources and energy. This
project will develop a heterogeneity and reconfigurability aware framework to
accelerate real-time artificial intelligence and machine learning without
hurting other workloads. It will benefit the society by improving the efficiency
of costly computing systems, which saves taxpayers' money and better utilize
existing investments. Real-time artificial intelligence and machine learning
powered by the framework can better serve the society, e.g., accelerating
scientific discovery and enabling data-driven control. The project will bring
innovative education, outreach and training opportunities for both academic and
industrial participants to train the next generation of researchers and
practitioners for the society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, managing
heterogeneous and reconfigurable systems for diverse workloads with high
resource utilization and performance guarantee is an extremely challenging task.
This project will design and implement an adaptive framework which automatically
detects, profiles, and analyzes both workloads and accelerators on the fly.
Based on the information, it adaptively reconfigures them to match resource
capabilities with workload needs. Global and local optimization will be used to
accommodate multiple types of workloads and the configuring, partitioning,
placement, scheduling, and execution of models in each workload. The developed
framework will provide provable performance even with partial information in
unknown environments, which is urgently needed due to the ever increasing system
complexity and volatility in workloads. Novel global resource allocation
policies will be developed based on optimization techniques in this project to
provide performance guarantee such as fairness, strategyproofness, and Pareto
efficiency. Throughout the project, a reciprocal methodology is envisioned: the
framework accelerates artificial intelligence/machine learning workloads and
artificial intelligence/machine learning techniques enable the
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.