* 2046167
* REU Site: Renewal of Summer Internships in Nanomaterials, Nanomechanics, and Leadership Training in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Uchechukwu Wejinya, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 402,533.00

This three-year REU site will provide 9 talented undergraduate students with
research opportunities in labs that bridge the gap between science and
engineering, and provide them with top-notch leadership training in engineering.
Program recruitment will target a diverse group of participants from a broad
spectrum of colleges throughout the nation, especially minority-serving and
small colleges without strong research infrastructure and experience. Women
participants will be provided custom-tailored leadership training specific to
them. Eight faculty members and nine graduate students from the Departments of
Mechanical Engineering, Physics, and Chemistry/Biochemistry will serve as
mentors. Research topics will be theoretical, computational and/or experimental,
involving short, challenging, self-contained, cutting-edge problems in
nanoscience and nanoengineering. The program includes seminars and workshops to
expose interns to nanoscale engineering as well as professional development,
emphasizing research, team building, leadership, and graduate studies. The
complementary social program includes tours of regional research and industrial
facilities, and group outings to local areas of interest in collaboration with
the other UA REU programs. The interrelationships of the engineering process and
its management within the life cycles of technology, innovation, products, and
systems will be an essential part of the REU program. The basic functions of
management relative to their implementation in technical organizations will be
examined. Strategies for leading engineering teams and technical organizations
will be explored, particularly as they affect individual and organizational
productivity and creativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site will build on
the successes of the previously funded (EEC – 1359086) REU Site and will focus
on nanomaterials, nanomechanics, and leadership training of undergraduate
students. The project objectives are: 1) to engage undergraduate students with
opportunities to conduct nanoscale science and engineering research; 2) to allow
students to self-assess their interest in graduate school; 3) to increase the
number of future professionals in nanoengineering; 4) to enable the Department
of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Arkansas – Fayetteville (UAF) to
become, and be recognized as a nationally top tier undergraduate and graduate
program, and 5) to equip students to become future leaders and managers of
technology driven organizations in the United States. Each year (of the three
year project) a different group of nine undergraduate students will conduct
research at the UAF campus as part of this ten-week summer internship program.
Nine faculty members (including the PI) and graduate students from the
Departments of Mechanical Engineering, Physics, and Chemistry/Biochemistry will
serve as mentors. Recruitment of summer interns will concentrate on five groups:
1) institutions where research opportunities in STEM are limited; 2) minority
institutions; 3) women; 4) persons with disabilities, and 5) UAF programs. All
participants will present their research findings both orally and in a written
report, sometimes leading to scientific publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.