* 2046148
* CAREER: Toward a Fundamental Understanding of Why Thrombus Dissolves, Persists, or Breaks Off
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Manuel Rausch, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 02/28/2026
* USD 568,517.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will use experimental and
computational strategies to quantify fundamental biophysical properties of blood
clot. The research work will study why blood clot sometimes dissolves, sometimes
persists, and sometimes embolizes (breaks off.) To this end, the research work
will use a clot mimic system that is highly controllable and of realistic
composition. Using both experimental and computational strategies, the work will
enable mechanistic insight into a what determines blood clot’s fate. Future
extensions of this work may enable improved diagnostic and therapeutic
strategies for patients that suffer from clot-related disease such as heart
attacks, stroke, or deep vein thrombosis. This scientific approach may also be
applicable to other soft and biological materials, as blood clot is very similar
to these. Thus, this research project will contribute to the progress in many
areas of science. Finally, the work integrates its research objectives with
educational objectives and broader impact goals that will directly translate our
advancements in health and science to public value. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goal of this research is to use deep vein thrombus as a model system to
fundamentally understand and learn to predict how thrombus microstructure gives
rise to its biophysical properties, how these properties change during thrombus
maturation and with treatment, and how maturation and treatment determine
thrombus fate. To accomplish this goal, the research work will first quantify
thrombus’ micro- and macroscopic biophysical properties during maturation and
lysis using classic mechanical testing modalities such as simple shear testing,
confined compression testing, and mode I fracture tests. Additionally, it will
make use of strategies to conduct these experiments under confocal observation.
Second, this work will calibrate and validate multiscale models to understand
and predict thrombus fate. To this end, two types of models will be used: an
investigative, microstructural model and a predictive, continuum model. Both
models will be calibrated and validated against the experimental data and then
used to investigate the mechanisms that lead to thrombus dissolution,
persistence, and embolization. Additionally, these models will provide a
framework that, in the future, will aid in optimizing deep vein thrombus
treatment and therapeutic technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.