* 2046383
* CAREER: Closing the Rural Water and Education Gap with a Simple Advanced Oxidation Process
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Joseph Goodwill, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 03/31/2026
* USD 395,284.00

Drinking water pollution is a major public health concern. Some organic
pollutants of drinking water are not easily treated by the commonly used
techniques of filtration and chlorination, so advanced treatment processes are
used. Advanced treatment typically requires complex and expensive systems that
are difficult to use in rural areas. The goal of this CAREER research project is
to understand the basic chemistry of a new advanced treatment method that
removes pollutants by combining iron and sulfur. The advantage of this new
method is that it can be used without the complex steps needed by existing
advanced treatment methods. Knowledge obtained in this research will then be
used in larger scale demonstrations of the new treatment technology to provide
real-world performance data. These demonstrations will also be used to improve
middle-school science education through a partnership with the Rhode Island 4-H
organization. Successful completion of this project will help the Nation by
providing a new approach for advanced water treatment and science education
appropriate for rural areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rural communities in the
United States face higher risks of drinking water quality violations and have
less access to advanced STEM curricula compared to more populated areas. This
CAREER development plan directly addresses these issues by focusing on rural
water quality and STEM education inequality through the development of a
simplified advanced oxidation process based on iron and sulfur. Although
advanced oxidation processes are of growing importance in water treatment, they
require complex systems for on-site generation, making them inappropriate for
many settings. The ferrate-sulfur advanced oxidation process (FeSAOP) shows
promise as an effective yet simple way to transform recalcitrant organic
pollutants, but key unknowns block adaptation. The rationale for this research
is that current advanced oxidation processes are not accessible to all water
systems and exploiting FeSAOP will close this gap. The central hypothesis is
that FeSAOP yields several radical species that rapidly oxidize contaminants
while also offering simplicity of production, enabling rural water system use
and compelling educational experiences. The plan includes four specific research
aims to: (1) elucidate iron radical formation and fate via ultrafast
spectroscopy; (2) determine the mechanism of 1,4-dioxane (a model recalcitrant
compound, and emerging contaminant) oxidation by FeSAOP; (3) incorporate novel
FeSAOP into conventional treatment processes at the pilot-scale; and (4)
integrate research and education goals via a learning-through-research model.
Broader societal impacts of this work include addressing the elevated risk
facing rural water systems, increasing opportunities for STEM exposure in
underserved communities, improving public understanding of water treatment, and
supporting a graduate student from an underrepresented group. The proposed plan
will accelerate achievement of the Principal Investigatorâ€™s long-term career
goal to ensure safe water and comprehensive STEM educational opportunities for
all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.