* 2046883
* CAREER:  Planet Formation at High Resolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Quinn Konopacky, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 364,559.00

The team will conduct high-resolution optical and spectroscopic surveys of young
planetary systems in an attempt to directly image and collect high-resolution
spectra of hot Jovian-mass planets. The team will use the upgraded Gemini
Planetary Imager (GPI 2.0) on the Gemini North telescope and the HISPEC high-
resolution spectrometer on the Keck II telescope. They will obtain the first
high-resolution spectra of forming gas giant planets, offering a pristine view
of their atmospheric structure and abundances. The team will also develop a
novel educational component for undergraduate astronomy courses based on a
planetarium-based program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GPI 2.0 optical survey will
target very young stars in nearby star-forming regions in Taurus and Rho
Ophiuchus. It will be the most sensitive direct imaging survey ever conducted in
this region. Using the demographic information discovered in the first iteration
of GPI, the team expects to detect as many as 10 new exoplanets during the epoch
of formation, constraining the timescale of formation, migration, accretion
histories, and planet-disk interactions. Follow-up observations with the HISPEC
spectrometer on the Keck II Telescope will provide R~100,000 spectra across the
entire near-infrared wavelength regime (0.9-2.5 μm). The team will investigate
predicted science performance for the instrument and provide targets from GPI
2.0 for first-light observations with HISPEC in 2024.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.