* 2046261
* CAREER: Self-Organization of Micro-Particles with Light and Sound
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Dustin Kleckner, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 02/28/2026
* USD 336,170.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Scientists have long known that one can
dramatically alter the properties of a material by patterning it on a
microscopic scale. Doing so, however, presents a major challenge: this
patterning must happen at a microscopic scale but over large distances,
preventing the use of direct techniques like 3D printing. There is an
alternative: biological organisms are able to produce complex structure using
the self-organization of basic chemical components with tuned interactions.
Doing something similar with manmade materials requires a better understanding
of the self-organization process, as well as practical methods for engineering
forces among microscopic particles. This project explores an effect known as
"optical binding", which induces complex forces between clusters of particles
using light. The research team is developing new experimental and numerical
tools to explore the range of active and passive structures that can be
generated using this force. In addition, the researchers are conducting proof of
principle research on "acoustic binding", a similar effect which uses sound
instead of light. The long term aim of both efforts is to exploit these novel
tools to better understand self-organization in general, as well as to enable a
new generation of manmade materials for industrial, defense, and consumer
applications. The project also includes efforts to increase participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields at the middle school through graduate
level through integrated education and research opportunities. In particular,
the researchers are developing a new course on experimental physics for Middle
and High school students in collaboration with the Bobcat Summer STEM Academy at
UC Merced; rather than relying on ‘canned’ physics experiments, this course
exposes students to the complete lifecycle of a scientific experiment, from
design through execution and data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Understanding self-organization is of interest for many
fields of science, including biology, chemistry, physics, and engineering.
Colloidal systems have emerged as a useful experimental platform to study this
phenomenon, as various techniques exist to modify the forces between colloidal
particles. Despite this, there are limits to the type of forces than can be
produced: they are typically short range and can only be modified during the
synthesis stage. This project is studying an effect known as optical binding,
which uses light to induce multi-particle interactions which are long range,
directional, pairwise non-conservative, and can be altered in real time.
Additionally, the project includes proof-of-principle research on acoustic
binding, which produces similar forces in an athermal and inertial regime. The
research team is using novel numerical and experimental methods to study both
types of force in detail and exploring how these forces modify the self-
organization of many-particle systems. This provides insights into how feats of
self-organization are performed in the natural world, and how they could be
exploited to create new manmade materials with complex microstructure. In
addition to its research aims, this project also includes integrated outreach
efforts to increase participation of underrepresented groups in STEM at the
middle school through graduate level through research opportunities and summer
programs for students and their teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.