* 2046186
* CAREER: Reinventing Network-on-Chips of GPU-Accelerated Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Hui Zhao, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2026
* USD 331,947.00

Graphics processing units (GPUs) have rapidly evolved to become high-performance
accelerators for data-parallel computing. To fully take advantage of the
computing power of GPUs, on-chip networks need to provide timely data movement
to satisfy the requests of data by the processing cores. Currently, there exists
a big gap between the fast-growing processing power of the GPU processing cores
and the slow-increasing on-chip network bandwidth. Because of this, GPU-
accelerated systems are interconnect-dominated and the on-chip network becomes
their performance bottleneck. The emergence of data-intensive applications, such
as artificial intelligence, graph analysis, and big data is putting more
pressure on the interconnection fabrics. Furthermore, the future of computing
beyond Moore’s law and Dennard scaling is moving toward advanced integration of
emerging hardware architectures, such as Tensor cores and high bandwidth
memories through 2.5D or 3D stacking. Such new hardware architectures also call
for effective support from the on-chip networks. The educational contributions
of this research include: (1) develop effective strategies for teaching computer
systems, create an active learning environment for students and integrate the
proposed research results into the curriculum development; (2) integrate the
modules and simulators into course projects and mentor students to conduct
computer system related research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to
reinvent on-chip networks for GPU-accelerated systems to remove the
communication bottleneck. A major outcome of the project is a set of techniques
that enable the development of effective and efficient network-on-chip
architectures. The research activities leverage a combination of system
modeling, state-of-the-art design methods, and cutting-edge VLSI technologies.
The specific research objectives are: (1) develop computational models,
benchmarks, and simulator for GPU on-chip networks, with the goal of
understanding the communication behavior of GPU applications, especially the
recently emerged ones; (2) develop innovative network architectures tailored for
GPU-accelerated systems for improved performance and power efficiency; (3)
explore the emerging research paradigm of in-network computing to improve the
computation/communication efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.