* 2046180
* CAREER: PolyQ Proteins Phase Transition Induced by Lipid Vesicles
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Wei Dai, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,013,753.00

The structure-function paradigm states that protein structure dictates function.
However, this concept has been challenged by recent discoveries that ~40% of
proteins in eukaryotic cells with important biological functions lack a stable
three-dimensional (3D) structure. Many of these intrinsically disordered
proteins (IDPs) can condense into membraneless liquid-like or gel-like
assemblies through a process termed phase transition. Formation of these
assemblies enriches these proteins within an isolated microenvironment, and thus
regulates their biological activities. At present, it remains a mystery how the
ultrastructure of phase transition assemblies supports spatiotemporal control of
functions of the enclosed proteins. Due to their structural flexibility, IDPs
present inherent challenges for experimental structural studies. By applying
state-of-the-art structural methods, namely cryo-electron tomography (cryoET)
and advanced subtomogram analyses, this project will reveal the architecture of
phase transition assemblies, and establish a connection between the 3D
structure, dynamics, and function for this important class of proteins. Overall,
this project will contribute towards a more complete structure-function paradigm
in fundamental biology. In parallel, the PI will develop a research-driven
education curriculum that introduces interdisciplinary research to undergraduate
students, promotes interactive graduate student teaching, and provides engaging
online training resources on cutting-edge cryoET biostructure imaging to young
scholars. Development of the cryoET educational portal has broader impacts. It
will showcase to the general public the exciting potential of this novel
bioimaging technique for unraveling dynamic biological processes in
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to resolve the
structural organization of protein phase transition assemblies to provide a
deeper understanding of how biophysical and structural properties of these
assemblies support biological activities of enclosed IDPs. Proteins with
extended polyglutamine (polyQ) homo-repeats represent one of the simplest IDPs.
Using this system, the PI will resolve, at the subnanometer level, the 3D
structural organization of phase transition assemblies formed under
physiologically relevant experimental conditions. This project will also
investigate how the formation, stability, and aggregation propensity of phase
transition assemblies are affected by sequence characteristics of the IDPs and
lipid vesicles. This work will advance our understanding of the molecular
mechanisms underlying IDP phase transitions. More importantly, results from this
work will facilitate development of strategies for regulating these metastable
assemblies and thereby modulating protein homeostasis in
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.