* 2046552
* CAREER: Advancing Physical Human-Robot Interaction through Intuitive Sensorimotor Communication
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Yun Song, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 07/31/2026
* USD 538,876.00

In the near future, robotic systems will collaborate closely with human partners
to complete shared tasks such as materials handling in manufacturing and patient
care in clinical settings. To ensure safe and effective interaction, the robotic
partner must interpret and understand the human partner's goals and intent, as
communicated through various information channels, including physical
interaction. The human partner must also be able to interpret and understand the
robot's intended actions. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
aims to understand how a human and a robot can communicate each otherâ€™s intent
through impedance modulation at a single point of physical contact. The project
will use this knowledge to develop a robotic system that interacts safely and
intuitively with a human partner as they walk "hand-in-hand" in a collaborative
path-following scenario (assisted walking). By analyzing the forces at the hands
and consequent movements of the arms during different leader/follower scenarios,
specific impedance modulation strategies of humans will be identified that
enable natural human-robot interaction through their arms and hands. The project
will advance the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and to advance
national health, prosperity, and welfare by advancing a fundamental
understanding of novel communication strategies made possible through the
physical coupling of human and embodied machine intelligences. This project will
also provide early exposure and training opportunities on physically interactive
robots to the public, particularly to students in STEM programs and to K-12
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work focuses on intent communication and
the role of the mechanical impedance of the human arm during collaborative,
physical human-robot interactions. The project will measure human arm impedance
during guided partner walking with the human acting either as leader or
follower. In partner walking, one agent guides the other through a desired path
at some desired speed. The robot will apply small transient force perturbations
occasionally to the human arm and monitor the resulting arm motions to infer
limb impedance. The project team will then identify the contextual modulation of
arm impedance during situations where the human assumes the role of the leader
and in situations where the human is the follower. By doing so, the project team
seeks to discern physical communication strategies underlying effective and
intuitive physical human-robot collaborations. Finally, the project will
quantify the effectiveness of the identified intent communication strategies by
implementing them on a mobile robot that simulates human partnered walking. The
experiments will be performed using a force-controlled over-ground interactive
robot that walks together with a human in a large room monitored by a 3D motion
capture system. The research and educational work of this project will lay the
foundation for implementing intuitive physical communication between humans and
robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.