* 2046650
* CAREER: Investigating Chromatin Dynamics Underlying Activity-Induced Neuronal Transcription Using CRISPR Technologies
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Lei Qi, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 02/28/2026
* USD 609,781.00

Mammalian genomes are folded into 3-dimensional (3D) structures in the nucleus.
How the 2-meter-long primate DNA with 3-billion base pairs (bp) fit into a
10-micrometer nucleus has intrigued biologists for decades. Microscopy imaging
and DNA sequencing methods have revealed distinct structural units of DNA
territories and domains, which change dynamically when cells change fate or are
under environmental stress. How these DNA structural domains functionally impact
gene expression and cellular activity remains unclear. To address this important
question, the project aims to develop a new CRISPR-based technology platform to
reveal the causal relationship between the 3D genome organization and gene
expression. The project will develop an online education platform consisting of
hands-on curricula modules designed to stimulate broad interest on CRISPR gene
editing among undergraduates and high school students. Students from diverse
cultural or socio-economic backgrounds will gain exposure to cutting-edge genome
editing tools, knowledge and techniques via the remote learning platform. These
educational activities are expected to engage STEM students and teachers,
promote participation of underrepresented groups, and inform and educate the
public about the importance and responsible use of novel gene editing
biotechnologies. The project will train graduate students in the field of genome
editing and genomics for science communication, education and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of the project is to
develop a novel CRISPR-based technology platform to elucidate dynamics and
timescales of 3D chromatin interactions and their causal relationship to gene
transcription. Preliminary work in the PIs lab has developed several CRISPR-
based methods such as LiveFISH for live cell imaging, CRISPRa/i for
transcription perturbation, and CRISPR-GO for inducible and reversable
repositioning of genomic loci. The project will develop an integrated platform
enabling simultaneous perturbation and multi-color imaging of any
DNA/RNA/protein on super-resolution level over longitudinal timescales in single
living neuron cells. Using induced human neurons as a model system, the specific
scientific goals are to: 1) measure the timescales of chromatin looping at
signal-stimulated gene loci via live-cell imaging in single neurons; 2) study
dynamics of loop formation, mRNA transcription and protein translation via
multiple-color super-resolution imaging after neuronal activation; 3) determine
the mutual relationship between looping and transcription by targeted
perturbation of gene transcription with CRISPRa/i or targeted perturbation of
looping with CRISPR-GO. Successful completion of the project will reveal new
knowledge of the chromatin loop formation and complexity and uncover their
causal functional relationship to transcription and cell activity. The insights
gained by this research are expected to form the biotechnology basis that can be
used to manipulate and engineer the 3D genome for future functional genomics
research. The project is jointly funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology and
Genetic Mechanisms clusters of the MCB Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.