* 2046122
* CAREER: Bioinformatic algorithm and infrastructure development for post-translational modification analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* So Young Ryu, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 05/31/2026
* USD 520,970.00

Protein post translational modifications (PTMs) play important roles in many
aspects of cell biology, including cell growth, differentiation, and survival.
Due to the complex nature of PTMs (e.g., various PTM types and sites), there
have to date been limitations in the technology used for PTM
identification/quantification. This project will overcome such challenges by
developing bioinformatic methods that incorporate unique characteristics of data
and fully utilize publicly available data, providing comprehensive
characterization and quantification of PTMs. This development will enhance
fundamental understanding of functional proteomics in many biological areas,
including plant science, biomedicine, and microbiology. Bioinformatic tools
generated from the research component of this project will be re-designed as an
interactive educational app. Through the associated outreach activities using
this app, the project will provide valuable interdisciplinary training to both
graduate and undergraduate students, including first-generation college, low-
income, and minority students, and inspire high school students to pursue STEM
majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to develop
statistical and computational methods to advance the field of mass spectrometry-
based PTM analysis. Specifically, this project will establish PTM algorithms and
infrastructures that 1) utilize publicly available data to improve PTM
identification in biological samples of interest; 2) make use of instrumental
technique-specific characteristics of data; 3) provide biologically- meaningful
information by properly measuring site occupancy rates and stoichiometry; 4)
develop a mixed-model framework to perform differential PTM analysis; and 5)
suggest an optimal experimental design (e.g., instrumental technique and sample
preparation, sample size calculation) for future studies. This development will
not only advance knowledge across various biological fields, but also help
scientists generate critical hypotheses using millions of publicly available
data generated previously, without PTM enrichment. The resulting bioinformatic
tools and infrastructure will accelerate scientific discoveries using mass
spectrometry-based proteomic data. The results of the project can be found at
https://github.com/soyoungryu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.