* 2046043
* CAREER: Self-consistent and Data-constrained Simulations of the Leader and Return Stroke Processes in Lightning Discharges
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Caitano da Silva, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2026
* USD 523,159.00

Despite lightning being such a common natural phenomenon, a large portion of its
fundamental physics remains to be uncovered. Even its most studied element — the
return stroke — remains to be fully quantified. A central question in lightning
physics has to do with how the widely-observed asymmetry in positive- and
negative-leader propagation maps into the overall contrasting differences
between cloud-to-ground (CG) flashes of both positive and negative polarities
(leader is the term used to describe the elongation lightning channel before its
connection to the ground). One important example is the origin of recoil
leaders, which are observed to only retrace the channels of positively-charged
leader channels. Recoil leaders in its turn may be the root cause for the
asymmetry in stroke multiplicity between positive and negative CGs.
Understanding the physics of lightning at a fundamental level is required for
quantifying its effects in our planet's atmosphere (e.g., production of nitrogen
oxide compounds) and to mitigate its societal impacts (e.g., power transmission
and distribution disruptions). Through the development of novel computer models,
this project addresses outstanding questions in lightning physics outlined in
the second paragraph below. The broader impacts of this project are heavily tied
with the educational plan. The backbone of our educational plan is to develop
teaching strategies based on the simple idea that a physics instructor can use
lightning and thunderstorms — something that any student is familiar with — to
introduce complex physics concepts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project tackles
two key problems in lightning physics. Problem 1: When leader channels connect
to a ground structure, a strong current surge known as the return stroke travels
upward. The most widely-employed type of return stroke model assumes that the
wave propagation velocity and its attenuation with height are free parameters of
the model. Despite a few attempts from previous investigation, a detailed
characterization of the return stroke dynamics from first-principles remains an
open problem. Problem 2: Positive and negative leaders have different
propagation mechanisms (different velocities and channel branching rates, and
continuous vs. stepped propagation). It has been hypothesized that this polarity
asymmetry maps into how differently current cutoff and recoil leader formation
takes place in positive and negative CG flashes. However, there is no
computational simulation tool available that can fully answer this complicated
question. The main goal of this project is to advance the current understand of
lightning by introducing two novel physics-based models to describe the main
stages of a lightning flash, and address the two problems outlined above: (1) a
return stroke model that calculates the velocity of current and optical
luminosity waves and their attenuation as they propagate upward towards the
cloud, and (2) a stochastic, 3-dimensional model of the leader channel network,
which accounts for probabilistic branching and has different propagation
mechanisms for positive and negative extremities. The most important advance
aimed here is the coupling of these two electrodynamics models with a realistic
treatment of the plasma channel's nonlinear
resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.