* 2046521
* CAREER: Formulations, Theory, and Algorithms for Nonlinear Model Reduction in Transport-Dominated Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Benjamin Peherstorfer, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 02/28/2026
* USD 250,726.00

Often in science and engineering, systems need to be numerically simulated with
multiple different parameter configurations, inputs, and coefficients to gain a
deeper understanding of the underlying physical phenomena. Model reduction
(complexity reduction) has become a ubiquitous tool that makes these repeated
numerical simulations computationally tractable by exploiting intrinsic low-rank
structures in the system dynamics. However, most of today's model reduction
methods exploit linear structures that are present only in a limited class of
problems, which excludes, for example, important problems with transport
phenomena that describe waves and other moving coherent structures. This
severely limits the use of today's model reduction methods in a wide range of
applications from multi-phase problems in materials science to combustion in
engineering to pattern formation in biology. The goal of this project is to
develop new types of model reduction methods at the intersection of machine
learning, numerical analysis, and scientific computing that exploit nonlinear
structures to make tractable repeated simulations of transport phenomena to
support scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nonlinear model
reduction techniques proposed in this project will derive reduced solutions on
manifolds as compositions of low-rank approximations. This means that the
traditional linear vector-space structure of today's model reduction methods is
given up in favor of increased expressiveness ("breaking the Kolmogorov
barrier"). The work packages are as follows: (i) New approximation theory
concepts will be developed to show for prototypical transport-dominated partial
differential equations that the proposed reduced models break the Kolmogorov
barrier of today's linear model reduction methods, meaning the best-
approximation error of the proposed nonlinear models decays exponentially faster
than the best-approximation error of linear models. (ii) Numerical methods will
be proposed that exploit the nonlinear low rankness of the composed
approximations of the proposed nonlinear reduced models to achieve speedups
compared to traditional models. The nonlinear solutions will be numerically
computed by integrating in time the governing equations to ensure that the
nonlinear reduced models generalize well to new inputs/parameters, in contrast
to purely relying on data-fitted maps without going back to the governing
equations. (iii) Two real-world applications in collaborations with domain
scientists in storm-surge forecasting and additive manufacturing will
demonstrate that the proposed techniques have the potential to impact a wide
range of applications that currently are limited by prohibitively expensive
simulations of transport phenomena. (iv) Integrated education components such as
interactive online courses via flipped classrooms, tutorials for engineers, and
outreach activities building on the two real-world applications in storm-surge
forecasting and additive manufacturing will educate a broad audience and ensure
relevance in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.