* 2046772
* CAREER: Intersubband neurons for ultrafast optical neural networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* David Burghoff, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

An artificial neural network is a machine learning technique that mimics the
operation of a human brain. These networks are typically implemented using
electronics, and they have been responsible for many recent technological
advancements. Neural networks that use light—optical neural networks—could
potentially perform calculations even faster, potentially at the speed of light.
However, full-scale optical networks competitive with electronics have not been
demonstrated, as they lack the critical element that allows artificial neural
networks to make decisions. In this program, new optical devices will be
developed that fill in this missing puzzle piece. By growing atomically-thin
layers of different materials on one another, the first intersubband neurons
will be created. These are devices that will be able to make decisions based on
the amount of light that hits them, and they will eventually allow for ultrafast
optical neural networks to be developed. This could directly benefit many
fields, as it could provide direct speed-up of many computing tasks. In
addition, it could allow for information processing that does not use
electronics at all! This program integrates research and education, having
broader impacts on the community. It will develop an optics outreach program for
a middle school in South Bend, one that introduces students to important
concepts and will allow them the opportunity to see a real research lab in
action. It will also develop a summer research program for undergraduates from
underrepresented groups, as well as a new graduate course on nonlinear
optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of
this program is to develop new intersubband photonic devices for information
processing, ultimately culminating in the first optical neural networks capable
of high-speed operation. Deep learning based on neural networks has
revolutionized computation. By cascading linear matrix multiplications with
nonlinear activation functions, a deep neural network can learn many tasks. In
principle, optical neural networks could perform calculations at the speed of
light, thousands of times faster than electronic networks. Unfortunately, while
light is excellent at computing the linear part of the network, it cannot so
easily compute the nonlinear part. Optical nonlinearities are fast but
notoriously small. In this program, a nanostructure will instead be designed
that blends an optical element with a nonlinear electronic element. This program
will utilize the physics of intersubband transitions to make intersubband
neurons, nonlinear devices expected to operate at speeds much faster than
existing devices and with lower optical powers. Several novel design strategies
have been developed that can implement low-threshold, low power consumption,
high-speed artificial neurons, and in this program, they will be experimentally
demonstrated and characterized. Neurons will be also be developed at shorter
wavelengths using an emerging material system in order to improve the
scalability and long-term viability of this concept. The intellectual merit of
this program is that it will lay the groundwork for a completely new approach to
optical neural networks, one that seamlessly blends the best features of
electronics and the best features of photonics. Though intersubband physics have
previously been exploited to make sources, detectors, and sensors, they have yet
to make an impact in computation—this program will do just that. It will make
important contributions at the intersection of optics, electrical engineering,
and computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.