* 2046063
* CAREER: Geometries of Topological Defects in 3D Nematics, from Equilibrium Structure to Active Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Daniel Beller, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2022
* USD 260,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research and education to advance understanding of how complex,
functional organization arises in living and lifelike systems from the
interactions of many similar units. From the cytoskeleton within cells up to
animal swarms and flocks, nature abounds with examples of collective
organization and collective motion with critically important functions, such as
cell division and foraging for food. Recently, insights from statistical and
soft materials physics have helped to uncover general principles underlying such
collective behaviors across many size scales and species. This physics of active
matter, because of its wide applicability, is guiding the design of new,
advanced materials that mimic functionalities of living systems, such as the
capability to sense their environment, internally rearrange, move, divide, or
self-heal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active nematics constitute one prominent class
of active matter, with examples including intracellular biofilament assemblies,
colonies of growing or swarming bacteria, and tissues of epithelial or neural
stem cells. Two basic factors unite these diverse systems: the active forces
exerted by each unit, for example a cell or biofilament, along an axis of
extension or contraction, and the tendency for neighboring units to align their
long axes in parallel, like a crowded collection of tree logs floating on a
river. This latter phenomenon, known as nematic order, can be interrupted at
certain locations by topological defects, which are point-like or thread-like
places within the nematic where the neighboring units unavoidably fail to align.
Like a vexing bump in a rug, topological defects can be moved around or
combined, but cannot be smoothed out of existence except by special operations
such as moving them out to a boundary. In active nematics, far from being
vexatious, topological defects are fundamental to the emergent collective
motion: Active forces continually produce and destroy topological defects, whose
chaotic motions continually rearrange the underlying, force-exerting units.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, in order to understand active nematics in
biology and exploit these phenomena in life-mimicking technologies, it is
imperative to understand the creation, motions, and effective interactions of
topological defects. Significant progress has been made in recent years on this
front for thin layers of active nematics. However, the behavior of topological
defects becomes substantially more complicated in fully three-dimensional
systems, which presents a challenge for developing robust technologies based on
active nematic physics. To address this challenge, the principal investigator
and his research team will develop a computationally guided theoretical
understanding of active nematic dynamics in 3D, with topological defects as the
central focus. This research will uncover the rules governing how thread-like
topological defects are born, reshape themselves, and eventually merge with
other defects or disappear. In turn, these findings will reveal the defect-
driven rearrangements of active nematic material, illuminating how the material
responds to stimuli such as damage or a change of chemical environment. The
understanding gained from this project will guide experimental investigations of
phenomena universal to diverse 3D active nematic systems in nature, and will
enable design of advanced materials capable of autonomous functional responses
with a wide range of applications in biomedical, industrial, and consumer
devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his research group will design and
lead education and outreach activities closely integrated with the research
project. Modeling of nematics is incorporated into a new graduate course on
Advanced Soft Matter and Statistical Physics at the University of California,
Merced. Professional development workshops build undergraduates’ skills in
critically analyzing, visualizing, and writing about scientific data.
Additionally, outreach to high-school students in California’s San Joaquin
Valley employs soft matter computer simulation activities as accessible,
relatable, and visually appealing introductions to physics research and
scientific computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational
research on topological defect lines in three-dimensional (3D) nematic liquid
crystals, together with an integrated program of education and outreach
incorporating soft matter research. The research goal is to understand both
equilibrium structure and non-equilibrium active dynamics of 3D nematics,
through development of a coarse-grained theory for interaction and motion of
curvilinear disclination defects. This goal is motivated in part by the recent
demonstration of a bulk-3D active nematic model system, exhibiting creation and
annihilation of topologically neutral disclination loops along with a network of
disclination lines. This project, employing a coarse-grained framework for
disclination geometry alongside relaxational and active-hydrodynamic
computational modeling, will calculate effective pair potentials governing
deformation and reorientation of nearby disclinations. Hydrodynamic calculations
will illuminate how and why activity causes disclinations to curve, stretch,
reconnect, and change winding character. Fundamental properties of the 3D active
steady state will be determined, including chaotic self-mixing and the
disclination network’s continual topological self-reconfiguration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The perspective of disclinations as active quasiparticles
has been central to understanding active nematic chaotic dynamics in 2D. As
exploration begins of the 3D case, a major challenge is the far greater
complexity of topological defects: While 2D disclinations have fixed winding
numbers such as +1/2 and –1/2, in 3D these winding geometries can continuously
transform into one another, as seen both in active defect loops and in
heterogeneous defects of equilibrium nematics frustrated by surface anchoring.
There is a need for theoretical tools to predict and characterize such
geometrically variable but topologically robust features in complex 3D
orientation data. Addressing this need, this research applies a new definition
of disclination orientation and winding character via an orthonormal frame
construction directly computable from the nematic director field. This frame
provides a set of unambiguous coarse-grained variables to systematically
generalize recent findings on disclination translation and reorientation from 2D
into 3D. The project will produce a widely applicable framework for effective
interactions and active dynamics of 3D disclinations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI and research group will design and lead education and outreach activities
closely integrated with the research project. Liquid crystals modeling is
incorporated into a new graduate course on Advanced Soft Matter and Statistical
Physics emphasizing computational techniques alongside theoretical methods.
Professional development workshops build undergraduates’ skills in critically
analyzing, visualizing, and writing about scientific data as they engage in
research projects in various scientific and engineering disciplines.
Additionally, outreach to high-school students in California’s San Joaquin
Valley employs soft matter computer simulation activities as accessible,
relatable, and visually appealing introductions to physics research and
scientific computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.