* 2046562
* CAREER: A Hybrid Filtering and Robust Control Framework for Legged Robot Locomotion on Dynamic Rigid Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Yan Gu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 564,702.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will focus on creating
new methods to model, estimate, and control the movement of legged robots for
enabling stable locomotion on dynamic rigid surfaces (DRS) (i.e., surfaces that
move and do not deform). While todayâ€™s legged robot systems have demonstrated
remarkable capabilities in traversing stationary surfaces (e.g., stairs, sand,
and grass), legged locomotion on DRS (e.g., ships, aircraft, and trains) is a
new robot functionality that has not been addressed. This new functionality will
empower legged robots to negotiate complex, dynamic human environments (that are
prohibitively challenging for wheeled or tracked robots) to allow them to aid in
numerous critical high-risk applications, such as shipboard firefighting and
fire suppression and cleaning/disinfection of public transportation vehicles to
contain the spread of infectious diseases. Enabling such functionality demands
reliable robot estimation and control, which are substantially challenging due
to the high complexity of the associated robot behaviors that are hybrid
(involving continuous leg-swinging motions and discrete foot-landing events) and
subject to the time-varying DRS movement. The CAREER research program seeks to
solve these fundamental problems and lay a foundation for the development of
next-generation legged robot systems capable of autonomous navigation on
nonstationary surfaces. The CAREER education program will enhance the robotics
curriculum at the University of Massachusetts Lowell while engaging diverse
groups, including underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students, K-12
students, and the general public, in robotics education and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of the project is to draw upon
dynamic modeling, state estimation, feedback control, and theory of hybrid
systems to advance the control theory of legged robots in order to realize
provably stable legged locomotion on a DRS. To achieve the research goal, four
main objectives will be pursued: (i) formulation of a physics-based model that
captures the hybrid, time-varying robot dynamics associated with legged
locomotion on a DRS; (ii) creation of new methods of designing state estimators
that achieve real-time state estimation with convergence guarantees by provably
expanding an invariant filtering methodology from continuous systems to hybrid
dynamical systems that include legged robots moving on a DRS; (iii) derivation
of a Lyapunov-based controller design methodology to produce stable locomotion
on a DRS by handling the hybrid, time-varying robot dynamics under uncertainties
that reside in both continuous phases and discrete events; and (iv) integration
of the modeling, state estimation, and controller design into a model-based
framework that provably sustains legged locomotion on a DRS. The project will
support the PI to solve major robotics challenges beyond the capabilities of the
state of the art, and help establish a long-term career in robotics and
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-directorate
Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the
Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.