* 2046540
* CAREER: New Analytic Frontiers for Symmetric Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Viet Tung Hoang, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2026
* USD 336,184.00

Justifying security of real-world cryptographic systems is often challenging
because those legacy systems were not originally designed with a provable-
security goal in mind, and consequently theoretical explanations may be
unsatisfactory, failing to capture the real strength of the systems. In some
other cases, provably secure designs are too expensive for performance-hungry
applications, and practitioners therefore have to resort to heuristic solutions.
This project takes a critical step towards this long-term goal by developing new
proof techniques for symmetric cryptography to understand the exact security of
real-world schemes, and bridge the performance gap between provable-security
designs and heuristic ones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies how to
build practical and provably secure Format-Preserving Encryption schemes, a tool
that is widely used for encrypting credit-card numbers. The project revisits the
security analyses of several widely used Random Number Generators, strengthening
them with new analytic methods to obtain tight bounds. The project investigates
how to give tight time-memory trade-offs for symmetric encryption schemes. The
investigator develops an original problem-solving course in which students
experience the full discovery process with trial-and-error, guessing, forming
attack plans, and validating them. This class targets senior undergraduate
students and first-year graduate students, preparing them with a proper
background for doing research in theoretical computer science. Some of this
material is used in the Young Scholars Program, a summer science and math
program for high-school seniors in Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.