* 2046730
* CAREER: Topological Descriptors
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Brittany Fasy, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2026
* USD 183,627.00

Comparing topological spaces, especially those arising from noisy data, is
difficult. Topological data analysis (TDA) captures the 'shape' of data with
descriptors (e.g., persistence diagrams and Reeb graphs). Individually, these
topological descriptors have proven to be powerful data-analysis tools; however,
a single topological descriptor is often not rich enough to capture the
intricacies of large, complex data that arises in real applications. For that
reason, this project develops a framework for studying topological spaces and
data by transforming them into families of descriptors that capture the topology
of different 'views' of the data. Studying this family of descriptors enables
new methods for summarizing and comparing topological spaces, and creates a
pathway for their use in statistical settings. As a result, this project will
develop usable, theoretically-grounded data-analysis techniques that will enable
TDA for large complex data, including networks, images, and point clouds.
Through the research activities, the investigator will train graduate and
undergraduate students in interdisciplinary research, and special efforts will
be made to recruit first-generation and underrepresented minority students. The
proposed educational activities will promote a sense of belonging of first-
generation and underrepresented minority students as graduate students in STEM,
and, more generally, as future academics in interdisciplinary
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project builds the
foundations for representing and comparing large, complex topological spaces and
data sets through parameterized families of topological descriptors, where a
topological descriptor is any summary of a topological space. These families of
topological descriptors are called topological transforms. The two objectives to
accomplish this are: (1) Studying topological transforms and quantifying their
ability to represent topological spaces. The project team will study existing
transforms, reframe other topological and data analysis concepts as a
topological transform, and propose new transforms. By allowing a diverse set of
topological descriptors (from persistence diagrams to Euler characteristic
curves to small graphs) and a choice of parameterization set (e.g., subspaces or
ambient directions), the topological transform framework is flexible. (2)
Developing the statistical tools necessary for using topological transforms for
data summarization and comparison. In doing so, the project team will define
distances between transforms and study the transforms as distributions over
spaces of topological descriptors. Throughout, theoretical developments will be
grounded in applications, thus establishing mathematical foundations and
algorithmic developments that address core issues in analyzing data from real-
world applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.