* 2046368
* CAREER: Testing the adaptive significance of thermally-mediated behavioral responses of tropical and temperate dung beetles in a changing world
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Kimberly Sheldon, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,352,860.00

Temperature impacts the development and survival of insects, and warmer
temperatures are expected to result in insect population declines. Insects could
potentially compensate for temperature increases by shifting their behavior to
take advantage of cooler microclimates in their environment. However, species
that have evolved in relatively constant thermal environments, like tropical
regions, may have limited ability to shift their behavior in response to
temperature changes compared to species that have evolved in thermally variable
environments, like temperate regions. To understand the potential for behavioral
shifts to buffer organisms from warming, this project will expose tropical and
temperate dung beetles, a beneficial insect group, to temperature increases
using laboratory experiments and field manipulations. Specifically, researchers
will examine reproductive behaviors of dung beetles in response to warmer and
more variable temperatures and investigate how behavioral responses impact
offspring survival and development. The researchers will then build a model to
predict impacts of temperature change on insect populations. Native American
high school students and undergraduate interns will carry out key pieces of the
research. The project will simultaneously support STEM literacy and interest in
STEM fields while advancing our understanding of the sensitivity of species from
different latitudes to environmental stress. Additional broader impacts include
training of graduate students in physiology and ecology in the USA and at
international field sites, thus strengthening students’ global networks. This
project will enhance infrastructure by adding insect specimens to collections in
the USA and Ecuador for teaching and future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical ectotherms, which represent the vast
majority of biological diversity on Earth, are predicted to be particularly at
risk from increases in temperature mean and variance. However, there is a great
deal of uncertainty in these predictions because models often fail to consider
behavioral plasticity, which could buffer organisms from temperature change.
Theory suggests the capacity for behavioral plasticity should vary with the
evolutionary history of organisms; species from temperate zones that evolved
with more diurnal and seasonal temperature variation may have greater behavioral
plasticity than species from the more invariant tropical zones. This project
will incorporate realistic temperature changes (i.e. increases in both mean and
variance) and focus on plasticity of reproductive behaviors of tropical and
temperate dung beetles. Dung beetles—an ecologically and economically valuable
insect group—have considerable control over the developmental environment of
their offspring, which in turn impacts offspring phenotype, fitness, and
population dynamics. Using an integrated series of lab and field experiments,
the project will 1) compare plasticity of reproductive behaviors among tropical
and temperate species in response to temperature change, and 2) examine how
these responses shape offspring phenotype and fitness. Life table data will then
be used to 3) develop a model to assess population viability of tropical and
temperate species. Research will be integrated with a Native American high
school education program and undergraduate internships to simultaneously support
STEM literacy and interest in STEM fields while advancing our understanding of
the potential for behavioral plasticity to buffer species from temperature
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.