* 2046796
* CAREER: Warm Quantum Materials: Harnessing Exotic Quantum Properties at High Temperatures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Ranga Dias, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 02/28/2026
* USD 461,151.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity is one of the most profound
phenomena in condensed matter physics and has the property of complete absence
of electrical resistance. Achieving a state of superconductivity at room
temperature or near room temperature at ambient pressure is groundbreaking.
Pressure has been proven to be the most versatile tuning parameter in making
novel materials, such as superconductors. Hydrogen-rich materials, mimicking the
elusive solid metallic phase of hydrogen, can be metalized at much lower
pressures, promoting high-Tc superconductivity at much lower pressures. The
primary goal of this project is to synthesize novel hydrogen rich, room
temperature or above room temperature superconducting materials at ambient
pressure for practical applications, such as advanced power grids, new
transportation, medical imaging, and scanning techniques such as MRI and
magnetocardiography, and faster, more efficient electronics for digital logic
and memory device technology. The project also provides an important research
infrastructure for high pressure experiments with capabilities of addressing a
diverse set of problems in materials science. The principal investigator will
create educational media to support teaching and student learning all over the
world. Groups receiving direct support include graduate students gaining access
to large user facilities and learning necessary research skills; local high
school teachers collaborating with the principal investigator on direct
application of classroom concepts; research opportunities for first-generation
college, low-income, and underrepresented minority students; and improving and
building upon resources available to the Deaf community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The properties of quantum
materials are anomalously sensitive to external stimuli such as pressure, which
give rise to exotic and often unprecedented properties. The long-standing quest
for room-temperature or warm superconductivity has been reinvigorated by the
discovery of high Tc superconductivity in a new class of dense, hydrogen-rich
materials—superhydrides. The superhydrides rely on the role of the dissociation
of the hydrogen molecules, which provide the extra electrons needed in energy
states near the Fermi level. However, thus far, theoretical and experimental
studies are mainly focused on binary superhydrides. The efforts envisioned in
this project represent a natural and timely research direction to discover and
understand structure, chemical bonding, and stability of novel ternary and
quaternary superconductors with Tc comparable to or higher than room temperature
and via compositional tuning, lowering the transition pressure while preserving
the superconducting properties. Furthermore, in order to understand the quantum
nature of these hot superconductors, there is a major need for absolute
temperature measurements in high pressure experiments. To remedy this need,
Nitrogen vacancy centers provide a new way to potentially determine the in-situ
temperature measurement for compressed materials into the Mbar range, which
would be revolutionary. Careful thermal measurements would likely increase the
ability to measure the heat capacity on superconducting superhydrides, which is
a superior test for superconductivity. The work will allow the research team to
obtain insight into superconductivity more broadly including the stabilities,
and as such, to the design of a new class of warm quantum materials for
transformative technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.