* 2046288
* CAREER: Designing Hypervalent Bismuth Complexes with Reactive Perfluorinated Groups for  Selective Organofluorination and Expanding Outreach in STEM Education in Hawaii.
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Jakub Hyvl, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 02/28/2026
* USD 670,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Jakub Hyvl of the University of Hawaii–Manoa, Department of Chemistry, is
studying the synthesis of bismuth compounds, which potentially can be developed
into replacements for expensive metals that currently are used to facilitate
important chemical transformations. Many chemical reactions require catalysts to
proceed at and acceptable rate. A common characteristic of one important type of
catalysts is their ability to gain and lose electrons; that is to participate in
oxidative or reductive processes. Since many of these catalysts contain
expensive metals such as platinum, there is great interest in discovering
similar catalysts based on less expensive components. In this project, the
preparation of bismuth compounds that are capable of the sort of gain/loss of
electrons typical of platinum is being explored. The project focuses on bismuth
because it is much cheaper and environmentally more benign than platinum. In
addition to the scientific project, there is an educational component that
involves close collaborations with local programs and science teachers. It will
engage middle and high school students, especially Native Hawaiian, and other
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bismuth is inexpensive,
abundant, and non-toxic. This project aims at synthesizing bismuth compounds
that mimic the reactivity of noble metal transition metal complexes. In the
research portion of this project, organobismuth species that are capable of
performing efficient difluorocarbenation and perfluoroalkylation reactions are
being synthesized. These involve hypervalent bismuth compounds with an expanded
coordination number that can cycle between oxidation states Bi(III)/Bi(V) and
Bi(I)/Bi(III). These attributes are to be used to facilitate a selective
organofluorine transfer, a pharmaceutically relevant transformation that is
often challenging. The educational portion of this project will reach out to
K-12 students, collaborate with local programs and science teachers, and place
an emphasis on Native Hawaiians and other traditionally underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.