* 2046632
* CAREER: System Design of Crowd Logistics via Participatory Agent-based Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Caroline Krejci, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2026
* USD 532,585.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will contribute to
the advancement of national prosperity and economic welfare by yielding insights
into crowd logistics platform design. Crowd logistics is a term that describes
crowdsourced transport and delivery of goods and freight. Senders source cost-
effective logistics services from individual carriers via an online platform,
which is controlled by a digital management system. To be successful, a platform
must rapidly scale up its sender and carrier networks. If there are too few
participants, senders and recipients will be dissatisfied by unfilled service
requests, carriers will have insufficient opportunities, and the initiative will
fail. This award supports a fundamental understanding of crowd logistics
platform design for robust network growth and performance by attracting and
retaining participants having a variety of economic and social motivations. The
knowledge gained from this research will facilitate the use of crowd logistics
for resilient food distribution in the face of large-scale disruptions, such as
the COVID-19 emergency. The educational plan seeks to implement participatory
modeling activities that will improve STEM students’ capacity for systems
thinking, which is critical in the design and analysis of complex logistics
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will produce a novel agent-based
modeling approach to systematically explore the impacts of a crowd logistics
platform’s design on its ability to quickly achieve a critical mass of
participants. This approach will model the degree of control that a platform
management system assumes over participants’ digital exchanges. At one end of
the spectrum is a platform characterized by centralized control, full
automation, and algorithmic management; at the other end is a platform with
decentralized control and community-driven exchanges. Existing research on
crowdsourcing platform design suggests that the degree of centralization of
control impacts platform growth over time. However, understanding and predicting
network effects that will lead to long-term platform growth is challenging,
because the feedback loop perpetuated by participant decisions and interactions
yields complex and dynamic system behavior. This research will address this
challenge by representing carriers and senders as autonomous, heterogeneous, and
adaptive agents, whose decisions to participate in a crowd logistics platform
impact the participation of other agents over time. Participatory modeling
sessions with crowd logistics practitioners will be leveraged for model
validation, to ensure that agent behaviors correspond to those of their real-
world counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.