* 2046515
* CAREER: Privacy-preserving Transfer Learning for Process-defect Modeling toward Accelerated Cross-system Certification for Metal Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Wenmeng Tian, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 02/28/2026
* USD 547,651.00

The process-defect relationship is one of the key elements to the certification
of additive manufacturing (AM) parts, which has been a major challenge in
accelerating AM technology deployments in the industry. Advanced machine
learning methods that leverage massive data to characterize the process-defect
relationship have been studied for AM certifications. However, some AM
fabrications and certification courses, especially for high-valued metallic
parts, are lengthy and costly; thus, if the certification could be transferrable
between different AM systems, it may greatly broaden the industrial use of AM
technologies. Though feasible in theory, combining data from multiple AM systems
on a shared platform for the certification purpose is not practical because of
the desire to protect intellectual properties and sensitive data. What is
lacking, therefore, is a holistic strategy to share knowledge learned from
different AM systems without compromising the private information. This Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports fundamental research on
privacy-preserving AM process-defect modeling and certification means across
different systems. The project aims to establish a transfer learning groundwork,
while protecting the process and part confidentiality, to understand and
establish the process-defect relationship in metal AM between different systems.
In addition, educational activities closely integrated with the research will
provide basic training in privacy-preserving manufacturing systems modeling to
next-generation manufacturing engineers from diverse groups, including
minorities and women. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current data-driven AM certification
schemes largely focus on characterizing the process-defect relationship of
individual systems (i.e., one model for each single system and not generalizable
to other systems, even similar ones). Although the state-of-the-art transfer
learning methods can leverage data collected from multiple machines for cross-
system studies, the research need is to maintain certain confidentiality—for
both the part and process—to realize such collaboration. The goal of this
project, hence, is to advance the scale-up of metal AM technologies by
establishing a data-sharing platform, which enables process-defect modeling
among multiple AM systems without divulging critical part and processing data.
If successful, the major contribution of the research project will be a privacy-
preserving transfer learning framework derived from the following research
activities using directed energy deposition AM as an example: 1) constructing
masked process features through de-coupling variability components assignable to
product designs and process quality using a physics-informed tensor
decomposition method, 2) establishing cross-system process-defect relationship
through multi-task transfer learning to characterize intra- and inter-system
variability and 3) enhancing AM certification capability by integrating part-
level density and process-level thermal data based on fundamental physics
principles. This project is jointly funded by the division of Civil, Mechanical
and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.