* 2046488
* CAREER: Algorithms for Comprehensive and Cost-effective Cancer Phylogeny Inference from Multi-omics Single-cell Sequencing Data
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Mohammed El-Kebir, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 03/31/2026
* USD 299,122.00

Cancer is the leading cause of premature death in the United States. To lessen
the burden of cancer and improve clinical practice, researchers use algorithms
to reconstruct the evolutionary history, or phylogeny, of a tumor from DNA
sequencing data. Specifically, a tumor phylogeny describes the precise
mutational composition of a patient’s tumor, thus enabling precision medicine
with improved clinical outcomes. Moreover, comparative analysis of tumor
phylogenies from patient cohorts enables the identification of key mechanisms
underlying tumor evolution and metastasis, which in turn may lead to new
treatment avenues. The next technological frontier in the field is single-cell
sequencing (SCS), which holds the potential to precisely reconstruct a tumor's
evolutionary history at single cell resolution. While SCS is becoming the de
facto standard in cancer genomics, algorithms for this new type of data are
still in their infancy and do not yet comprehensively model cancer evolution.
This project will address this gap by developing new tools that will enable
practitioners to cost-efficiently use SCS to comprehensively study a tumor's
evolution, thereby advancing the state of knowledge regarding cancer
progression, which in turn may lead to better targeted cancer therapies. Results
from this project will be disseminated through open-source software. The
integrated research and educational activities include interdisciplinary
bioinformatics curriculum development, outreach to high school students and
research opportunities for students in underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks new models, algorithms and
practical implementations to accurately and cost-efficiently infer comprehensive
cancer phylogenies from SCS data and integrate the proposed research into
education and outreach. The project couples a new evolutionary model that
incorporates somatic mutations of varying genomic scales with efficient
phylogeny inference algorithms that are able to deal with hybrid SCS data
obtained using multiple experimental techniques. The aims of this research are:
(1) inference of comprehensive cancer phylogenies from hybrid single-cell
sequencing data, (2) design of cost-efficient single-cell sequencing experiments
that are sufficiently powered to enable accurate phylogeny inference, and (3)
application of the developed methods to data obtained from clinical
collaborators within integrated, scalable, extensible and user-friendly analysis
pipelines. Results, software and additional information will be available at
http://el-kebir.net/scp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.