* 2046134
* CAREER: Optofluidic Solar Indoor Lighting Towards Sustainable Buildings
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Sung-Yong Park, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,000.00

According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration, the building sector
accounts for more than 70% of all U.S. electricity use and 40% of total U.S.
energy consumption. Buildings are also responsible for over one-third of U.S.
greenhouse gas emissions, which is more than any other sector of the economy.
This project addresses an important national and societal need for green and
sustainable buildings. The research explores a novel optofluidic approach that
can make full use of rooftop solar energy not only for interior illumination of
buildings with active control of lighting power, but also for other indoor solar
activities such as indoor farming and photovoltaic generation using excess
sunlight. The research outcomes will truly offer a new paradigm in solar energy
solutions in the pursuit of buildings that are energy-efficient and
environmentally friendly. The innovations of the proposed technology include
compact and lightweight solar lighting systems, constant illumination at a
comfortable level, electricity reduction in buildings, a high-quality indoor
environment, and excess solar energy for other solar indoor activities. The
project requires interdisciplinary research and training on issues ranging from
electrical engineering and surface science, all the way to optics and energy
applications. Graduate students will gain first-hand experience from this
interdisciplinary research and be well prepared to be future leaders. Through
the collaborations with SDSU’s educational programs, outreach activities will be
also conducted with the goal of promoting participation of K-12 and community
college students from underrepresented groups and women in higher education in
STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop an optofluidic solar indoor lighting (OFSIL) system that can make full
use of rooftop solar energy not only for interior illumination of buildings with
active control of lighting power, but for other indoor solar activities such as
indoor farming and photovoltaic generation. The PI recently developed
electrowetting-driven liquid prisms that enabled high-performance beam steering
without any mechanical moving parts. In this project, the concept of the tunable
liquid prism is used as a low-cost, lightweight, and precise beam steering mean
to realize smart solar indoor lighting. The project firstly focuses on
fundamental studies of nanomaterials and optofluidic phenomena to achieve high-
performance solar beam steering. Secondly, three-dimensional (3D) numerical
simulation studies are implemented for the concept demonstration of active
lighting control and design optimization of the large-scale lighting system.
Lastly, an arrayed form of optofluidic solar lighting systems is developed to
demonstrate the feasibility to capture sunlight outside and guide it to
interiors through optical fibers for building’s illumination. The developed
research outputs utilize natural sunlight for indoor lighting to significantly
reduce electricity use in buildings as well as provide healthy and productive
indoor environment under comfortable sunlight illumination as a move towards
green and sustainable buildings. The technology developed in this research can
be further used for other underground structures (e.g. subways, tunnels,
basements, shelters, etc.) where natural sunlight can be enjoyed for indoor
lighting and even make possible the cultivation of plants in deep underground
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.