* 2046374
* CAREER: Intelligent Energy Retrofit Decisions for Large-scale Residential Buildings
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Dong Zhao, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2026
* USD 402,312.00

Large-scale retrofits of existing buildings can potentially reduce energy use by
60%-80% and carbon emissions by 30%. Large-scale retrofits are critical in
America where more than 44% of existing buildings are expected to be replaced or
renovated by 2050. Retrofits of residential buildings have potential to save
more energy than commercial buildings. Although the technologies for residential
buildings are not complicated, large-scale retrofits are held back due to a lack
of understanding human-building interaction and the high complexity of community
systems. This knowledge gap results in inaccurate and unnecessary retrofit
decisions and causes wasted energy and investment. For example, an energy-
efficient stove is not useful if occupants rarely cook. To address this gap, the
investigator has created a new concept of routine occupant behavior (ROB) to
indicate the stable occupant behaviors that are essential for building retrofit
decisions. The research program aims to better understand human-building
integration and produce intelligent, cost-effective, and transformative energy
retrofit decisions for large-scale residential buildings. Built upon the ROB
concept, the PI proposes a highly integrated research and education/outreach
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research outcomes targeted are: (1) definition of
ROB via a theoretical framework and a detection tool; (2) optimization of whole-
community retrofit decisions via dynamic human-building networks; and (3)
enablement of across-community retrofit knowledge transfer via an intelligent
lifelong learning model. Research outcomes are to be validated using data from
four testbeds with up to 3,000 single-family and multifamily units across
multiple climate zones and geographic landscapes. The holistic
education/outreach program aims to prepare the next generation of convergent
researchers and engineers with knowledge, skills, and abilities in green
technology and philosophy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.