* 2046212
* CAREER: Hypersampled Model Predictive Control: Reconciling Analog Systems with Digital Controllers
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Marco Nicotra, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2026
* USD 567,426.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will support
research related to constrained control theory, promoting its dissemination in
engineering science, practice, and education. Constrained control theory is a
branch of mathematics aimed at steering a dynamical system to its desired
target, while also enforcing a set of safety/quality restrictions. This enabling
technology allows engineering systems to live up to their full potential by
operating at the limit of their specifications. Model Predictive Control (MPC)
achieves this objective by solving an optimal control problem at every sampling
instant. However, doing so requires a large number of computations in a
relatively short amount of time, making the approach challenging to implement on
high frequency engineering applications. This award supports fundamental
research for the development of a new constrained control paradigm that combines
systems theory, numerical methods, and algorithmic optimization to reduce the
computational effort and hardware requirements of MPC. Results from this
research will enable the widespread adoption of MPC in the aerospace,
automotive, energy, and robotic industries, thus benefitting the U.S. economy
and society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypersampled MPC can reduce the computational
burden of traditional MPC by decoupling the prediction model, used to formulate
the optimal control problem, from the control model, used to prove that the
closed-loop system is asymptotically stable and satisfies constraints. This
reformulation requires an extensive revision of existing MPC theory, where the
two models are implicitly assumed the same. This research project will lay the
foundational groundwork for Hypersampled MPC and investigate its implications on
how to handle warm-starting, preconditioning, implicit recursions, parametric
uncertainties, and disturbance rejection. Experimental validation will be
performed on standardized educational platforms and will be released as an open
source plug-and-play toolbox. The supporting documentation will then be expanded
into a series of self-contained teaching modules for a hands-on laboratory class
in constrained control, thereby promoting access to this transformational
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.