* 2046060
* CAREER: Understanding degradation mechanisms in sustainable energy electrochemical systems using advanced characterization approaches
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Jasna Jankovic, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2026
* USD 435,779.00

Near zero-emission energy systems, such as fuel cells, electrolyzers, and
batteries hold immense promise for production and storage of clean and renewable
energy, but challenges such as high cost, unsatisfactory efficiency, and low
durability remain. This NSF CAREER project presents a comprehensive integrated
research and education program that focuses on application of cutting-edge
microscopy methods to understand degradation processes in fuel cell electrodes,
applicable to other systems, such as batteries and electrolyzers. The project
will use novel microscopy characterization and quantification methods to close
the gap in understanding degradation mechanisms that occur within the membrane
electrode assembly including the electrocatalyst, the catalyst support, and the
electrolyte membrane. The knowledge generated in this project will contribute
towards the rational design of electrodes with greater durability through the
understanding of key factors that contribute to electrode degradation. The
educational objective of the project is to attract younger diverse generations
to both STEM and clean energy. The investigator will harness the motivation of
the next generation to improve prospects for clean energy by integrating the
research and educational aspects of the project with the use of virtual reality
tools. The investigator plans to develop instructive and stimulating “I loVR
Nano” and “I loVR Clean Energy” virtual reality modules, where materials
science, clean energy, and microscopy topics will be presented. The investigator
has also planned an “Engineering Entrepreneurs—Under the Microscope” program to
offer undergraduate and graduate engineering students entrepreneurship and
research training to prepare them as future leaders in the clean energy and
other sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fundamental engineering science
research project will use sophisticated microscopy characterization and
quantification methods to close the knowledge gap in understanding of the
following scientific questions: (1) What (undiscovered) mechanisms/changes on
the nano- and micro-level occur during electrode degradation and how do these
changes affect performance? (2) Can the effect of each degradation mechanism be
distinguished and linked to individual components in the electrodes? (3) How do
the properties of electrode components and their distribution on a nano- and
micro-scale affect degradation? The project has the potential to make a
significant contribution to science by establishing novel approaches for testing
and 2D/3D microscopy characterization of zero-emission electrochemical systems,
and hence provide solutions for improving performance and durability. The
technical objectives of this project are: 1) Develop and verify a method to
directly observe the degradation processes in actual and model electrochemical
systems on a nanometer scale in a novel Micro EChem Cell for Identical Location
(MECC-IL); 2) Establish a suite of advanced characterization approaches
involving 2D/3D multi-scale imaging and spectroscopy, and parameter
quantification to understand degradation mechanisms on a nano- and micro-scale.
Define a unique, comprehensive matrix of structural and compositional parameters
to correlate to MECC-IL and ex-situ testing; 3) Establish multi-variate
correlations between the derived matrix of parameters and the MECC-IL validated
with ex-situ degradation testing. The project will yield new fundamental
knowledge of degradation mechanisms for electrochemical systems through
convergence of correlations and modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.