* 2046590
* CAREER: Towards a Data-driven Understanding of Online Sentiment
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Jeremy Blackburn, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2026
* USD 304,159.00

This project promotes the progress and advancement of scientific knowledge by
exploring new&lt;br/&gt;methods for understanding and modeling online sentiment.
As the Web has become critical to&lt;br/&gt;society, impacting our personal
lives as well as the world at large, a greater need to understand&lt;br/&gt;how
people interact. In particular, research into how to measure people’s opinion on
various&lt;br/&gt;topics or types of content has failed to address the new ways
and types of content used on the&lt;br/&gt;evolving social Web. This project
addresses this lack of understanding by developing new tools&lt;br/&gt;to help
quantify online sentiment using large-scale, empirical data. In addition to
these new&lt;br/&gt;tools, output from the project, including datasets and code
artifacts will help other researchers&lt;br/&gt;advance our understanding of
social media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigator
seeks to achieve four research objectives. The first is the&lt;br/&gt;creation
of a multi-platform social media dataset. In particular, the investigator will
develop a&lt;br/&gt;series of tools leveraging prior experience in large-scale
data collection to perform continuous&lt;br/&gt;identification and collection of
multimedia data from emerging social media platforms. Next,
the&lt;br/&gt;investigator will develop data-driven techniques to understand
coded language used in social&lt;br/&gt;media. These techniques will focus not
just on textual content, e.g., slang words, but also coded&lt;br/&gt;visual
language, e.g., memes. The third objective is developing a new, explainable
system for&lt;br/&gt;rating the sentiment of content. This method departs from
existing approaches by treating the&lt;br/&gt;classification task as a game
between two pieces of content and learning a total ordering of
the&lt;br/&gt;content devised from the Elo rating system used in chess and video
games. Finally, the&lt;br/&gt;investigator will explore user and community level
modeling of online sentiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.