* 2046683
* CAREER: Statistical Mechanics of Cellular Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* DAPENG BI, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2026
* USD 402,757.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research integrated with education to gain a unified understanding
of the physical properties of cellular materials. From honeycombs to foams to
biological cells, materials with cellular structures are ubiquitous in nature.
To advance understanding of cellular materials, the PI will use an
interdisciplinary approach that combines knowledge and techniques from physics,
geometry, and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organ surfaces are covered with
dense layers of cells, acting as physical barriers. While normally non-
migratory, cells can undergo active rearrangements during basic processes such
as embryo development, morphogenesis, repair, and remodeling. In these events,
the cell layer transitions from a solid-like state to a fluid-like state. This
striking transition is traditionally studied in the context of cells on a flat
surface. However, most organ surfaces are naturally non-flat, and comprised of
curved surfaces such as spheres, saddles, or cylinders. How surface curvature
affects cell motion remains largely unknown. To address these questions, the
principal investigator will study how cells move collectively on a curved
surface and the role of curvature on whether they behave like a solid or a
fluid. These investigations will generate predictions that can be tested
experimentally in living embryos and lab-cultured
tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge gained from biological tissues will
serve as an inspiration for the PI to investigate the origin of rigidity in
other cellular structures. These include the meshwork of forces in a solid or a
mechanical network constructed by randomly connecting springs. The goal is to
develop design principles for cellular structures to exhibit unusual mechanical
properties and take advantage of them to design functional materials that do not
readily occur in nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award also supports
educational activities tightly integrated with the research. The goal is to
increase diversity and retention of students taking physics classes for the very
first time, whether in high school or college. The PI will collaborate with K-12
STEM educators to design unconventional yet accessible teaching modules for
introductory physics classes. The modules will be based on biophysics,
epidemiology, and biology while drawing connections to the fundamental physical
concepts taught in introductory physics. These modules, which differ greatly
from conventional "textbook examples", will provide students an eye-opening
experience on the applicability and impact of physics
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports integrated theoretical and computational research, outreach, and
education with the aim to advance the fundamental understanding of the
statistical mechanics and collective behavior of cellular materials, including
biological tissues, foams, granular packings, and their force
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the biological context, the project will
investigate the nature of the jamming/unjamming transition in multicellular
collectives constrained on a curved surface and elucidate the origin of coherent
angular motion that arises as a unique consequence of non-zero Gaussian
curvature. In non-biological cellular structures, the PI will investigate the
consequence of mechanical dualities. The objective will involve deriving an
effective Hamiltonian in the force space for disordered granular solids based on
the dual correspondence between self-stress states and floppy modes. The
framework will be the basis for exploring the force-network ensemble of
disordered grain packings. The PI proposes to leverage the duality of self-
stresses and floppy modes to design disordered mechanical metamaterials with
phononic bandgaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award also supports
educational activities tightly integrated with the research. The goal is to
increase diversity and retention of students taking physics classes for the very
first time, whether in high school or college. The PI will collaborate with K-12
STEM educators to design unconventional yet accessible teaching modules for
introductory physics classes. The modules will be based on biophysics,
epidemiology, and biology while drawing connections to the fundamental physical
concepts taught in introductory physics. These modules, which differ greatly
from conventional "textbook examples", will provide students an eye-opening
experience on the applicability and impact of physics
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.