* 2046428
* CAREER: Electron-phonon processes in gate-defined silicon quantum dots: measurement, control, and applications.
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Meenakshi Singh, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 411,993.00

Non-technical abstract: Acting like electrically controllable ‘artificial
atoms’, quantum dots are a useful system to study a wide range of condensed
matter physics phenomena ranging from bond formation and magnetism to the
fundamentals of quantum information. In this project, the research team will
study the ubiquitous coupling between electrons and phonons. Of particular
interest is the impact of the phonons on the spin of the electrons. Control over
the phonon-spin interaction, achieved here via nano-structuring and applied
strain, has crucial implications for a number of applications, such as quantum
computing. In the course of this project, a new generation of undergraduate and
graduate students are being trained with expertise in nanoscale fabrication,
cryogenics, and microwave measurements. These skills are relevant to the
nationwide calls for a quantum workforce. The research efforts are being
integrated with the Microelectronics Processing course at Mines via development
of illustrative quantum experiments. Finally, modules are being developed to be
incorporated into outreach efforts to middle school children in the Rocky
Mountain Camp for Dyslexic Children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:
Electron-phonon coupling is ubiquitous in Condensed Matter systems. It plays a
pivotal role in relaxation and decoherence (in case of multiple spins) of
electronic spin states and is predicted to mediate many-body phenomena. An
immense body of research on tailoring it in fields as varied as
superconductivity and thermoelectrics exists. Insight from these fields has
never been applied to experiments in few-spin systems. This is a new and
impactful opportunity, since few-spin systems are the fundamental prototype for
rationalizing spin dynamics in more complex systems, important for quantum
information applications. This project bridges the gap via an experimental
effort focused on control and measurement of electron-phonon processes in
silicon gate-defined quantum dots. The phonon bath is engineered through nano-
structuring and spin-orbit coupling is controlled via applied strain to
investigate the theoretically predicted ‘protected’ states. Measurements of spin
relaxation and decoherence time are performed. Controlling the coupling of spins
to the phonon bath has profound implications. First, it can be used for the
design of ‘hot’ qubits and spintronic devices. Second, it leads to an
examination of hitherto untested theoretical predictions. Third, the novel
protocols developed in the project for sensing nanoscale electron-phonon
thermalization are foundational for future quantum thermodynamics studies on the
quantum dot platform. Finally, this is a pioneering effort to apply insight from
the vast field of nano-phononics to spin qubits and paves the way for future
integration of the fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.