* 2046270
* CAREER: Morphological Computation for Resilient Dynamic Locomotion of Compliant Legged Robots with Application to Precision Agriculture
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Konstantinos Karydis, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 02/28/2026
* USD 572,149.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project innovates compliant
multi-legged robotics technology for precision agriculture. High agility,
maneuverability, and payload capacity, combined with a small footprint, make
legged robots well suited to precision agriculture applications. This project
develops and experimentally validates a theoretical and computational framework
for structurally compliant legged robots to navigate over natural terrain. A
systematic series of experiments will show how increasing the degree of
compliance in the robot structure -- from passive elasticity in hip and waist
joints, to fully deformable chassis and legs -- affects the efficiency and
resilience of locomotion. The project integrates foundational robotics research
on design, modeling, motion control, and planning into two educational and
outreach programs across K-12 and higher education. The first is a robotics
makerspace for undergraduate students at the University of California-Riverside,
and the second is a robotics summer academy camp for female middle-school
students. Both efforts capitalize on student diversity at UC Riverside, a
Hispanic Serving Institution, to broaden participation of under-represented
minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates how compliance
embedded into a legged robot can be harnessed to facilitate control and
computation, with an eye to enabling efficient and resilient navigation in real
agricultural fields. Research activities innovate along three key foundational
robotics research directions. 1) Hardware design and dynamic modeling: The
project offers fundamental insights and develops models regarding the effect of
various forms of compliance on center of mass motion and gait stabilization for
certain classes of legged robots and introduces new hardware designs that can
harness compliance and enable principles of morphological computation. 2)
Locomotion control: The project establishes compliance-aware legged locomotion
controllers according to principles of whole-body and central pattern generator-
based control to enable efficient closed-loop legged locomotion over a range of
engineered and natural unstructured terrains. 3) Non-holonomic motion planning
and autonomous navigation: The project develops non-holonomic motion planners
that rely upon and utilize distinctive features of robot body morphology and
embedded compliance for efficiency and resilience during autonomous legged
locomotion over real agricultural fields. This research can transform the
science and technology of autonomous legged robots by making them more efficient
and resilient in their operation, and thus unlock legged robotsâ€™ full potential
in precision agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.