* 2046592
* CAREER: Mechanically dynamic and viscoelastic hydrogels as tools for studying fibroblast epigenetic memory
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2025
* Steven Caliari, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2025
* USD 348,454.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop three-
dimensional biomaterial models of tissue to better understand how tissue
mechanics control persistent scarring, or fibrosis. This is an important
societal challenge since fibrosis is a significant contributing factor to nearly
half of the overall deaths in the developed world. Biomaterials called
hydrogels, or water-swollen polymer networks like contact lenses, will be used
to create models matching normal and scarred tissue mechanics. Fibroblasts, the
primary cells that drive fibrosis, will be encapsulated in hydrogels that can
change their mechanics upon controlled exposure to light. This platform will be
used to make tissue models with patterned and reversible mechanical properties
mimicking the irregular progression of fibrosis. Careful control of the
mechanical signals presented to cells will enable improved fundamental
understanding of how these signals are interpreted and “remembered” during
fibrosis. This project will also include educational and outreach objectives
where the overarching goal is to recruit, mentor, and empower students at all
levels from underrepresented backgrounds on the design of biomaterial-based cell
culture models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tissues undergo dynamic mechanical changes during
diverse biological processes including development, disease progression, and
remodeling. There is tremendous interest in understanding how these dynamic
mechanical cues are sensed and integrated to direct cell behaviors in vivo.
Unfortunately, mechanistic studies are complicated by the myriad cells,
extracellular matrix (ECM) constituents, and signaling moieties at play.
Therefore, there is a significant and unmet need for in vitro biomaterial models
that deconstruct this complexity and enable systematic investigation of
environmental regulators of cell fate. This proposal will address this critical
challenge through the development of a 3D viscoelastic hyaluronic acid (HA)
hydrogel platform that permits both dynamic stiffening and softening in the
presence of encapsulated cells through the use of orthogonal photochemical
reactions. The proposed hydrogel system will be used to study how fibroblasts
form mechanical memories during activation into myofibroblasts that drive the
pathological scarring process known as fibrosis. While the signaling mechanisms
underlying mechanical memory are poorly understood, there is growing evidence
that epigenetics (changes in gene function that do not involve alteration in DNA
sequence like histone modification and DNA methylation) are prominently
involved. The research objectives of this proposal are to develop 3D
viscoelastic hydrogels with either 1) uniform stiffening, 2) patterned
stiffening, or 3) patterned, reversible stiffening as tools to study the
epigenetic regulation of fibroblast mechanical memory. Notable milestones will
include photochemical cycling of mechanics from normal to fibrotic levels
(stiffening) and back to normal (softening) and spatiotemporal control of
hydrogel mechanics using photopatterning to mimic the heterogeneous development
of fibrosis. This proposal integrates the PI’s research activities in
biomaterials engineering with educational and outreach initiatives focused on
mentoring and empowering underrepresented groups in STEM. Together, these
efforts will enable the establishment of a laboratory program that designs
biomaterial cellular microenvironments to investigate a range of fundamental
bioengineering challenges while inspiring future generations of creative,
rigorous, and ethical scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.