* 2046097
* CAREER: Quantum Gases in Low-Dimensional Rings
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Kevin Wright, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2026
* USD 312,964.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many advanced technologies rely
on special properties of quantum materials like superconductors, where currents
can flow without resistance. The activities supported by this award will improve
our understanding of these important materials, especially how their behavior
changes when they are formed into very thin wires. The experiments will involve
microscopic clouds of a few thousand lithium atoms shaped into circuit-like
configurations by laser light. Near absolute zero temperature the atoms in these
"quantum gases" can be used to simulate the behavior of electrons in solid
materials, and the project will examine how fluctuations, magnetization, and the
shape of the circuit affect its properties. The results will shed light on the
processes that give these materials their special properties, improving our
ability to use them and to discover new kinds of quantum materials. Solving
these types of problems requires mastery of important critical thinking and
quantitative reasoning skills that are often not adequately or systematically
included in the physics curriculum. The integrated educational component of this
project is to draw on real-world laboratory experiences to develop interactive
training exercises focused on these skills, which can be used to improve the
effectiveness of teaching in advanced physics lab courses. The goal is to ensure
that every physics student is systematically trained in "how to think like a
physicist" before they graduate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award supports a research program
investigating quantum phenomena and quantum phases of matter in in quasi-one-
dimensional fermionic systems with cyclic boundary conditions. The approach will
be to confine lithium-6 atoms to precisely controlled ring-shaped optical dipole
traps, taking advantage of a unique combination of tunable interactions,
dimensionality, and boundary conditions to achieve experimental goals that
include characterizing spontaneous symmetry breaking in the Gaudin-Yang model,
measuring transport in Luttinger liquids, and determining whether polarized
superfluid phases can exist in this setting. The experiments will also establish
methods for creating ring lattices with ultracold atoms, enabling studies of
even more unusual quantum phases including some with topological order. These
experiments will provide important tests of 1D theories in a configuration that
are often considered but have been very difficult to realize in laboratory
materials. The results will also support broad efforts to generalize successful
1D theories to higher dimensions, which will eventually improve our ability to
predict the existence of quantum phases of matter and understand their
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.