* 2046032
* I-Corps: Piezoelectric sensor for in-situ strength monitoring of infrastructure materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Na (Luna) Lu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of sensing technology to accurately monitor infrastructure
conditions in real time. U.S. infrastructure has been deteriorating: Of 6
million bridges in the United States, 13.6% are obsolete, 9% are structurally
deficient, and 39% have exceeded their designed lifetimes. The worldwide market
for structural monitoring is estimated to increase to $3.4 billion in 2023 from
$1.5 billion in 2018 at a compound annual growth rate of 17.9%. Development of
cost-effective and user-friendly sensing technologies is important for
construction, maintenance, and rehabilitation to monitor concrete strength and
evaluate infrastructure condition. The proposed technology may mitigate
premature failure and reduce infrastructure construction/maintenance costs, save
the time of construction workers and commuters, ensure safety by limiting in-
field operations, and enabling data-driven infrastructure-related decisions.
This may help to ensure the safety of commuters/travelers and construction
workers and reduce expenditures on infrastructure construction and
maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a wireless sensing technology for real-time concrete strength
monitoring. In-situ and real-time monitoring of construction materials, such as
concrete, is crucial to the safety and security of our nation’s infrastructure.
However, available non-destructive techniques typically measure concrete
temperature and refer to a database of strength versus temperature information
developed in lab settings for a specific concrete mix to determine the strength.
In contrast, the newly developed technology enables direct measurement of in-
situ strength of concrete in real-time. Benefits include high accuracy, fast
response, no need of data-base calibration, significantly reduced cost, and ease
of implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.