* 2046111
* CAREER: The vital role of motivation in cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Amitai Shenhav, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 637,613.00

In order to achieve long-term goals, people need to exert cognitive control, a
set of mental capacities that allows them to focus their thoughts and direct
their actions. However, people often fail to engage sufficient and well-directed
cognitive control, leading to poorer outcomes at school and in the workplace.
This research investigates the neural and computational mechanisms responsible
for making these decisions and studies how people weigh the costs and benefits
of exerting mental effort on a given task. Different hypotheses are tested about
how these decisions are altered when someone is in a stressful environment,
which is known to impair cognitive control. This work will achieve better
understanding of the sources of variability in achievement of educational,
career, and health goals, and why these achievement outcomes may differ for
individuals who regularly encounter stressful environments. This project
includes community outreach designed to help to educate students about the role
that environment plays in shaping motivation, and about the importance of
motivation for achieving their goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the mechanisms
underlying the exertion of mental effort are well known, much less is known
about how people perform the cost-benefit analysis that determines whether and
how they will invest their mental effort. The investigators’ model of the neural
and computational mechanisms underlying the evaluation of mental effort divides
this evaluation into computationally explicit components, including (1) how
people weigh the potential outcomes of their effort, (2) how people weigh the
extent to which their efforts are efficacious for achieving those outcomes, and
(3) how people consider the different ways in which they can direct their
efforts. By combining this model with a novel set of tasks that target each of
its components, as well as brain imaging measures of neural activity and
connectivity, this research maps out the neural architecture underlying the
evaluation of mental effort. This research also tests how components of this
evaluation process are altered by mild experimentally-induced stress in the
laboratory, providing a clearer understanding of how environmental stressors may
alter one’s perceptions of the value of their efforts, potentially contributing
to poorer performance on cognitive tasks. Knowledge gained through this work
contributes to resolving the key role of corticostriatal interactions (between
the cortex and subcortical striatum) including reward-related and control-
related circuits in motivation and cognition. This study also provides new
computational and experimental tools for probing the sources of variability in
effort allocation across individuals and contexts, helps understand the causes
of inequalities in academic and career achievement for people from disadvantaged
backgrounds, and provides strategies for overcoming motivational challenges in
order to use one’s available cognitive resources to best advantage and hence
better meet one’s goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.