* 2046160
* CAREER: Scalar Transport in High Reynolds Number Boundary Layer with Heterogeneous Roughness and Source Flux: Modeling Marine Aerosol in Coastal Regions
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Giacomo Valerio Iungo, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 502,482.00

The goals of this research is to better understand transport by turbulent flow
over rough surfaces since this understanding is important for a broad range of
scientific and engineering applications, such as pollutant transport, urban
flows, pollen dispersion, air quality, propagation of electromagnetic waves for
communication. This project will focus on the transport of marine aerosol in
coastal regions, accounting for shore roughness and aerosol generation from
waves. Transport by turbulent diffusion is common in nature, yet current
understanding is based on simplistic flow cases rather than real applications.
This project will drive future generations of models for turbulent diffusion
processes through a physics-based approach. The integrated education plan is at
the interface of STEM, boundary-layer flows, turbulence, and will have a broad
impact by: 1) educating students about the role of atmospheric turbulence for
environmental flows; 2) involving teams of high school and undergraduate
students in research-related design projects; 3) promoting awareness about the
role of boundary-layer flows for the environment through the LiDAR summer camp
and exhibits for rotation in community libraries serving disadvantaged youth.
This work will involve traditionally under-represented students and reflect the
diverse demographics of the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will encompass three interrelated tasks:
i) A LiDAR field campaign at the coast of Galveston Bay in Texas to perform
simultaneous and co-located wind and marine aerosol measurements in the marine
atmospheric boundary layer; ii) Application of machine learning models to
characterize, classify and predict various turbulent processes for marine-
aerosol transport; iii) Development of fully tensorial eddy-diffusivity models
for scalar transport in absence of equilibrium condition in the surface layer.
The goals of the proposed project are: 1) Characterize and model scalar
concentration over height and streamwise direction as a function of surface
roughness variability and local source flux; 2) Investigate the role of large
energy-containing turbulent structures in the re-organization of aerosol
concentration within the surface layer in absence of equilibrium condition; 3)
Develop eddy-diffusivity models for scalar transport as a function of statistics
of heterogeneous surface aerosol flux and roughness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.