* 2046932
* CAREER: Modeling two-phase flow, multi-lithologic melting, and chemical disequilibrium with uranium-series isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Lynne Elkins, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2026
* USD 696,573.00

This project aims to explore the origins of magmas using computer models that
predict the chemical makeup of lavas, particularly for isotopes that preserve
information about rates of melting and magma transport in the Earthâ€™s mantle
layer. The project tests for the role of alternative mantle rock types in
generating magma, and for the importance of chemical diffusion during magma
transport. Questions about magma origins are fundamentally important to our
understanding of dynamic global processes and plate tectonics, including the
origins of new oceanic crust produced by volcanic eruptions. The project further
aims to develop a computer modeling program housed at the University of Nebraska
to train the next generation of geoscience computer modelers, and to increase
public engagement and literacy with STEM through broader outreach. Modeling
techniques and tutorials will be hosted and managed online in an open-source
code repository and educational library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The roles and
importance of recycled mantle lithologies in mantle melting and basalt
generation and of the influence of slow chemical diffusion on multi-lithologic
partial melting remain unclear. Uranium-series disequilibria in lavas may
provide a method for identifying lithologic source heterogeneity, but U-series
modeling remains complex and difficult to replicate. The overall research goal
of this study is to test multi-lithologic melting and diffusive exchange through
the development of new, open-source modeling packages that predict U-series
disequilibria in basalts, and to ground-truth that modeling effort by comparison
of existing U-series data with measurements sensitive to the presence of
pyroxenite in the melting regime. The educational goals are to incorporate the
modeling work into lessons for existing and new geoscience courses and to create
and curate digital lessons and training tutorials and share them via an online
program. The rationales for this work are to advance the understanding of mantle
melting processes, train a future cohort of sophisticated geoscience modelers,
and develop widely-accessible and reproducible melt modeling tools that can be
integrated into community research and teaching efforts. The outcomes of the
project will be amplified through the development of archived, open-source,
cloud-hosted modeling code packages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.