* 2046454
* CAREER: Using network analysis to assess confidence in research synthesis
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Jodi Schneider, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2026
* USD 172,572.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The best available science is an
important factor that informs policy in areas such as conservation, energy,
healthcare, and sustainable. Determining the best available science requires
synthesizing multiple scientific results to gauge both the level of scientific
consensus and the reliability of the research. However, on some policy-relevant
topics, different syntheses come to incompatible conclusions. Such inconsistency
in the synthesis of evidence wastes money, generates misleading results, and can
lead to poor decisions impacting large numbers of people. Through research,
education, and outreach, this CAREER project aims to develop and test a novel
framework of tools and workflows that will reveal potential sources of bias in
expert literature. The framework will enable stakeholders to quickly understand
which individuals, institutions and funders contributed to the creation of the
evidence. It will assess other factors that create risk of bias as well as the
degree of confidence an expert community has in the evidence presented. Research
outcomes could facilitate data-driven decision-making in a broad range of areas.
Examples include topics in energy and environmental sciences and health
sciences, like the carbon footprint of various forms of food production, herd
immunity, and vaccine effectiveness. This project will also help diversify the
science workforce by employing student assistants from underserved populations
and by developing two policy-relevant STEM university courses and a middle
school career video to attract underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores how to improve the
assessment of confidence in research at scale. It will enable evidence-seekers
to quickly understand the level of consensus within a body of literature, along
with risk factors that might impact reliability of research, providing a key
resource for robustness and reproducibility. This framework can be applied to
any bibliography, including manuscripts under peer review, published articles,
and database search results. Project outputs will be beneficial for identifying
risks in literature reviews, such as sponsor bias or the avoidance of citation
of contradictory evidence, which will help reduce the spread of misinformation.
This project is made possible by recent advances in network science and text
mining methods, as well as the availability of abstracts, affiliation,
citations, and funding data under suitable licenses for data science. The work
is novel in bringing together complementary approaches that have not previously
been combined: argumentation theory and the study of controversies; approaches
for synthesizing evidence; and bibliometric and scientometric approaches for
looking structurally at a field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.