* 2046235
* CAREER: Fast Linear Algebra: Algorithms and Fundamental Limits
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Cameron Musco, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2026
* USD 336,338.00

Computational Linear Algebra is the study of algorithms for solving mathematical
problems involving matrices and other linear-algebraic objects. It is one of the
oldest and most practically applicable subfields of algorithms research. Linear-
algebraic routines lie at the core of many large-scale scientific and
engineering simulations, signal-processing methods, statistical- and machine-
learning algorithms, and beyond. Recently, the field has been revolutionized by
work on algorithms that make carefully chosen random choices during the course
of their execution, allowing much faster approximate solutions for very large-
scale problems. This project aims to build on the success of these randomized
methods and extend their reach. The work will also identify fundamental limits
on the potential for faster algorithms and on today's most popular techniques.
Beyond impact in the above mentioned application areas, the project will deepen
the theoretical foundations of computational linear algebra and strengthen ties
to theoretical computer science, approximation theory, optimization, machine
learning, and other fields. The work is interdisciplinary in nature, and will be
complemented with curriculum development focused on preparing students with an
interdisciplinary mathematical and computing toolkit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project breaks down into three main thrusts. The first will consider the
computational complexity of fundamental linear-algebraic problems, which is not
well understood. In the process, the work will explore the role of randomization
and approximation in fast linear algebra and endow the field with missing
complexity-theoretic structure to guide algorithmic progress. The second thrust
will focus on algorithms and lower bounds within the restricted matrix-vector
query model of linear-algebraic computation. This model encompasses a large
fraction of known approaches, and the project aims to both explain its dominance
in practice, and to develop new algorithmic tools. Finally, the third thrust
will focus on applying randomized methods to structured matrix problems arising
in machine learning, signal processing, and beyond. Randomized methods have led
to breakthroughs for computation on general unstructured matrices, but their
potential in solving structured problems is under-explored. The project will
address this gap, broadening the practical impact of randomized methods, and
strengthening theoretical connections to diverse areas of computer science and
applied mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.