* 2046093
* CAREER: Mechanoaging: Understanding the Mechanical Forces that Drive Cellular Aging
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Joshua Morgan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 03/31/2026
* USD 514,591.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will study the role of
tissue mechanics in cellular senescence. Cellular senescence, defined as when
cells can no longer divide, is an important component of wound healing, cancer,
and aging. Senescence is known to spread from cell to cell, but how this occurs
is not understood. It has been recently observed that senescent cells are
stiffer and pull more strongly on their surroundings than other cells, and these
attributes may provide essential clues to cellular processes. The goal of this
project is to identify the role of stiffness and mechanical force in spreading
senescence from cell to cell. This project investigates both: 1) whether
stiffness encourages cellular senescence; and 2) whether contractile cells
trigger senescence in other cells within a tissue. The results of this project
will eventually enable future medical research by providing insight into
senescent populations that regulate wound healing, cancer, and aging. Parallel
to the research aspect, this project will develop activities for local school
children highlighting the important concept of self-organization, or how large
biological systems (like tissues) are formed from many individual components
(like cells). The outreach initiatives will encourage STEM accessibility and
excitement in the Inland Empire community of Southern California, which is
majority-minority and critically medically
underserved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will answer fundamental questions
regarding the role of mechanical signaling in cellular senescence. Cellular
senescence, defined as the irreversible exit of the cell cycle, has important
physiological and pathological roles, and it is known to spread from cell to
cell (“bystander senescence”). Despite rigorous understanding of the molecular
pathways of senescence, we have relatively little data on the role of mechanical
signaling. This project will test a hypothetical role for mechanical signaling
in bystander senescence, focusing on three discrete questions: 1) Determine
whether increased cellular tension accelerates the entry into senescence; 2)
Determine whether increased cell-cell adhesion tension triggers bystander
senescence; and 3) Determine whether increased cell-matrix tension triggers
bystander senescence. Further, the project approach utilizes complementary
experimental and computational modeling methods, enabling creation of a
descriptive and predictive framework for senescent mechanobiology. This project
will directly and indirectly contribute to bioengineering research, health
sciences, and education. Specifically, identification of a novel mechanism of
senescence induction and non-autonomous propagation will provide insight into
multiple processes, including 1) how physiological senescence is coordinated in
wound healing; 2) how pathological senescence propagates through aged and
diseased tissue; and 3) how cellular behavior can be controlled through
mechanical signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.