* 2046944
* CAREER: Air Stable and Tunable Bandgap Pb-free Halide Perovskite Materials for Photovoltaic and Photocatalytic Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Shubhra Bansal, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This CAREER project aims to develop high efficiency Pb-free perovskite solar
cells and determine the stability of these novel materials. Pb-based organic-
inorganic halide perovskite (OIHP) solar cells have shown tremendous promise
with big leap in efficiency in less than a decade. However, due to presence of
Pb and poor stability, these materials may pose issues for widespread use and
commercialization of OIHP solar cells. The research community has not yet come
up with a high performance alternative to Pb-based OIHP solar cells, primarily
due to material defects. This project will develop air-stable and low defect
density Pt-Ni and Sn-Ge based perovskite solar cells. Success in this project
will result in development of a model system for Pb-free perovskite solar cells
with stable buffer and contact materials. Lifetime prediction and levelized cost
of energy (LCOE) models will be developed to determine the effect of Pb
replacement on cell cost, energy yield, efficiency, degradation rates,
encapsulation costs and recycling. In addition to these scientific advancements,
PI will train underrepresented minority graduate and undergraduate students on
materials for energy applications. This CAREER project will also train the next
generation workforce for solar energy jobs in Nevada at community colleges and
UNLV. Dedicated workshop series to identify the fundamental roadblocks for
development of high efficiency and Pb-free perovskite materials will be hosted
in collaboration with academia and industry
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic-inorganic halide perovskites (OIHPs) have
shown significant progress as low-cost, solution printable semiconductors with
superior optoelectronic properties. For photovoltaic applications, these
materials have achieved remarkable power conversion efficiency of 25.2% single-
junction and 29.1% perovskite-Si tandem devices. Despite the exceptional
performance of OIHPs, toxicity of Pb, thermal stability, and stability due to
ion migration are fundamental materials issues that need to be solved. The
superior optoelectronic properties of Pb-based OIHPs have not yet been
reproduced in Pb-free compositions due to high defect density and low absorption
coefficient. The objectives of the proposed research are to develop all
inorganic mixed halide-chalcogenide Pb-free perovskite photoabsorbers ABX3 and
A2BX6 (A = Cs; B = Ge/Sn, Pt/Ni; X = I, Cl, Br, O, S) with tunable bandgap and
high carrier lifetime. Dopant-free inorganic electron and hole transport layers
with optimal band offsets will be developed for high efficiency and stable
planar solar cells. Proposed work will address following: (1) solution
processing of stable mixed halide-chalcogenide Pb-free perovskite thin films
with low midgap defect density and high absorption coefficient; (2) stability
and degradation mechanisms under junction bias, light illumination, heat,
oxygen, UV and humidity; (3) surface and interface defect passivation with
improved electron and hole transport layers; (4) high efficiency and stable Pb-
free perovskite solar cells; (5) Accelerated stress testing protocols and
numerical models for lifetime prediction and LCOE for Pb-free perovskite solar
cells; and (6) cost-stability-performance trade-off analysis of Pb vs. Pb-free
perovskite solar cells. Achieving a fundamental understanding of how to control
the electronic, chemical, electrochemical, and dynamics behavior of Pb-free
perovskite photoabsorbers will enable an entirely new generation of wide bandgap
semiconductors for PV applications and beyond. Key international collaborations
will be formed to address critical challenges for high efficiency Pb-free
perovskite solar cells. This project is jointly funded by the division of
Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.