* 2046175
* CAREER: Leveraging Signal Structure for Cost-Sensitive Adaptive Sampling
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2026
* John Lipor, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Fowler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 215,219.00

A persistent challenge to scientists and engineers is the ability to rapidly
sense the environment. Whether monitoring for harmful air pollutants, wildfires,
or low oxygen levels in lakes, an essential task is to determine all locations
where a factor of interest reaches a critical level. To solve this problem,
practitioners are increasingly utilizing mobile sensors such as those deployed
on unmanned vehicles. While these provide a safe means of exploring large
spatial regions and hazardous environments, they also require extensive planning
to ensure the most relevant measurements are collected and to manage battery
life. This project will overcome these issues through the design of adaptive
sampling algorithms, which automatically guide sampling vehicles to the most
important regions while accounting for the realistic costs associated with the
measurement process. The resulting approaches will provide general-purpose
solutions to environmental sampling that can be easily utilized by practitioners
while also accounting for the realistic challenges that typically prevent
adaptive methods from translating into practice. Furthermore, this research will
support education and diversity through the development of curriculum for a high
school course on unmanned aerial vehicles as well as a citizen science campaign
that leverages adaptive sampling to benefit one of the nation's largest urban
parks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to design and
analyze cost-sensitive adaptive sampling algorithms for the problem of level set
estimation. Novel adaptive sampling techniques will be developed under three
forms of level set structure: (1) boundary smoothness, where no domain or side
knowledge is available, (2) known similarity structure that indicates which
locations should have similar measurement values, and (3) unknown cluster
structure, where the signal of interest is constant within each cluster of
locations, and the goal is to simultaneously learn the cluster structure and
measurement values. For each case, principled algorithms will be derived based
on recent developments from the fields of active learning, multi-armed bandits,
and reinforcement learning, with the goal of providing improved empirical
performance, rigorous theoretical characterization, and incorporating realistic
costs such as the distance traveled while sensing. Algorithms will be evaluated
on real-world datasets including those measuring air quality and geothermal
energy prospects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.