* 2046072
* CAREER: Foundations of IoT-Supported Mobile Augmented Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Maria Gorlatova, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 04/30/2026
* USD 326,111.00

Mobile augmented reality, which integrates computer-generated virtual objects
with real-world environments around a user in real time, has the potential to
bring to the users, vibrant and immersive representations of important
information at the right time and the right place within the physical world. Yet
existing mobile augmented reality systems often make mistakes in identifying the
objects present in the real world, thus generating incorrect virtual objects for
the users. They also make mistakes in placing virtual objects within the real
world, making them appear as shifting, oscillating, or jumping around. This
project will address such environmental awareness limitations by taking
advantage of Internet of Things (IoT) sensors and controllers located in the
vicinity of mobile augmented reality devices. Many IoT devices, such as smart
lights, cameras, and displays, are already pervasive in smart homes, offices,
and other environments. This project will improve mobile augmented reality
environmental awareness by using these IoT devices as sources of additional
information about the real world, and as means for partially controlling the
state of the world. The project will make mobile augmented reality more
reliable, paving way for its applications in health-critical and safety-critical
domains, such as medicine and transportation. The project will develop multi-
disciplinary research skills in a diverse cohort of graduate, undergraduate, and
high school students. The findings of this project will be showcased as
interactive demonstrations at K-12-oriented events, with the particular aim of
attracting women and underrepresented minorities to science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lay the foundations for studies of IoT-
supported mobile augmented reality by developing techniques for designing,
implementing, and evaluating it, and by demonstrating IoT-supported methods that
improve the performance of core mobile augmented reality algorithms. The goals
of this research are divided into three thrusts. The first thrust will develop
an IoT-supported mobile augmented reality platform, a game engine-based IoT-
supported augmented reality emulator, and new IoT-supported mobile augmented
reality applications. The second thrust will examine and quantify the failures
in mobile augmented reality semantic awareness, and will develop algorithms that
address these failures by making use of the IoT camera-provided availability of
multiple views of the same physical space and IoT-based smart light and shade
controls. The third thrust will examine and quantify failures in mobile
augmented reality spatial awareness, develop machine learning-based techniques
to predict whether the failures are likely to occur in a given environment, and
demonstrate algorithms that improve spatial awareness by controlling the state
of smart lights, shades, and displays available in the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.