* 2046710
* CAREER: Towards Better Understanding, Robustness, and Efficiency of Deep Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Yingyu Liang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2026
* USD 336,842.00

Deep learning is a primary driving force behind many current intelligent
decision-making systems and has achieved unprecedented success in various
applications such as image processing, speech recognition, language translation,
and game playing. However, the lack of adequate theoretical understanding is
limiting the capacity to fully exploit the potential of deep learning in
realistic environments, such as in security-sensitive or resource-constrained
scenarios. This project aims to provide a thorough and systematic approach to
understanding why practical deep-learning models succeed, under models of the
data capturing the properties of real-world problems. This project will develop
such an approach and employ the revealed principles in designing more robust and
efficient deep-learning methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
new theoretical models of properties of practical data leading to empirical
success, and also provide frameworks for proving performance guarantees,
including for learning in the presence of adversarial attacks or limited labeled
data. It will also design new learning methods that are provably more robust and
labeled-data efficient. This direction is still largely unexplored, despite
significant recent research activities. The proposed theoretical and algorithmic
solutions are possible through an interdisciplinary mix of tools from machine
learning, statistics, and optimization. The proposed program is grounded in the
investigator's prior work that includes both theoretical results and empirical
validation. If successful, the proposed research can be transformational for
modern intelligent systems by laying the foundations for further development. It
will also help to solve new theoretical problems from practice that are not
adequately addressed by current theory and will have lasting impacts on machine
learning and optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.