* 2046822
* CAREER: Symmetry-based microfluidics and perturbation-free micromanipulations of swimming microorganisms
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Bin Liu, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 508,296.00

Precise control of fluid flow in small geometries, or microfluidics, has been
used as a powerful means of controlling or transporting small particles.
Microfluidics can be potentially used to manipulate microorganisms to study how
they sense the mechanical properties of their environment (mechanosensation).
Gaining a full understanding of the mechanosensation of these microorganisms may
lead to mechanical control of their behavior as an alternative to the
traditional chemical treatments in ecological, environmental, and health
applications. The advancement in microfabrication techniques has yielded
increasingly sophisticated geometries in microfluidic devices, and the flow
within these devices can be predicted using computational fluid dynamics. This
project explores the fundamental principles that govern microfluidic flows
relevant to micromanipulation of microorganisms, using a technique called
symmetry-based abstraction. Advanced microfluidics and three-dimensional imaging
techniques developed for this project can be directly transferable to many
biological, medical, and industrial applications. The proposed endeavor also
consists of notable educational components, including “Virtual Imaging Lab” and
“Kirigami-Origami Microfluidics” outreach programs that bring interactive
research experiences to both the regular classroom and virtually to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to establish a
symmetry-based framework of understanding and then modulating microscale flow
patterns for advanced micromanipulations. This level of controlled microfluidic
environment will be used for isolating the passive mechanical responses of
microorganisms to surrounding media from active responses. This functionality
will elevate our understanding of the mechanical effects and lead to mechanical
treatments for biological controls. The approach is to (i) develop and
experimentally measure a symmetry-based foundation of microfluidics for advanced
manipulation functions, (ii) extend these capabilities to perturbation-free
manipulations of living cells (by building a “bacterial treadmill”), and (iii)
ultimately realize channel-free and pixelated microfluidic applications. By
bridging flow patterns and flow symmetries, a broader design space of
microfluidics beyond simple geometries is made available for advanced
microfluidic applications. By robustly isolating the microorganisms from
mechanical perturbations through flow symmetries, a controlled comparison of
microorganisms under perturbation-free and mechanically perturbed conditions
becomes viable. This comparison will quantitatively provide the mechanoresponses
of microorganisms to surrounding media. This understanding also provides us a
rigorous approach to explore the true hydrodynamic effects of swimming
microorganisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.