* 2046768
* CAREER: Understanding the importance of biomass hydraulic capacitance for transpiration
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Ashley Matheny, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 01/31/2026
* USD 473,258.00

Forests provide an important link between the water cycle and the carbon cycle.
Increasing global temperature and chances of drought threaten the forest
ecosystems. Droughts can limit the ability of trees to cycle carbon and water
due to limited amount of water in the soil and atmosphere. Like many plans,
trees move water from the soil into the roots, up through trunks and branches,
and out through the leaves into the atmosphere. They can move and store large
amounts of water that play a key role on maintaining plant functions and prevent
drought stress. Bigger trees typically have larger volumes of water storage,
protecting them from soil water stress. This study assesses the role of forest
water storage in how trees respond to water supply and demand stresses in a
temperate and a semi-arid forest. The work will develop a new sensor to measure
water content in trees and generate an extensive dataset of water content in
living, mature trees that will advance knowledge on how different trees acquire,
store, and use water. It will further develop computer models to simulate the
effects of forest water storage on the water and carbon cycles and apply new
satellite data analysis to assess where the water is residing and predict the
likelihood of droughts, tree mortality, and forest fires. An interactive virtual
field trip of different forests will be developed, both in English and Spanish,
to increase access to field experience and expand diversity in the Earth
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this research is to increase
understanding of the physics of water storage and use in trees. This novel
understanding of capacitance will be used to develop plant hydraulics models and
to connect individual-based ground measurements of biomass water storage to
remotely sensed data products at regional and global scales for use in model
evaluation, as well as to generate predictions of ecosystem stress. This
research effort will couple field-based observations and instrumentation
development with model development and evaluation. Measurements of biomass water
storage, water potential, and sap flux will be used to create individual-based
plant hydraulics models capable of reproducing the capacitive response to
rewetting after drought. These data will also be used to ground truth regional-
scale remotely sensed biomass water content using a statistical scaling
algorithm. Finally, this work will provide a pathway to incorporate remote
sensing observations of water content into plant hydraulics-capable land-
atmosphere models at the regional scale. This research will shed new light on
the role biomass water storage plays in governing transpiration response to VPD
and soil water stresses and will enhance our ability to model vegetation
responses to both drought stress and drought recovery at multiple scales.
Simultaneously to these research activities, interactive digital field trips
will be created to allow students at high school and college levels to immerse
themselves with the scientific team to learn more about carbon, water, and
energy cycling in different forest types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.