* 2046705
* CAREER: Foundations for Real-Time System Security
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Gedare Bloom, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 06/30/2026
* USD 359,697.00

A real-time system is an electro-mechanical computing platform that controls a
physical process and must respond to inputs before a bounded time known as a
deadline. When the deadline is missed, disaster can happen. Safety-critical
systems, cyber-physical systems (CPS), and critical infrastructure including
cars, airplanes, power plants, manufacturing robots, satellites, electronic
roadway signage, and more, all rely upon the correct, safe functioning of the
underlying real-time system. When its security is compromised, the improper
functioning of a real-time system can cause hazardous and deadly consequences.
The objective of this project is to protect real-time systems from cyberattack.
The outcomes of this effort are advancing theory and practice of real-time
security to the public benefit by improving the national security posture and
enhancing human safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
bring real-time security to the forefront as a research field by thoroughly
characterizing the security challenges facing real-time systems. The effort
revolves around investigating three key research aims. The first aim is
formalizing the threats and solutions for securing real-time system schedules by
way of understanding schedule-based attacks, mitigating such attacks with moving
target defense, and detecting schedule violations with a specification-based
intrusion detection system. The second aim enables securely using trusted
execution environments in real-time embedded systems including response-time
analysis, integration with the open-source Real-Time Executive for
Multiprocessor Systems (RTEMS), and enhancing resistance to side-channel
attacks. The third aim mitigates the threats introduced by fault tolerance
mechanisms in real-time systems to enhance the security of fault recovery by
creating frameworks for unprivileged and proactive recovery mechanisms. The
integrative educational and broadening participation activities of this project
advance the cybersecurity workforce development necessary to address skills gaps
and shortages in the profession. Widespread adoption of the successful outcomes
of this project will positively impact a broad range of CPS and critical
infrastructure assets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.