* 2046440
* CAREER: Platform for Characterizing Transdiagnostic Markers of Disease from Wearable and Mobile Technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Ryan McGinnis, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to develop
an open-source software platform using wearable sensors and mobile phones to
help diagnose internalizing disorders in young children. Nearly one in five
children experience an internalizing disorder like anxiety or depression. These
disorders can hinder development well into adulthood. Yet objective and widely
available assessment for these conditions remains a key unmet need. Such an
assessment could enable effective diagnosis at scale while advancing the
understanding of internalizing disorders, potentially informing future
personalized interventions. The results of this project pave the way for
improved assessment of a variety of disorders such as fall risk assessment in
older adults and in individuals with neurological disorders. This project will
also establish a digital mental health interest group at the University of
Vermont that will bring together high-school, undergraduate, and graduate
students with faculty and industry professionals. This group will engage in an
annual digital mental health hackathon, hosted by UVMâ€™s Center for Biomedical
Innovation, that focuses on rural mental healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
NSF CAREER project advances the fields of childhood mental health, digital
medicine, and the engineering of signal processing and machine learning
algorithms for extracting meaning from wearable sensor signals. These advances
fill key knowledge gaps, and will be made in the context of three research
objectives: 1) developing and validating context-aware multi-modal digital
biomarkers and using them to identify transdiagnostic latent classes, 2)
developing, validating, and optimizing multi-modal, multi-domain digital
phenotypes of childhood internalizing disorders, and 3) developing an open-
source platform that integrates algorithms for extracting biomarkers, latent
classes, and phenotypes from wearable and mobile technologies. Data to inform
this project will be collected from children at elevated risk for internalizing
disorders. Each child will complete a series of brief mood induction tasks
during which movement, speech, electromyography, electrodermal activity, and
electrocardiography data will be collected by wearables and mobile phones. These
research objectives advance scientific knowledge of the biomarkers and
phenotypes of childhood internalizing disorders, trans-diagnostic latent
profiles in young children, and the relationship between physiological markers
of these conditions and their behavioral symptoms. The first-of-its-kind
platform will advance development and validation efforts in digital medicine and
allow future extension to a wide array of clinical
endpoints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.