* 2046984
* CAREER: Understanding Peroxisomal Stress Responses
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Hua Bai, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 02/28/2026
* USD 710,495.00

This research will investigate how eukaryotic cells sense and respond to
malfunctioned organelles, such as peroxisomes. Peroxisomes are essential
subcellular organelles involved in lipid metabolism and hydrogen peroxide
detoxification. Despite the crucial role of peroxisomes in maintaining cellular
and metabolic homeostasis, our knowledge on how cells cope with peroxisome
dysfunction is largely missing. Using genetic and biochemical approaches, this
project aims to uncover novel peroxisome surveillance pathways and a cascade of
stress responses induced by defective peroxisomes. Through this project, the
investigators will integrate peroxisome research into innovative educational
activities allowing students to gain hands-on experiences in genetic and cell
biology research. These educational activities include: 1) Developing an
innovative undergraduate laboratory course to provide students with hands-on
experience in genome editing and imaging techniques through course-based
undergraduate research experiences; and 2) Engaging undeclared students in
genetic and cell biology research through partnership with “The Sky is the
Limit” learning community. These integrated education programs will engage
larger and more diverse groups of undergraduate students in biology research,
and make basic research more inclusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peroxisomes are
important, yet least studied subcellular organelles in all eukaryotic cells.
Dysregulated peroxisomal protein translocation can lead to impaired organelle
function and disrupted cellular homeostasis. However, little is known about how
cells surveil and respond to impaired peroxisomal protein import. This project
will utilize state-of-the-art genome-wide CRISPR screening and TurboID proximity
labelling techniques to map novel peroxisome stress response pathways and
identify mechanisms underlying cellular homeostatic response to defective
peroxisomal protein import. Several novel hypothesis will be examined,
including: 1) How peroxisomal membrane proteins relay stress signal from the
peroxisome to the nucleus; and 2) How serine/arginine-rich splicing factors
activate cellular adaptive responses upon peroxisomal stress. Overall, the
results of this research will likely have an important and positive impact on
the protein translocation stress research field and may significantly advance
our understanding of cellular adaptation to dysregulated peroxisomal protein
import.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.