* 2046233
* CAREER: Exploring the Participation of LGBTQ Undergraduates in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Bryce Hughes, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 01/31/2026
* USD 437,193.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty who
exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent
education, and the integration of education and research within the context of
the mission of their organizations. This project awarded to a CAREER scholar has
the goal to examine the participation of LGBTQ students in undergraduate STEM
programs to understand how their experiences as LGBTQ students in STEM affect
their decision-making regarding STEM career goals. The research will provide
STEM students, educators, administrators, and policymakers the tools to create
LGBTQ-inclusive learning environments. This award is supported by the EHR Core
Research program which supports fundamental STEM education research initiatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will achieve the research goal through three
research aims. The first aim uses social network analysis to measure
characteristics of LGBTQ STEM students' social networks, relate these
characteristics to other STEM outcomes like STEM identity, and compare these
characteristics with their heterosexual and cisgender peers. The second aim is
to compare STEM degree completion rates between LGBTQ STEM students and their
peers through regression analysis of a national dataset of college students. The
third research aim is then to explore the discipline-based STEM identities of
LGBTQ STEM students through narrative interviews. The research produced from
this project will contribute by highlighting the potential consequences of
hiding LGBTQ identity in STEM on students' social networks, the difference in
STEM degree completion rates by sexual orientation and gender identity, and how
the LGBTQ climate in STEM affects discipline-based STEM identities. The
educational aims of the project are to develop a course on social network
analysis in education research; create training resources for STEM faculty to
ensure more LGBTQ-inclusive classrooms; and conduct training seminars on LGBTQ
data for administrators and policymakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.