* 2046053
* Collaborative Research: Socialization Competencies and Youth Outcomes in Response to Racial Violence
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Seanna Leath, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 252,977.00

Given the historical and persistent crisis of racial discrimination and violence
enacted against Black communities in America, Black parents have unique
considerations to prepare their children to cope with potential racial bias and
discrimination in schools, neighborhoods, and community settings. Yet, there is
less research on how parents' race-related experiences influence their
competency in transmitting information to their children about processing and
coping with widely publicized instances of racial discrimination and violence.
This project will examine how Black parents perceive racially violent incidents
in their immediate communities, their own interpersonal experiences with racial
discrimination, their parenting practices around racial socialization, and the
coping strategies parents use to impact their child’s academic and well-being
outcomes. The findings will provide a more comprehensive understanding of the
ways racial/ethnic minority families' navigate oppressive social contexts and
support the positive development of their children. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
widely publicized incidents of police brutality highlight the intersecting
systems of inequality, injustice, and racism in the United States, elucidating a
need for research documenting how Black families process and respond to such
events. This study is a longitudinal, mixed methodological investigation of
Black families' vulnerability to or resilience against marginalization, focusing
on parenting practices and adolescent developmental trajectories. The three-year
project involves two phases of research with Black parents and adolescents: (1)
annual survey data to examine the influence of parents' race-related experiences
and racial socialization competencies on adolescent outcomes, and (2) in-depth
qualitative analysis exploring parents’ perceptions of the factors that shape
their parenting practices and racial socialization competencies. The findings
will provide a more comprehensive understanding of how Black families navigate
racially oppressive social contexts and shed light on family processes for
racial/ethnic minorities in the U.S. more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.