* 2046880
* CAREER: Design and analysis of experiments for complex social processes
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Alexander Volfovsky, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 05/31/2026
* USD 147,469.00

Modern scientific inquiry from the social to the health sciences centers around
answering foundational “what if?” questions with a special emphasis on
understanding the effects of changing complex social processes such as the
arrangement of individuals into networks or groups and communication of
information via text. The causal inference literature has heralded the role of
randomization in getting answers to such “what if?” questions, treating
randomized controlled experiments as a gold standard for testing simple causal
hypotheses. However, hidden behind this powerful tool are a series of
assumptions and design decisions that are difficult to control for and are
untenable in the context of complex and changing social processes. The PI will
develop novel theory and methodology that will directly address the role of
these social processes in causal inference. The new tools can be used across
disciplines to study interventions whenever social processes are present such as
in the study of important societal questions relating to vaccines, non-
pharmaceutical interventions, implications of different education policies and
the like. The PI's education plan integrates the research products from this
project into courses that will engage students from a wide range of academic
backgrounds, presenting and linking the methodological contributions to
substantive applications. Research products will be widely disseminated to the
scientific community and the general public through popular and scientific
publications, presentations, and open-source software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the nascent areas of causal inference in the presence of
network information and text data. While much of the work in these areas has
concentrated on the analysis of existing experimental designs, little work has
gone into designing experiments specifically for such complex social processes.
The research will demonstrate the inadequacy of classical designs and the
importance of developing specialized experimental designs that adapt to
underlying complex social processes. For network and text data, the PI will
provide a comprehensive framework for defining causal quantities of interest
that exploit the structure in such data. The PI will work on three main thrusts:
(1) Conditional design in the presence of network information: this thrust will
develop restricted randomizations to target the testing and estimation of peer
effects, total effects and other network quantities; (2) Unconditional design
where the experimenter can control the social process: this thrust will draw on
results from graph sampling to develop experimental designs that simultaneously
design an interaction graph (that can represent how study participants will be
allowed to interact) and a treatment allocation; and (3) Text as a social
process: this thrust will provide guidance and tools for extracting causal
quantities from text data that can play the role of treatment, outcome,
confounder or mediator in a causal analysis. The output of the research will
include practical guidelines for experimental design as well as adaptable tools
and algorithms that can be deployed to address a wide range of social processes
and applied problems beyond those studied in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.