* 2046476
* CAREER: Diffusion-Driven Degradation and Failure Mechanisms in Architected Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Pavana Prabhakar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2026
* USD 539,434.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will support fundamental
research in elucidating how fiber architecture in reinforced polymer composite
materials influences moisture ingression, and consequent degradation and failure
when used in service. Owing to their high strength-to-weight ratios and
significant in-service energy savings, composites have tremendous promise for
lightweight structural applications in the aerospace, automotive, and marine
industries, as well as civil infrastructure. However, these materials are
inevitably exposed to and affected by moisture in the environment, even humidity
in the air, which makes them vulnerable to degradation and damage, thus severely
limiting their use in critical applications. This research will provide
essential guidance for designing and fabricating composites for structural use.
The research activities will be complemented with a series of integrated
educational activities to train the next generation composites workforce, e.g.,
through a blended online course designed for working professionals and graduate
students alike and research opportunities for a diverse group of undergraduate
students. Additionally, the award will be used to create awareness in the public
space through broad dissemination of research outcomes via various institutional
programs, such as 4-H and Youth Conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multi-
fold objectives of this research are to: 1) determine how fiber architecture
influences the tortuosity of moisture diffusion pathways within woven fiber-
reinforced polymer composites (FRPCs); 2) establish the relationship between
moisture diffusivity and effective mechanical properties; and 3) elucidate the
impact of moisture diffusion pathways and concomitant degradation on mechanical
failure modes. This research will use an integrated computational and
experimental framework that resolves fiber architectures at multiple length
scales common in woven FRPCs. The research approach relies on finite element
modeling combined with convolutional neural network-based machine learning for
exploring the correlations between tortuosity of fiber architecture, moisture
diffusivity, and mechanical performance; fabrication of the selected specimens
using textile weaving technology; and characterization of diffusion pathways
through X-ray microtomography with digital volume correlation and mapped
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.