* 2046001
* CAREER: Innovative Technology for Mass Timber and Hybrid Modular Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2026
* Erica Fischer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2026
* USD 559,396.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will create innovative
building technology that will enable mass timber modular construction as a
building solution to many of the issues the nation's major cities face today.
The architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC) sector is on the cusp of a
significant disruption that will change the way buildings are manufactured,
assembled, and designed, the catalyst of which is the integration of building
information models (BIM) and automated construction and manufacturing. This
disruption will significantly impact structural engineers. With the streamlining
of building manufacturing, assembling, and design, engineers will need to take
advantage of three opportunities: (1) design for constructability, (2) design
for manufacturing, and (3) design for the whole life of the building
(considering future modifications, maintenance, and easily replacing parts of
the building). Modular construction, as one method to take advantage of these
three opportunities, can address labor and housing shortages that exist in
almost every U.S. city today and also can provide rapid construction methods for
post-disaster reconstruction and additional patient care facilities. This
research will contribute to the state of Oregon’s economy, which has made
significant investments in mass timber production, manufacturing, and research.
This research will be complemented through the development of best practices for
using interdisciplinary, collaborative classroom environments to enhance
engineering identities of underrepresented minorities and women at the graduate
level. This award will support the National Science Foundation (NSF) role in the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program and the National Windstorm Impact
Reduction Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this research is to
develop a novel framework for robust and ductile mass timber modular
construction that can be applied to buildings with varying lateral force
resisting systems. Through this framework, the relationship between the rigidity
of modular interconnections and overall structural behavior will be
investigated. The research objectives of this project are to: (1) quantify the
demands in interconnections that provide ductility when the building framing is
subjected to combined gravity and lateral forces (seismic and wind); (2)
quantify the impact of interconnection configuration and design on the ability
of interconnections to meet the strength and serviceability performance criteria
for mass timber high-rise modular buildings; (3) quantify ductility and
overstrength for mass timber modular construction and explore applicability of
conventional seismic performance factors and how these factors influence the
adjusted collapse margin ratio for archetype buildings; (4) explore the
influence of interconnection stiffness on the behavior of high-rise modular mass
timber buildings subjected to wind demands; and (5) explore the relationship
between team-focused and interdisciplinary educational practices with
engineering identity and knowledge retention. New connection technology will be
created and its contribution to the overall building behavior will be
investigated through a rigorous testing plan and complex physics-based numerical
simulations of archetype buildings subjected to combined gravity and lateral
loads (seismic and wind). This research is a critical first step to develop
innovative technology that will change how buildings are designed, manufactured,
and assembled. This project will enable the Principal Investigator to establish
interdisciplinary research, teaching, and mentorship in the area of mass timber
and hybrid construction. This research will use the NSF-supported Natural
Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Boundary Layer Wind Tunnel
facility at the University of Florida. Experimental datasets will be archived in
the NHERI Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org) and made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.