* 2046363
* CAREER: Multimodal Single Entity Electrochemistry at Nanoscale Liquid/Liquid Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Jiyeon Kim, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 04/30/2026
* USD 607,500.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and co-funding from the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research, Dr. Jiyeon Kim and her group at the University of Rhode
Island are developing new experimental strategies to advance our understanding
of electrochemistry occurring on very small spatial scales (nanometer) in
nanoemulsions (NEs) and nanopipettes. The work addresses important processes
that occur at liquid/liquid interfaces, and seeks to elucidate the relationship
between interfacial structure, function, and activity of these nano-objects. The
long-range aim is to advance practical applications for rational and
ultrasensitive analysis in diverse fields, including environmental monitoring,
clinical diagnosis, and electrochemical energy storage/conversion. Dr. Kim's
group works to communicate the underlying nanoscience and its importance to the
general public through educational and outreach activities that seek to explain
the principles of nanoelectrochemistry at the liquid/liquid interface to
undergraduate and high school students with a focus on women and other groups
underrepresented in science-technology-engineering-mathematics (STEM)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, Dr. Kim's group at the University
of Rhode Island is developing new experimental approaches to investigating ion-
or electron-transfer (IT or ET) reactions across immiscible liquid/liquid
interfaces in two distinct nanoscale domains - nanoemulsions (NEs) and
nanopipettes. The work seeks to enable better practical applications through
greater fundamental understanding. Specifically, a new experimental approach of
multimodal single-entity electrochemistry (SEE) is being used to obtain
unequivocal kinetic and thermodynamic insights at nanoscale liquid/liquid
interfaces of individual NEs or nanopipettes, thereby enhancing fundamental
understanding of how the associated heterogeneous IT or ET reactions are
affected by the structure, thermodynamic selectivity, and contamination of the
interfacial surfaces. These emerging nanoscale platforms are envisioned to
provide ultrasensitive analysis with high selectivity in diverse practical
applications in environmental monitoring, clinical diagnosis, and
electrochemical energy storage/conversion. Advances may lead to implementation
of nanoelectrochemistry in industrial settings, including mass production of
commercially marketed NEs in food/drug/cosmetic
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.