* 2046487
* CAREER: Developing Thermal Gel Electrophoresis to Interrogate Higher Order Biological Structure
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Thomas Linz, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 04/30/2026
* USD 690,948.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and partial co-funding from the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems, Dr. Thomas Linz and his
group at Wayne State University are developing innovative methods to measure
biological molecules. Proteins must be “active” in biological samples and
pharmaceutical formulations to carry out therapeutic functions. To improve the
reproducibility of biological research studies and to screen the integrity of
biopharmaceutical products, convenient low-cost methods are needed for
determination of the amount of active protein in a sample, as opposed to the
total amount of a target protein. The Linz Lab is addressing this need by
developing technology to rapidly determine the fraction of protein molecules in
their active states. A technique called thermal gel electrophoresis is being
created that uses temperature-responsive materials to help distinguish active
and inactive protein molecules. The methods created in the Linz Lab target rapid
and inexpensive analysis of biological samples and biopharmaceuticals. The group
is also developing associated outreach activities for elementary and middle
school students to teach children how temperature impacts the properties of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein bioactivity is governed in part by
folded conformations, multimeric complexes, and post-translational
modifications. Screening for these higher order structures when validating
biological samples or biopharmaceutical formulations can help determine and
control the amount of active protein in the sample, rather than just total
protein mass. The Linz Lab is developing methods in a microchip gel
electrophoresis format to conveniently interrogate tertiary and quaternary
structures and post-translational modifications. Thermal gel electrophoresis
uses thermoresponsive polymers to integrate distinct analytical capabilities
within a single microfluidic device including sample preparation, separation,
and detection. These disparate functions are achieved by controlling temperature
in the device with high spatial and temporal resolution to locally adjust gel
viscosity for each analysis step. This approach minimizes complexity and cost of
the microdevices and streamlines analyses to increase sample throughput.
Ultimately, this rapid, inexpensive gel electrophoresis screening technique is
expected to enhance the precision of biological research and enable the
integrity of protein drug and vaccine formulations to be assessed in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.