* 2046589
* CAREER: Designing and Defending Novel Ultra-stealthy and Controllable Design-time Analog-domain Hardware Trojans
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Matthew Hicks, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 04/30/2026
* USD 319,511.00

Hardware designers build circuits leveraging the digital abstraction where only
values 1 and 0 exist. While this simplifies circuit operation, it hides a lot of
real-world operational details. In the real world, circuits behave continuously,
with voltages ranging between 0 and some higher level. Voltage fluctuates in the
short- and long-term due to the operating environment changes, circuit age, and
computation. Traditionally, both hardware designers and attackers have ignored
these low-level details. This project shows that it is possible to harness these
low-level behaviors, using existing digital design techniques, to create new
hardware attacks and proposes defenses to counteract
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project changes how hardware designers across
government and industry reason about and validate the security of their designs.
By exploiting analog-domain effects for increased stealth, the project
represents a fundamental change in the capabilities of hardware Trojans. Two
significant outcomes of the project are a new dimension of hardware Trojan
stealth, namely reproducibility, and exposing the ability to harness analog-
domain properties at the hardware description language level. The artifacts of
this project are a Field-Programmable Gate Array-based System-on-Chip that
demonstrates the novel analog-domain hardware Trojans as well as serves as a
defense evaluation platform, representative of commodity
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together research in the areas
of computer security, computer architecture, and digital circuits to create
novel design-time hardware Trojans and new defenses against them. Other broader
impacts include extending the technical work's impact to society, developing
partnerships with government labs and industry, and providing mentorship to the
next generation of leaders, especially those who are the first in their family
to get a college degree. The project will also play a role in undergraduate and
graduate education through the integration of the research artifacts into the
curriculum and the creation of an embedded security design
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project repository will be indefinitely
available to the public https://github.com/FoRTE-Research/NSF_CAREER. This
repository will contain the code for all hardware and software systems need to
reproduce and extend the research results. Experimental data will be stored on
the laboratory devices where the simulation and experiments are conducted, as
well as being backed-up using external media for archival
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.