* 2046081
* CAREER: SBP: Understanding how diversity exposure impacts social categorization
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Zoe Liberman, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2026
* USD 701,246.00

People divide the social world into groups, based on attributes such as race,
gender, and nationality. Beginning early in life, people use information about
another person’s groups to form expectations about that person’s likely traits
and behaviors. Even infants expect people in the same group to be similar.
Expecting people within a group to be similar may lay the foundation for
negative stereotypes and bias. One potential way to reduce bias is through
positive interactions. Past research has shown that positive interactions with
someone from an unfamiliar group improves attitudes towards other members of
that group. But most communities do not include representation of people from
every background. As a result, it is not feasible to have positive interactions
with people from all groups. This project develops a new idea: that exposure to
diversity more broadly (rather than to a specific group) may itself reduce
stereotyping. This idea is tested by developing measures of the racial and
linguistic diversity of infants’ and children’s neighborhoods and networks along
with traditional measures of stereotyping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
develops novel measures of exposure to diversity, based on the principle of
entropy: networks that contain a greater number of groups and with more equal
representation of groups are scored as more diverse. By pairing this novel
measure with other validated measures of children’s stereotyping, the research
will test whether differences in exposure to diversity are related to
differences in stereotyping. This approach helps to address a number of
fundamental questions. One is whether exposure to racial diversity reduces race-
based stereotyping. Another is whether the effects of diversity exposure are
even broader, such that exposure to linguistic diversity can reduce race-based
stereotyping. A third is how children’s stereotyping based on racial groups
compares to linguistic groups. The broad aim is to better understand how early
exposure to diversity is related to stereotyping in infants and children. The
laboratory-based research is a critical first step that can be leveraged for
future interventions aimed at mitigating the negative impacts of stereotyping.
The project also provides training in social psychology and developmental
science for a diverse group of early-career researchers, and supports
partnerships between the university and local museums aimed at increasing
scientific literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.