* 2046054
* CAREER: Climate Resilient Landslide Repair on Expansive Soil Using Vetiver Grass
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Mohammad Sadik Khan, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 04/30/2026
* USD 539,710.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will develop a climate-
resilient design concept for slope maintenance using vetiver grass. In many
cases, agencies cannot perform repairs of shallow slope failures due to limited
budgets, which often leads to more expensive deep-seated failures. On the other
hand, a slope showing early signs of failure, such as cracks, could be repaired
and strengthened using low-cost, environment-friendly deep-rooted vetiver grass.
This study will transform the slope repair paradigm from reactive to proactive
enhancing safety and resiliency of infrastructure through a bio-inspired,
sustainable approach. The project will be carried out at Jackson State
University (JSU), one of the nation's leading Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), creating numerous opportunities for African American
students to participate in research and explore careers in engineering. High
school teachers and students will be involved in the project through a summer
research program and workshops. Online educational resources and live events on
social media will reach out to greater audiences around the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to understand the
vetiver grass root-soil interaction as a bio-inspired and climate-resilient
solution to stabilize shallow slope failures in expansive soils. The project
investigates (i) interactions of the deep-rooted grass with highly plastic clay
at the micro and macro levels to resist cracking behavior; (ii) the role of the
deep-rooted grass in the soil water balance and enhancing matric suction during
infiltration and evapotranspiration; and (iii) the strength of the grass root-
soil system. Model tests and field studies will be performed under different
rainfall conditions to investigate the water balance within a slope covered with
deep-rooted vetiver grass. The understanding from the model tests and field
studies will be extended through numerical analyses to evaluate the coupled
action of vetiver grass as reinforcement and vertical path for evapo-
transpiration under different rainfall and weather conditions. All the collected
data will be analyzed in an Artificial Intelligence-based Deep Learning Platform
to develop the next-generation climate-adaptive slope repair model, which will
connect weather stressors, soil data, field monitoring data, and strength
properties of vetiver grass. Finally, a climate-adaptive design protocol for
repairing and maintaining slopes using vetiver grass will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Engineering for Civil Infrastructure (ECI) Program, the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Division of Civil, Mechanical
and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.