* 2046670
* CAREER: An Efficient First-Principles Method for Calculating Deformation Properties, Diffusivity, and Secondary Creep-Rate Behavior in BCC High-Entropy Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Chelsey Hargather, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 07/31/2026
* USD 308,995.00

This project is jointly funded by the Condensed-Matter-and-Materials-Theory
program in the Division of Materials Research and by the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports computational research
and educational activities with an aim to understand fundamental failure
mechanisms in a new class of engineering alloys called high-entropy alloys
(HEAs). HEAs are a relatively new class of engineering materials that show
significant promise for replacing traditional engineering alloys, such as steel,
in high temperature and load-bearing applications. HEAs are unique because they
are typically composed of five elements in approximately equal proportions,
whereas traditional engineering alloys, such as conventional steel, have one
base alloying element (e.g. iron) which makes up at least 95% of the
composition. Determining properties of HEAs using physics-based simulations,
however, are challenging because of the large computational resources required
to handle the multiple elements and atomic configurations of HEAs. The PI and
her team will investigate an important mechanical property of HEAs, known as
creep failure, which is the time-dependent and permanent deformation of a
material under applied load or stress. A fundamental understanding of creep
failure in these materials could potentially lead to the replacement of
traditional engineering alloys with HEAs that could create faster, more fuel-
efficient, and less costly machines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports an education plan which is aimed at (i) developing and delivering
research-focused workshops to undergraduates, and (ii) facilitating faculty
involvement in the current mentoring program. The PI and her team will create a
series of workshops for first-year, first-semester students that will be added
into the mentoring program at New Mexico Tech. These workshops will be delivered
by faculty and will provide students with a toolbox of techniques useful in an
undergraduate research setting. Participating students will be offered a small
scholarship to use as consumable laboratory supplies in a faculty member's
research laboratory. The undergraduate and graduate students engaged in the
research and education components of this project will be trained as an educated
workforce in research techniques and computational materials science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports computational research and educational activities focused on the use of
first-principles calculations based on density functional theory to predict
factors that contribute to secondary creep rate properties of body-centered
cubic high-entropy alloys (HEAs). HEAs are a relatively new class of engineering
materials that show significant promise for replacing traditional, single-
principal element engineering alloys in high temperature or structural
engineering applications. However, HEAs pose several challenges when atomistic-
level calculations are used to determine their properties, since (i) such
calculations are more time consuming than those for ordered systems with an
equivalent number of atoms, (ii) they require averaging of several atomic
configuration permutations of a structure when a defect is present, and (iii) a
model for predicting diffusivity in non-dilute random structures does not exist
for body-centered cubic materials at the atomic level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four research objectives will be completed to solve the
challenges of applying atomistic-level calculations to HEAs. First, an efficient
first-principles methodology validated with statistical inference will be
developed for structures with point and planar defects. The inferential
statistics method allows the user to select an appropriate error bar based on
the sample set of a larger, global population. Second, a diffusion model for
calculating atomic jump frequencies and diffusion coefficients in HEAs will be
developed by combining Manningâ€™s theory of diffusivity in random alloys with a
novel frequency model for paired solutes in a body-centered cubic host lattice.
When combined with inferential statistics, an efficient method for calculating
the diffusion coefficients of each element in the HEA will be obtained. Third,
stacking fault energy and elastic constants will be calculated by applying the
inferential statistics method. The effect of impurity segregation on stacking
fault energy in body-centered cubic HEAs will be explored. Finally, the
calculated diffusion and deformation properties will be incorporated into a
universal secondary creep law. Through a series of relationships in the
universal creep law, contributions to creep behavior from deformation and
diffusion properties will be investigated. This project will provide valuable
data that is necessary to focus future experimental and computational research
on HEA systems, while giving the materials science community a framework that
can be used for efficient property determination in other engineering
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports an education plan which is
aimed at (i) developing and delivering research-focused workshops to
undergraduates, and (ii) facilitating faculty involvement in the current
mentoring program. The PI and her team will create a series of workshops for
first-year, first-semester students that will be added into the mentoring
program at New Mexico Tech. These workshops will be delivered by faculty and
will provide students with a toolbox of techniques useful in an undergraduate
research setting. Participating students will be offered a small scholarship to
use as consumable laboratory supplies in a faculty member's research laboratory.
The undergraduate and graduate students engaged in the research and education
components of this project will be trained as an educated workforce in research
techniques and computational materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.