* 2046692
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Incorporating Psychological Distance Framing in Narrative Persuasion
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Janet Yang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2022
* USD 22,654.00

Scientists often use numbers and statistics to communicate health and
environmental risks with the public. Members of the public, however, may find
this type of messaging difficult to understand or unappealing. In contrast,
narrative or stories may offer an effective alternative. When reading a well-
crafted narrative, people may find themselves absorbed into an imaginary world
and identify with the characters portrayed. These processes, termed as
transportation and identification, illustrate how narratives may change people’s
attitudes and behaviors. Notably, when people are engaged in a narrative, they
may feel closer to the characters or the scenario, which may also influence
their perception about the issue featured in the story. This research project
examines whether narratives indeed reduce the distance people perceive toward
the characters and the scenario and subsequently influence their attitudes
toward two risk topics – ocean plastic pollution and e-cigarette use.
Specifically, participants will read a narrative that features either a close
scenario (e.g., ocean plastic pollution harming their own country) or a far
scenario (e.g., ocean plastic pollution harming a foreign country), and portrays
characters that are either similar or different from them. We then examine
whether these differences in the narrative influence their transportation and
identification levels, and more importantly, whether they report attitude
changes that are consistent with the positions promoted in the narrative. This
project will help risk communication experts craft narrative persuasion messages
to target different individuals more effectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project seeks to advance the theorization of narrative persuasion in
risk communication through the lens of psychological distance. There are two
main objectives. First, this research explores how using narrative can influence
risk communication outcomes. The central argument is that via the mediation of
transportation and identification, the effectiveness of narrative persuasion is
influenced by the perceived distance between audience and the risk featured in
the narrative. Second, the research aims to incorporate distance framing into
narrative message design to effectively communicate about abstract and uncertain
risks. Specifically, this research seeks to identify the impacts of distance
cues associated with narrative character and narrative scenario in actualizing
persuasion effects. The two experiments feature different character-based and
scenario-based distance cues. The experiments focus on one environmental risk –
ocean plastic pollution, and one health risk – e-cigarette use. Intrinsic to
public perception of these two topics are all four dimensions of psychological
distance – social, spatial, temporal, and hypothetical. By testing the proposed
theoretical framework in different environmental and health contexts, this
research has broad theoretical and practical implications. Findings from this
project contribute to the literature on narrative persuasion and risk
communication and inform the design of narrative messaging that is widely
utilized in information campaigns and entertainment
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.