* 2046588
* CAREER: LEarning to Search with Structure (LESS), a Unifying Algorithmic Framework for Gray Box Optimization of Biomanufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Giulia Pedrielli, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2026
* USD 510,449.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will contribute to
the advancement of national prosperity and economic welfare by studying
efficient operations of single use scalable individualized manufacturing
systems. Developing and manufacturing a new drug now often faces very tight
deadlines, and a myriad of individual variants may be required to be produced.
In such scenarios traditional large batch-production is generally poorly suited
because of low flexibility in the quantity and type of drug being manufactured,
large set up times between production runs and inability to distribute
manufacturing capacity across locations and product types. This award supports
better understanding of single use manufacturing as the fundamental enabler for
renewed production flexibility in terms of both type variety and volume. This
research will serve the biopharmaceutical manufacturing environment as well as
the manufacturing community at large, promoting a new way to scale out instead
of scaling up manufacturing systems. The accompanying educational plan aims to
broaden STEM interest in simulation and, particularly, simulation based
optimization aiming at the development of new tools for teaching and research,
with a particular focus on creating a diverse research and educational
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on the advancement of
simulation based optimization methods to support decision making for the
operation of individualized manufacturing systems. The project will result in
new methods for the acceleration of black box optimization. The framework will
consider the specific challenges of operating a large number of manufacturing
processes at small scale, allowing to use the process simulation not only as a
means to evaluate the performance, but also to provide structural properties of
the process being operated. This research fills an important gap in the black
box optimization literature, which reportedly suffers from poor finite time
performance, only exploit output of the simulation model and ignores sample path
information, and, finally, faces important hurdles in scaling to solve high
dimensional problems. The analytical infrastructure leverages and extends state-
of-the-art techniques from Bayesian optimization, high dimensional statistics,
and model predictive control. The project will devise methods to efficiently
achieve satisfactory solutions to simulation based optimization in presence of
discontinuities resulting from the dynamics of the system. Finite time
performance of the algorithms will be studied, and high dimensional problems
will be central to the development of the techniques. The performance of the
techniques will be evaluated not only using synthetic state of the art black box
optimization problems, but using large scale production of a large variety of
bio-products in an individualized manufacturing set-up. With the idea to promote
this new idea of manufacturing and the concepts of simulation-supported decision
making, a game will be implemented to attract students, as well as, potentially,
practitioners, to the area of manufacturing and operations
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.