* 2046309
* CAREER: Quantifying the Dynamics and Spatiotemporal Variability of Blocking Events Using Linear Response Functions and the Buckingham-Pi Theorem
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2026
* Pedram Hassanzadeh, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 03/31/2026
* USD 735,001.00

An atmospheric blocking event describes the occurrence of a large-scale, quasi-
stationary, high-pressure system that persists between 5 days to a few weeks in
the extratropics. Its appearance diverts the jet stream flow (altering nearby
weather) and can contribute to extreme events like heat waves and droughts.
Predicting blocking events is difficult. Our understanding of blocking events is
poor, and complete theory for blocking still does not exist. The outcome of this
project will advance our knowledge of blocking, which will enhance our
capabilities to better forecast midlatitude weather extremes and project the
response of blocking to climate change. In addition to training doctoral
students, the project will develop (1) a Research Experiences for Teachers (RET)
program with workshops focused on developing innovative teaching materials on
climate science, and (2) a course to educate college students from non-
geoscience quantitative majors about climate
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this proposal seeks to understand
blocking dynamics and their spatiotemporal variability as well as their response
to climate change. The research objectives are to: (1) assess the role of
positive eddy-blocking feedback mechanism in blocking persistence, (2) evaluate
the impact of large-scale circulation on blocking characteristics, (3) examine
the impact of climate change to blocking, and (4) investigate the roles of
latent heating in the previous objectives. The research approach includes an
innovative use of the linear response function theory, Buckingham-pi scale
analysis, and wavelet analysis in a hierarchy of models, from dry/moist two-
layer quasi-geostrophic to dry/moist idealized general circulation models (GCMs)
to large-ensemble simulations from fully coupled GCMs. The RET program will
provide 7 research positions for high-school science teachers, who will develop
introductory lessons on climate change. These lessons will be shared with 100s
of science teachers through workshops and other venues and will be taught to
10000s of Houston public school students, many from the underrepresented groups.
The developed class will result in novel materials for introducing climate
science/research to a broad group of STEM students, strengthening efforts aimed
at training a skilled future workforce in climate
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.