* 2046598
* CAREER: Testing models of early Earth crust formation and tectonics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Bradford Foley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2026
* USD 405,605.00

Plate tectonics is the fundamental process governing Earth’s dynamics, including
natural hazards such as earthquakes and volcanoes. Plate tectonics is a result
of convection in Earth’s mantle. However, why mantle convection results in plate
tectonics on Earth, but not the other rocky planets in the solar system that
also have convecting mantles, is not well understood. Likewise, it is also not
well known when plate tectonics started on Earth. The goal of this proposal is
to use numerical models of mantle convection and the formation of Earth’s early
crust to constrain when plate tectonics might have started. Observations of the
chemical composition of rocks formed 3-4 Gyrs ago provide key constraints on the
tectonic processes operating at this time. The investigator's models will test
both plate-tectonic and non-plate-tectonic scenarios for the generation of early
crust against these observations, and thus assess what tectonic processes are
compatible with the ancient geologic record. The results of this work will have
broad significance across the geosciences. Constraining the tectonic processes
that operated on the early Earth sheds light on how plate tectonics developed,
and potentially why it is absent on other solar system planets. This work also
further helps constrain on how Earth’s continents formed, with implications for
the climate state of the early Earth and possible environments for life. The
proposal also makes significant contributions to science education. It supports
a graduate student who will carry out much of the proposed work, therefore
furthering their research career. The project also contributes to undergraduate
education through the development of a remotely taught summer short course on
data analysis and visualization. This short course will be targeted at
geoscience students from minority serving institutions, with the goal of helping
promote diversity in the geosciences. The project also includes undergraduate
research internships for students to be selected from the short course
participants. These research internships will give students from
underrepresented groups firsthand research experience, which is critical for
progressing in their careers as geoscientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whether the
early Earth was characterized by a “mobile lid” mode of tectonics, featuring
subduction and surface plate motion, or a “stagnant lid” mode where subduction
is absent, is highly debated. Geochemical observations of Hadean and Archean
felsic crust provide important constraints on the tectonic processes operating
at this time. However, there is still significant ambiguity, as both subduction
and non-subduction, i.e. melting at the base of a thick crustal plateau, models
have been proposed to explain the formation of Earth’s early felsic crust. Here,
geodynamical models integrating new data provided by Hf isotopes recorded in
zircons will test the subduction and plateau melting models, from the Hadean
until ~ 3.5 Ga. Hf isotopes in zircons from many Archean cratons suggest that
the mafic crustal source of Earth’s earliest felsic rocks (&gt; 3.5 Ga)
persisted at the surface for 100s of Myrs. Additional petrological evidence
indicates that the earliest felsic crust still preserved today formed from
shallow (&lt;30 km) melting of mafic protocrust. These observations will be
integrated into two-dimensional mantle dynamic models, to test plateau melting
and subduction scenarios. The modeling work will also explore the fundamental
issue of whether subduction was feasible on the early Earth. Global models of
mantle convection including crustal buoyancy and grain size evolution will be
used to assess whether crustal buoyancy prevents subduction, or drastically
alters its dynamics, at early Earth conditions, and whether slab melting can
occur when subduction is active. The results of the work will provide vital new
constraints on the tectonic processes that operated on the early Earth, and thus
shed light on when plate tectonics might have begun. This has major implications
for the evolution of the Earth as a whole, including the dynamo, crust, and even
the atmosphere and oceans. The proposal also involves a significant educational
component, including training of a graduate student, and a numerical modeling
summer short course and REU program, geared towards students from
underrepresented groups in the geosciences. A lack of programming and
quantitative skills, as well as research opportunities, can be a barrier for
diverse students advancing in the geosciences; the educational program developed
here will seek to help address this problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.