* 2046278
* CAREER: Active forearc uplift, topographic growth, and permanent deformation above highly coupled subduction interfaces
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Kristin Morell, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2026
* USD 357,457.00

This program will provide key information about the physical properties and
conditions that may control the size of earthquakes in subduction zones, regions
which are known to host the largest earthquakes globally. This research will be
integrated with a series of activities specifically designed to increase the
number of successful geoscience and STEM students that identify as an
underrepresented minority. This project will support undergraduate research
internships for underrepresented minority students at the University of
California, Santa Barbara and Santa Barbara City College, and will host
workshops and local field trips specifically designed to increase geoscience
awareness and broaden student participation in outdoor experiences. The project
will also support the training and professional development of two PhD
geoscience students, who will also act as mentors to the undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Long-term forearc uplift and topographic growth
above locked seismogenic zones can segment the megathrust along-strike, which is
predicted to restrict the maximum size of large subduction zone earthquakes.
However, the conditions and mechanisms that ultimately produce permanent
vertical tectonism in these settings remain poorly constrained globally. The
program will use a combination of field observations, numerical dating, low-
temperature thermochronology and landscape evolution modeling to test between
three primary mechanisms of rock uplift and topographic growth in the highly-
coupled subduction zone regions of Nicoya Peninsula, Costa Rica, and Kodiak,
Alaska, USA. Constraining these conceptual models will have important
implications for processes that result in seismic segmentation, such as the
physical and rheological conditions between the decollement, lower plate, and
overriding plate, and how strain is partitioned between the megathrust and the
upper plate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.