* 2046245
* CAREER: Scaffolding Ethical Speculation in Technology Design
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Casey Fiesler, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2026
* USD 215,665.00

Hardly a day passes without a controversy related to technology ethics. From
bias in artificial intelligence to privacy violations on social media to systems
that enable online harassment, when tech companies and researchers come under
fire, people wonder: why are they not thinking about potential harms? Unintended
consequences of technology are a significant social issue, both with respect to
the harms that can result and widespread impact on perception of the computing
field. However, even when technologists want to do the right thing, doing so
requires consideration of future harms. This project will investigate an Ethical
Futures Toolkit to help technology development teams be forward-thinking about
ethical issues. Because the toolkit can be used in industry practice and in the
classroom, this project is expected both to impact technology design directly
and to contribute to ethics education for future technologists. This project
will directly intervene in tech industry settings and educating computing
professionals of the future. Through these interventions, this project has the
potential to transform how technology is designed to better address ethical
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves complementary methods and
goals: (1) deriving a taxonomy of ethical pitfalls based on semantic analysis of
media coverage and subsequent public reaction to existing tech ethics
controversies; (2) using the taxonomy to drive speculation--the process of
forecasting a possible future based on evidence from the past or present--about
possible harms to technology users, with a focus on vulnerable and marginalized
populations; and (3) analysis of the outcomes of speculative design exercises,
focusing on ethical considerations of technologies. Based on insights from these
studies, the final stage will be (4) the creation and iterative evaluation of an
Ethical Futures Toolkit to be used within design teams to consider ethics early
and in forward-thinking ways. Generating both data and societal impact, this
evaluation stage will begin in project-based computing classes, later be
integrated into startup competitions that mirror real-world business decision-
making, and also be incorporated into work with tech industry
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.