* 2046158
* CAREER: Plasticity and evolution of maternal care in bumble bees
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Sarah Woodard, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 03/31/2026
* USD 751,844.00

Identifying how sociality evolved is a key goal in biology. With respect to
feeding and nutrition, it is unclear how social animals evolved to mediate their
own personal feeding behavior while also engaging in social feeding behaviors,
such as the collection of food for their offspring. Bumble bees are considered
social, but they have an annual life cycle wherein each spring, solitary queens
must initiate new nests. Queens directly care for their first offspring as they
develop in the nest and only cease performing this care when their daughters
remain in the nest and assume all brood care. This project examines how queen
bumble bees navigate the transition from being solitary, to expressing maternal
care, to ceasing brood care, and identifies how these changes are mediated at
the molecular level. A team consisting of undergraduate researchers from local
community colleges and a university, a graduate student, and a postdoctoral
researcher, will carry out the research. This will create a bridge between
community colleges and a public university system and give valuable research
experiences to traditionally underserved students. Hands-on research activities
will also be integrated into two undergraduate courses taught by the PI to give
students research experience in the classroom, and an outreach program based on
bumble bee life history and conservation will be developed to inform the public
about this threatened pollinator group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of
parental care and eusociality are both fundamental topics in social research.
Lineages that exhibit both are particularly important systems for examining how
social behavior evolves. This project explores the regulation and evolution of
maternal care in bumble bee queens, which transition from a solitary to social
lifestyle during the nest initiation stage. First, experiments that cause
changes in offspring investment and brood care will be used to explore
hypotheses inspired by both subsocial insects, which resemble bumble bee queens
at this life stage, and also honey bees, which share a common origin of
sociality with bumble bees. Next, RNAseq will be used to identify genes that
change expression patterns in association with changes in offspring investment,
and are thus candidates for the co-regulation of personal feeding and brood
care. Evidence for the behavioral precursor hypothesis and the novel genes
hypothesis will be explored by examining, respectively, whether these genes are
conserved, or whether they are novel in either the bumble bees or in the lineage
of progressively-provisioning bees they belong to. This project will improve our
understanding of how sociality evolves using the bumble bee system, which is
more socially plastic than many eusocial lineages but also exhibits greater
social complexity than the subsocial insects. The project will also generate new
insights into how feeding behavior is regulated in social systems, and shed
light on how social animals have evolved mechanisms that mediate personal
nutritional homeostasis while also dynamically responding to cues that mediate
social feeding behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.