* 2046316
* CAREER: Bolstering Food System Resilience to Reduce the Human Impacts of Disasters
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Lauren Clay, D'Youville College
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 05/31/2022
* USD 521,938.00

The focus of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award is to
advance the science of food environments and enhance the mitigation and
adaptation of social and built environment systems to disasters by bolstering
food security and the resilience of food systems. Food is a basic need for human
survival and the ability of social systems to meet this need in disaster
situations is compromised when our homes, businesses and other structures are
damaged and lifelines disrupted. While elements of the various social and built
environmental systems that make up the broader food environment as well as food
security issues have been studied by various disciplines, a comprehensive,
systematic approach has yet to be applied and tested in disaster settings. The
overall objectives of this research are to develop a model of the Food
Environment in Disasters (FED) along with theory-based tools to support food
system resilience. The development of this model and associated tools
facilitates a clearer understanding and monitoring of food availability,
acceptability, and accessibility to enhance our understanding of the causes,
consequences, and health effects of food environment disruption in disasters.
This work contributes to NSFâ€™s mission to promote the process of science by
developing and validating a new theoretical model and associated metrics on food
environment disruption and food security following disasters. The products of
this research will advance national health, prosperity, and welfare by
supporting improved food security and food system functioning following
disasters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this CAREER project is to
transform our understanding of disruptions to the social and built food
environment and food insecurity in disaster impacted communities. The overall
objective of this research is to develop a socio-ecological model of the Food
Environment in Disasters (FED), associated metrics, and theory-based tools to
generate findings that can bolster food system resilience to hazards. This
research departs from the status quo of relying on food system theory and
metrics developed in non-disaster contexts to developing an understanding of
disaster specific processes and outcomes, thereby enhancing the depth and
utility of our knowledge of food environments and security in disasters.
Developing a FED theoretical model of food accessibility, availability, and
acceptability in disasters will support improved food response and bolsters food
system resilience (Aim 1). A new Disaster Research Lab training program based on
the Taxonomy of Significant Learning will integrate theory development and
empirical testing activities (Aim 2). A portfolio of food system environmental
audit tools (EAT) for monitoring disaster preparedness, impact, response, and
recovery (Aim 3) will promote improved food environment functioning in
disasters. This contribution is expected to help address acute food insecurity
issues that can double or triple chronic food security problems following
disasters. A public engagement strategic plan for the project will guide
meaningful engagement with public stakeholders and audiences to maximize the
impact of research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.