* 2046896
* CAREER: Bayesian Tree Models for Next-Generation Studies in the Behavioral and Social Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Jared Murray, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2026
* USD 186,022.00

This research project will develop statistical methods and tools for inferring
and understanding the implications of heterogenous effects of interventions in
the behavioral and social sciences. Experimental research in the social and
behavioral science is facing a crisis and an opportunity. Behavioral
interventions that seemed promising based on initial studies have failed to
replicate or have disappointed when implemented at scale. Ignoring heterogeneous
effects across individuals and by contexts is a likely contributor of these
results. This CAREER project will develop Bayesian methods for estimating
heterogeneous treatment effects in large, complicated datasets. The methods to
be developed will be applied to real-world behavioral interventions. The
investigator will collaborate with the Texas Behavioral Science and Policy
Institute and the University of Texas's OnRamps program to develop and evaluate
interventions designed to promote growth mindset practices and beliefs among
high school math teachers and college instructors. In addition, students will be
mentored, and case studies and software will be developed and made freely
available. This award is supported by the MMS program and the Education and
Human Resources directorate's ECR program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will develop Bayesian tree priors, models, and computational methods for
complex study designs. Estimating heterogeneous effects of interventions is a
challenging statistical problem, particularly when existing scientific knowledge
(or even theories) about how effects vary by individuals and by context is
lacking. Bayesian tree models, which combine Bayesian statistics and predictive
methods from machine learning, haven proven to be some of the most effective
methods for inferring heterogenous effects in large-scale empirical evaluations.
However, current methods are limited to simple data structures, study designs,
and outcomes, limiting their real-world applicability. It also can also be
difficult to extract actionable insights from these sophisticated models, which
is necessary for guiding the design of future interventions or studies and for
understanding the implications of deploying an intervention at scale. This
project will develop tree ensembles to encourage (partial) smoothing in
estimated treatment effects with an eye to computational costs. The project also
will adapt Bayesian tree models for heterogeneous effects to more complex data.
The methods to be developed will be used to improve both the design and analysis
of behavioral studies. The results of this project will advance knowledge in the
fields of statistics, machine learning, data science, education, and behavioral
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.