* 2046474
* CAREER: Ecoevolutionary dynamics of plant-pollinator interactions in agricultural systems
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Margarita Lopez-Uribe, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2026
* USD 1,208,359.00

Effective plant-pollinator interactions are necessary for the production of
nutritious fruits and vegetables, and thus are vital for food security. However,
overwhelming evidence suggests that most animal-pollinated crops are pollination
limited in the US. The research component of this proposal will provide data on
the ways that crop domestication results in changes in plant-pollinator
interactions that may be linked to suboptimal pollination. Specifically, this
project will combine experimental evolution, electrophysiology, genomics, and
analyses of past evolution to understand how human-mediated selection affected
traits of flowers, pollinator foraging preferences, and pollinator sensory
systems. The education component of this project will (1) enhance research
opportunities for undergraduate students of underrepresented minority groups,
(2) offer a graduate course that facilitates an understanding and active
engagement of students into solutions to problems of equity and inclusion in
academia, and (3) create opportunities to engage the public in community science
projects that build science literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial selection
is the main evolutionary force shaping phenotypes and fitness of domesticated
species. Despite the range expansion and dominance of domesticated plants and
animals across the globe, the mechanisms by which human-mediated selection
shapes, via its effects on plant traits, the ecological interactions and
reciprocal evolutionary changes of wild species have not been systematically
investigated. This project addresses fundamental questions about the direct and
indirect role of artificial selection on the eco-evolutionary dynamics of plant-
pollinator systems in agricultural niches. Using the plant genus Cucurbita and
their specialized pollinators, this project has three specific aims: (1)
characterize the role of reciprocal artificial and pollinator-mediated selection
on the evolution of floral functional traits through comparative phylogenetics
and experimental evolution, (2) determine how shifts in floral signaling of
domesticated plants drive changes in pollinator foraging behavior using
geographically replicated field choice experiments, and (3) investigate the
genetic underpinnings of changes in pollinator sensory systems that result from
foraging on domesticated plants by integrating electrophysiology experiments
with functional genomics. The education component of this project will provide
research opportunities for students from underrepresented minority groups to
engage in convergent research themes that can be applied to solutions to real-
life problems of pollinators in agricultural systems. This project will also
include the participation of the public to expand the geographic sampling and
data collection for the above research aims. The integration of the proposed
research and education activities will generate the foundation for the
understanding of how human-mediated selection influences the evolution of
plants, pollinators, and their interactions while developing a framework to
engage and retain students and the general public in scientific
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.