* 2046948
* CAREER: Illuminating structure-property relationships in energy storage materials via quantitative light microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Justin Sambur, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2026
* USD 377,857.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY.&lt;br/&gt;Renewable energy capacity is increasing and
expected to meet global energy demand this century. Existing technology will
thus ensure the generation of clean, renewable energy. But the storage and rapid
delivery of this abundant supply remains a critical unmet challenge. Development
of new materials that store large quantities of charge and rapidly deliver it on
demand is vital to any global transition to a low- or zero-carbon energy
economy. This CAREER award project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, focuses on the study of
fundamental materials chemistry to advance design principles for safe, fast-
charging, and long-lasting Li-ion battery materials. The research focuses on
linking chemical and structural properties of materials with their ability to
conduct Li-ions. Fast Li-ion transport is necessary for high power applications
that benefit society such as electric vehicles, power tools, and portable
electronic devices. PI Sambur’s team gains new insight into Li-ion transport by
developing new imaging tools that reveal Li-ion motion at the nanoscale. These
microscopic measurements enable the researchers to make strong connections
between materials chemistry and critical energy storage performance metrics.
Through this project, the PI promotes microscopy education and increase
accessibility to microscopy tools among elementary, high school, undergraduate,
and graduate-level students. Imaging is an essential skill in all scientific
disciplines, but there are few opportunities for students to receive an
education in microscopy. One issue is that university chemistry departments and
K-12 schools lack microscopy tools to educate large numbers of students. The PI
plans to develop low-cost microscopes with experiential learning activities
tailored to different age groups to address this critical need. This effort aims
to promote science to middle and high school students, particularly
underrepresented women and Hispanic/Latinx students in the Colorado STEM
education pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY.&lt;br/&gt;The major
scientific roadblock to a global renewable energy economy is inadequate energy
storage materials. Exhaustive research into new battery materials has made clear
that future innovation will stem from fundamental materials design principles
that are free from the element of art inherent in the fabrication of electrodes.
Rather than relying on mix and measure empiricism, single particle measurements
can establish materials design principles by linking known solid state chemistry
principles to fundamental ion/electron transport processes that determine charge
storage capacity and rate. However, such single particle studies are often slow
and tedious. This proposal advances high-throughput single particle-level light
microscopy and spectroscopy, in conjunction with electron, X-ray, and atom probe
tomography techniques, to forge new links between crystal structure
modifications, electronic structure, and electrochemical properties. The
research focuses on Wadsley-Roth crystallographic shear structures that exhibit
extraordinarily fast Li-ion diffusion coefficients in bulk-like (micron)
material, signaling that the built-in structural motifs in these complex oxides
are the key to unlocking critical design principles for tuning ionic
diffusivity. The PI’s team aims to define how Li-ion diffusivity scales with the
chemistry, stoichiometry, and block size of Wadsley-Roth compounds. The
microscopy tools are used to reveal how the type, concentration, and arrangement
of surface facets and Wadsley defects influences electrochemical properties. The
methodologies innovated herein will be generally applicable to a wide range of
existing materials and those that have yet to be discovered. An expected
significant outcome from the structure/property relationships uncovered in this
research will be design principles for a safe, high-rate anode material for use
in Li-ion batteries. The PI is determined to ensure that the intellectual
foundation of this research project has a broad impact on society through the
development of low-cost microscopes and activities designed to educate 6th-12th
grade students in mapping the functional properties of real-world systems such
as solar cells. The activities guide students into a grade-appropriate, working
knowledge about how the energy conversion efficiency of hobby-grade solar cells
correlates with materials heterogeneity. The PI works closely with STEM experts
in Colorado State University’s Natural Science Education Outreach Center to
disseminate the kits to middle and high school science labs across Colorado,
complementing existing University outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.