* 2046678
* CAREER: Machine Learning Methods for Spatial Data with Applications in Ecology
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Rebecca Hutchinson, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2026
* USD 323,490.00

Species distribution models (SDMs) are widely used tools in ecology and natural
resource management. SDMs are built by correlating observations of a species
(e.g., whether it is present or absent) with environmental features. Once built,
they can be used to predict how likely a species is to occur at a new site or
interpreted to understand why species live where they do. The spatial aspects of
species and environmental data present challenges for the machine learning
methods often used to build SDMs, and this award focuses on two of those
challenges. First, one must assess the quality of an SDM in order to determine
the validity of its predictions and interpretation. To assess quality, some data
are often held out from model building. Then, the model’s ability to predict the
unseen data are used as a measure of its quality. With spatial data however,
randomly selecting data to hold out can lead to optimistic bias in quality
estimates. This award will support research into methods for assessing model
quality that account for spatial characteristics of the data in order to produce
unbiased estimates of model quality. A second challenge arises when the data
supplied to an SDM come from the growing repositories collected by community
science programs. Under-reporting is a common phenomenon in biodiversity surveys
(since one typically cannot observe all individuals of all species during an
observation), and community science is no exception. The error introduced by
under-reporting can be corrected by conducting multiple observations at the same
site and estimating the probability of detecting the species, but community
science programs are often not structured this way. This award will support
research to create groups of multiple observations after the fact, so that
under-reporting error can be accounted for better in this growing data resource.
In addition to these scientific aims, this award will support education and
outreach to graduate, undergraduate, and pre-college students, including the
production of a set of benchmark datasets, a new introductory computer science
course, and modules for STEM clubs and camps.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research
contributions of this award will enable scientists to build better models of
spatial phenomena. The anticipated framework for cross-validation that accounts
for domain adaptation between training and test folds will produce better
generalization performance estimates by accounting for spatial autocorrelation
and admitting target testing distributions. In SDM, this means that researchers
will be able to correct for bias induced by autocorrelation and provide climate
model projections to obtain estimates of how species will fare under global
change. In addition, it will define and propose solutions to a new type of
spatial clustering problem: creating spatial modeling abstractions aimed at
meeting the assumptions of a subsequent modeling phase. In science and
management questions informed by SDMs, this will improve the ability to correct
for observational errors and translate to better habitat models. The methods
will be applicable beyond the motivating applications in SDM to a variety of
spatial domains. The education plan will build bridges between ecology and
computer science, while drawing on best educational practices to improve
recruitment and retention of underserved students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.