* 2046118
* CAREER: Enabling Trustworthy Speech Technologies for Mental Health Care: From Speech Anonymization to Fair Human-centered Machine Intelligence
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Theodora Chaspari, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 352,593.00

Speech-based technologies have been heralded as promising solutions to overcome
the limitations of existing clinical modalities related to limited healthcare
access, non-naturalistic in-clinic interactions, and social stigma. Speech
measures combined with artificial intelligence can serve as valuable biomarkers
for mental health conditions, such as depression and post-traumatic stress
disorder. Yet, in order for artificial intelligence to truly succeed in a
future-of-work landscape in which clinicians will be expected to work side-by-
side with artificial intelligence systems, both clinicians and patients need to
calibrate their trust in the algorithms that power this decision-making process.
The goal of this project is to design reliable machine learning, notably for
speech-based diagnosis and monitoring of mental health, for addressing three
pillars of trustworthiness: explainability, privacy preservation, and fair
decision making. Trustworthiness is critical for both patients and clinicians:
patients must be treated fairly and without the risk of reidentification, while
clinical decision-making needs to rely on explainable and unbiased machine
learning. This research program further provides a fertile ground for training
high school and college students providing them with the knowledge about (and
inclination toward) ethically applying computing research in sensitive
populations. The tangible applications developed as part of this research serve
as a vehicle to encourage students to pursue careers in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics, and prepare them to work in transdisciplinary
settings for solving real-world problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to design explainable, anonymized, and fair speech biomarkers for mental
health, integrating aspects of speech acquisition, transparent modeling, and
unbiased decision making. The work is divided into three technical objectives.
The first objective designs novel speaker anonymization algorithms that retain
mental health information and suppress information related to the identity of
the speaker. The anonymization algorithms learn a mapping between the original
speech and a latent space, which embeds information about speaker identity,
mental health, and phonological sequence through deterministic and probabilistic
operations. The second objective improves explainability of speech-based models
for tracking mental health through novel convolutional architectures that learn
explainable spectrotemporal transformations relevant to speech production
fundamentals. The third objective examines how bias in data and model design may
perpetuate social disparities in mental health, and designs new machine learning
to mitigate unwanted bias in speech-based mental health diagnosis. Through a
series of experiments this work further contributes to understanding ways in
which human-machine partnerships are formed in mental healthcare settings along
dimensions of trust formation, maintenance, and
repair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.