* 2046164
* CAREER: Physical transformations of aerosols after transport between indoor and outdoor environments
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* Marina Vance, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2026
* USD 439,953.00

Although outdoor air pollution is known to shorten human lives, people actually
spend most of their time indoors. Air inside homes, schools, offices, and other
buildings constantly interchanges with outside air. It is thus important to
understand how this interchange affects air pollution in both spaces to fully
assess human health risk. This is particularly true as outdoor pollution in the
USA has decreased in recent decades while indoor sources of air pollution become
more important. The goal of this project is to understand how air pollutants
known as aerosols (suspensions of fine particles in air) change while they are
transported between indoor and outdoor environments. This goal will be achieved
through a combination of experiments in laboratory and real-world settings to
measure physical and chemical transformations of aerosols. Successful completion
of this research will contribute new knowledge about aerosols to protect human
health. The research program will be integrated with educational activities to
train the next generation of scientists. A key aspect of this effort is a focus
on training scientists to become better public communicators to help improve the
Nationâ€™s STEM workforce and increase scientific
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to investigate
how physical properties of aerosols change once they are transported between
indoor and outdoor environments. This goal will be achieved through three
research objectives: i) measure the physical transformation of outdoor aerosols
as they are exposed to indoor environmental conditions; ii) quantify the
formation of secondary organic aerosols from indoor precursors and the oxidative
aging of primary indoor aerosols; and iii) investigate the physical
transformations that indoor emissions from a real home undergo in an oxidative
environment. Successful completion of this research will generate novel data on
secondary organic aerosol precursors that are emitted by indoor activities to
contextualize the evidence of indoor air pollutants found in outdoor field
campaigns. This work will also inform efforts by environmental health and
epidemiological professionals to protect human health, as well as contribute to
the development of better instrumentation and low-cost sensors. The research
will be integrated with education activities to inspire students to communicate
scientific topics to broader audiences. This will encourage the next generation
of students to pursue careers in science and engineering, and enhance public
understanding of air pollution topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.