* 2046737
* CAREER: On the Fairness of Light Transport for Unbiased Low-level Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Achuta Kadambi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2026
* USD 309,522.00

Does the physics of light disadvantage certain skin types? The visual appearance
of human skin is remarkably diverse. Anatomical variations in not just shades of
lightness, but also oiliness, texture, and thickness all influence how images
will appear. Such anatomical variations are linked to demographics and may
explain why artificial intelligence (AI) pipelines disadvantage certain skin
types (e.g., darker skin, older skin, female vs male skin). Existing efforts in
mitigating bias focus on biases at higher-layers of the AI stack. In contrast,
this research award studies bias from the bottom-up by probing how light
interacts with skin to form images. In doing so, it is possible to not only
identify, but also correct for physics-based bias in imaging. Today, physics-
based bias leads to performance gaps in everyday imaging systems, such as facial
identification or medical imaging. If successful, the research award can make
these systems fairer. The project integrates the research with education and
outreaches to middle and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research award rests on three pillars. The first pillar seeks to qualitatively
and mathematically identify how images vary based on skin variations. The
investigative team will focus on variations in skin tone, thickness, wrinkles,
and oiliness. The demographic link to these variations will also be studied in
collaboration with physicians enabling computer graphics renderings to be cross-
checked with real, human subject data. The second pillar aims to assess how
these variations in image appearance subsequently affect downstream image
processing and AI pipelines. The investigative team intends to study, for
instance, how photometric stereo- a widely used technique to obtain 3D shape -
can trace its source of performance bias to variations in skin. The third pillar
synthesizes these insights to create novel computational imaging systems that
resist bias due to skin variations. It is quite possible that in seeking to
design a fair imaging system, the overall performance may be affected. In the
event there is such a Pareto tradeoff between fairness and performance, the
investigative team will design a flexible system that can sample multiple points
on the Pareto curve. The overall choice - of which tradeoff point is optimal -
lies with societal and community goals. In summary, this award hopes to set a
unique foundation for analyzing bias in computational
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.