* 2046863
* CAREER: Paralog function following rapid gene family expansion in Candida albicans
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Matthew Anderson, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 03/31/2026
* USD 863,903.00

This project seeks to determine how multiple genes that all arose recently from
a single gene establish their function when other copies of that gene are
present. Nearly all genes in every organism on the planet arose from previously
existing genes and not from DNA that lacked function. As this process repeats, a
large set of highly similar genes can form a gene family that often give an
organism certain advantages in adapting to its specific lifestyle. For example,
yeasts used in brewing have expanded gene families for fermentation and humans
have expanded genes for being able to distinguish between good and rotten food.
A gene family in the human fungal pathogen Candida albicans called the telomere-
associated (TLO) gene family has expanded from 1 to 14 copies and is an ideal
system to test how functions of individual members of gene families are shaped
by the presence of many genetically and functionally similar genes. This project
will generate large datasets and highlights the needs for people to be trained
in analysis. This project will therefore also train Indigenous students in
bioinformatics through a summer workshop to promote data sovereignty and
Indigenous research capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will begin to
address the concept of Ohnoâ€™s Dilemma in a large gene family, how function
evolves when multiple other similar genes are present. We will use the TLO genes
from C. albicans to find how each gene holds individual or overlapping functions
with other genes in the gene family. Molecular and organismal functions will be
determined for these genes using strains missing single genes of the gene family
and strains lacking all TLO genes except for one. Strains lacking single genes
will define the amount of overlap in gene functions, and strains containing
single genes will determine the range of function for each
gene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.