* 2046056
* Collaborative Research: IODP-enabled Insights into Fungi and Their Metabolic Interactions with Other Microorganisms in Deep Subsurface Hydrothermal Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Roland Hatzenpichler, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 58,753.00

The marine subsurface is one of the least explored habitats on Earth.
International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP) Expedition 385 drilled into the
seafloor in Guaymas Basin, Mexico, and was the first to drill directly into
subsurface sediments and sediment-hosted basalt sill intrusions of an active
hydrothermal basin. This expedition provides a direct microbiological window
into a deep hydrothermal biosphere across an active plate spreading center where
complex hydrocarbons are generated by heating of buried organic matter under
high temperature and pressure. Mounting evidence suggests that Fungi constitute
an active and ecologically important fraction of the subsurface biosphere
community. This is especially true in organic-rich continental margin sediments
that are ideal for colonization by aerobic and anaerobic Fungi, where fungal
activities may contribute significantly to nutrient cycling. Major knowledge
gaps in our knowledge of subsurface microbiota preclude our ability to estimate
their full impact: how active Fungi are distributed along temperature and depth
gradients, the range of substrates utilized by active cells, and how Fungi may
cooperate with bacteria in degradation of complex organic matter, including
hydrocarbons. Fungi are known to participate in degradation of refractory
organics and cycling of metals and to produce novel metabolites with interesting
properties. This project informs us on origins of different lineages of
microbial life on Earth, the extent of marine subsurface carbon cycling, limits
of life, how life adapts to environmental change, and the potential for Fungi to
accelerate the biodegradation of complex hydrocarbons. Given the extent of the
potential subsurface biosphere, Fungi likely play an important role in global
nutrient cycling. The culture collection of fungal isolates created by this
project will be available for exploration of their ecology and novel properties
by other interested researchers, and may also yield insights into basal fungal
lineages. These biogeochemical and potential evolutionary outcomes are of great
interest to other research disciplines, educators, and students alike. The
project’s K-16 education program capitalizes on programs aimed at increasing
involvement of under-represented undergraduate populations in research. High
school students, undergraduates, a graduate student, and postdoc are involved in
the research. An art-in-science project with a local high school is being
displayed at the community library along with education materials on marine
Fungi and their ecological roles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines
how abundance, diversity and distribution of Fungi and co-inhabiting bacteria
and archaea changes in subsurface sediment samples exhibiting a wide range of in
situ temperatures and pressure, what the active fraction of cells is along these
gradients, and whether/how Fungi impact carbon cycling in this biosphere by
interacting metabolically with bacteria to break down hydrocarbon substrates.
The project is assessing the activities of in situ microorganisms in this active
hydrothermal subsurface biosphere using a cutting-edge combination of molecular
approaches and culture-based studies of enrichments and microbial isolates
applied to an extensive collection of samples from 8 sites in Guaymas Basin
varying in temperature profile, presence of old, buried magmatic sills, and
geochemical conditions. The investigators are examining 1) marker genes and
metagenomes of sorted active cells using new bioorthogonal non-canonical amino
acid tagging (BONCAT) approaches, 2) the distribution of bacterial, archaeal,
and fungal cells and their marker genes along depth and geochemical gradients
using microscopy, ‘meta-omics’ and lipid biomarker analyses, 3) substrate usage
by fungal isolates, 4) metabolite pools, nutrients, and hydrocarbons with depth,
and 5) fungal metabolism of complex organics (and syntrophies between Fungi and
Bacteria) using time-course stable isotope probing of RNA from culture-based
studies coupled with analyses of expressed genes and pools of
metabolites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.