* 2046295
* CAREER: Embedding High-Order Interaction Events: Models, Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Shandian Zhe, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 05/31/2026
* USD 323,200.00

High-order interaction events of multiple entities are ubiquitous, ranging from
online advertising to commodity recommendation, from neural-signal transduction
to gene regulation to disease spreading to international affairs. For example,
online shopping behaviors are interaction events between customers, products and
selling platforms. This project develops flexible, interpretable, and scalable
Bayesian embeddings for massive high-order interaction events, in order to
understand a variety of complex relationships between the events and discover
the underlying rich patterns. The developed tools can fundamentally promote many
important knowledge mining and prediction tasks. Examples include predicting the
occurrence of hazardous online transactions to enhance financial security,
predicting the outbreak and spreading of pandemic diseases to take effective
preventive actions, early warnings of catastrophes, studying when and how rumors
propagate through online social media, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current approaches for event data analysis are
mostly restricted to binary interactions, and suffer from rough, over-simplified
or opaque, uninterpretable modeling with limited computational efficiency. The
goal of the project is to develop Bayesian embeddings that can efficiently
process tremendous batch and fast streaming event data, capture both the static
relationships of the entities and a variety of short-term, long-term,
triggering, inhibition, and time varying influences among the events, and encode
all of these into embedding representations to uncover rich temporal patterns.
The research will be accomplished through four primary tasks: (1) using marked
point processes to design highly expressive yet transparent Bayesian embedding
models, (2) using variational transforms and composite Monte-Carlo
approximations to fulfill stochastic mini-batch gradient and asynchronous
stochastic learning on extremely large-scale batch data, (3) efficient posterior
incremental learning for rapid event streams, and (4) comprehensive evaluations
on synthetic and real-world applications. Moreover, using Bayesian frameworks,
the developed tools are resilient to noises, provide posterior distributions to
quantify uncertainties, and integrate all possible outcomes into robust
predictions. The contribution is expected to dramatically promote the use of
embedding as a means of temporal knowledge mining and predictive
analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.