* 2047318
* CAREER: Unlocking the Isotopic Signatures of Weathering Recorded in Rivers Through Isotope-Enabled Reactive Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Jennifer Druhan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 05/31/2026
* USD 316,143.00

The percolation of water through the shallowest layers of the solid Earth is
vital to sustaining life on this planet. Moisture delivered to soil irrigates
the crops we grow and sustains natural ecosystems. Water that reaches further
into the subsurface recharges aquifers and supplies the baseflow to streams and
rivers. This transit through the shallow Earth also introduces water as a
reactive agent capable of weathering the minerals that compose the crust,
allowing chemical transformations that convert rock to soil and set the chemical
signature of water resources. Thus, water is an integrator of this “critical
zone”, i.e., the surface of the Earth where we live and draw resources. Such
vital transformations are largely hidden from direct study because they occur
below our feet in the near surface. Thus, we rely upon models that describe the
rates and pathways of fluid drainage through the critical zone, coupled to the
chemical reactions that occur between water, minerals and life, to predict what
takes place where we cannot make direct observations. These models are then
checked against more accessible samples often using the chemistry of streams and
rivers which drain watersheds. Using novel instrumentation and model
development, this project will offer the first direct validation of these
reactive transport models based on fluids and solids collected within the
transition from soil to stream. The broader impacts of this study include the
improvement of predictive models for the chemical signatures of water quality
and critical zone functioning. The capability to develop and deploy such models
is vital to the advancement of watershed management and critical zone science.
In pursuit of this goal, the project will create an open access online training
platform designed to educate the next generation of Earth scientists in the
development of state-of-the-art reactive transport models. The teaching modules
will be deployed as part of an NSF-RCN award and will feature ADA-compliant web
design with both self-guided and classroom integration options. This resource
will foster the expanded use and equitable availability of next generation
quantitative models and promote international collaborations across the global
critical zone community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predictive models for the tight
coupling between fluid transport and chemical reactivity in critical zone
weathering profiles remain largely validated against easily accessible
observations such as the fluids that emerge as spring water and baseflow to
streams and rivers. These integrated signatures of fluid draining landscapes
offer a vital means of testing forward models and an increasing emphasis is now
being placed on the use of riverine stable isotope ratios (e.g., 7Li, 30Si,
27Mg, 44Ca) for their exquisite sensitivity to specific components of chemical
weathering. Integration of these promising tools into reactive transport
simulations could hold the key to high fidelity predictive models for the
coupling of chemistry and fluid flow draining intact weathering profiles. This
proposal will generate three major advancements towards this goal: (1)
quantitative interpretation of solute isotope signatures as a function of fluid
travel time; (2) validation of isotope signatures in the zone of weathering
between infiltration and discharge; and (3) predictive models for the weathering
processes recorded by the isotope ratios of rivers draining watersheds. This
will be accomplished through leveraging of a series of laboratory column
experiments designed to support model development and in turn application to a
novel field-scale instrumentation capability which allows direct collection of
fluid samples in the partially saturated section of the critical zone where
fluid drains through regolith before emerging as the baseflow to streams. The
results of this work will test a set of hypotheses that link theory to
observations of isotope ratios in the solutes derived from chemical
weathering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.