* 2047727
* CAREER: Understanding thermal transport across phase-change interfaces via in situ micro-Raman thermography
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Yangying Zhu, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 03/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Liquid-vapor phase change including evaporation, boiling and condensation are
utilized in power generation, cooling of micro-electronics, and thermal control
of buildings. The advancement of nanotechnology over the last decade has enabled
nanoengineered devices with superior heat transfer performance. Although the
thermal performance at the macroscale system level can be measured,
understanding what happens at the phase change boundary at the microscale is
necessary to design the next-generation thermal devices. The overarching goal of
this research is to develop a temperature measurement technique that can
directly probe phase change region, and to further understand the microscopic
mechanisms of liquid-vapor phase-change thermal transport in the presence of
nanostructures. The proposed research will be integrated into education and
mentoring activities by incorporating hands-on projects into high school and
undergraduate teaching, hosting undergraduate researchers and developing new
graduate courses. Furthermore, the project plans to broaden the real-world
impact of thermo-fluids engineering by studying the transmission of infectious
diseases through respiratory droplets from the perspective of heat and mass
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to develop a novel
platform, based on micro-Raman spectroscopy interfaced with a thermofluidic
chamber, for in-situ measurement of temperature near the solid-liquid-vapor
contact line with unprecedented accuracy and spatial resolution. This platform
allows one to (i) investigate the role of surface micro and nanostructures in
promoting the thermal transport across phase-change interfaces, (ii) develop
multi-length-scale structures to maximize the heat transfer coefficient and the
critical heat flux simultaneously, and (iii) understand phase change processes
associated with high temperature gradients by detailed temperature mapping. The
proposed research will bridge the gap between macroscopic thermal
characterization and precise thermal measurement at the microscale. The
fundamental insights gained through this work will lead to highly effective
phase change devices. In addition, the in situ, local temperature measurement
method will be a general platform to investigate phase change processes
including condensation, frosting, and boiling, contributing broadly to the
advancement of phase change heat transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.