* 2047570
* CAREER: Towards Biologically Inspired Lifelong Learning with Multimodal Association
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2021,05/31/2023
* Bo Tang, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 05/31/2023
* USD 324,792.00

Humans have the ability to continuously learn, accumulate and fine-tune
knowledge and skills from a sequence of tasks over their lifetimes. Such
lifelong learning is also crucial for computational systems to achieve high
levels of performance, flexibility, and adaptation when they interact with real
world environments and process streaming sensory data. This project will develop
biologically inspired lifelong learning architectures and methods that integrate
functions and characteristics of a mammalian brain, which is arguably the best
learning system the world has seen. The success of this research will advance
fundamental knowledge in computational lifelong learning and will have the
potential to transform how the field creates human-like artificial intelligence
with lifelong learning capabilities. In addition, the outcome of this research
will be integrated into a new curriculum, and opportunities will be provided to
students from under-represented groups to participate in computational
intelligence research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore a new
machine learning paradigm to address many critical challenges facing current
deep neural networks when learning is performed from sequential tasks and
different sources. The proposed research will introduce a lifelong learning
framework consisting of a feature learning network, a convertible short-term and
long-term memory network, and a memory replay network. To achieve effective
lifelong learning, this project will address the following three research
challenges: (1) learning to memorize -- achieving the optimal balance between
plasticity and stability of neural connections to improve the efficiency of both
learning and memory networks; (2) learning to recall -- optimizing cue
effectiveness in both learning and memory replay networks to address the problem
of catastrophic forgetting; and (3) learning to associate -- enabling
multimodality association at the memory level. Since the proposed models mimic
the hierarchical architecture, short- and long-term memory mechanisms, and
feedback function of the mammalian brain, they have the potential to contribute
to an artificial general intelligence that better accumulates knowledge without
interference, learns multimodality association, and even predicts the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Robust
Intelligence and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.