* 2047525
* CAREER: Deconvolution of marine oxygen isotopic variability with an Earth system model to constrain sea level across the Pliocene
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Clay Tabor, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 668,591.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The project aims to constrain sea level during the
Pliocene Epoch (5.3 – 2.6 million years ago) in an effort to better understand
ice sheet stability. With carbon dioxide concentration similar to present-day
and global temperatures 2-4°C warmer than preindustrial, the Pliocene provides a
good analog for future climate change. Sea level was likely higher during the
Pliocene, but significant uncertainty remains, with estimates ranging from 0 to
50 meters above present-day. To refine Pliocene sea level estimates, this study
uses a series of Earth system model simulations to reinterpret records of past
temperature and ice volume. The Earth system model data from this project will
go into a public database, providing a community resource for education and
future research. This project will also produce a collection of educational
activities for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students to foster the
next generation of geoscientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine oxygen isotope
records have been fundamental to our understanding of past climates. However,
extracting ocean temperature, circulation, and sea level from marine oxygen
isotope records remains difficult. Earth system models that track water
isotopologues can quantify the contributions from ocean isotopic composition and
temperature to the marine oxygen isotope records, and therefore, can provide
estimates of past sea level. This project will leverage an Earth system model
that tracks water isotopologues to explore marine oxygen isotope responses to a
suite of orbital, carbon dioxide, and ice sheet configurations of the Pliocene.
These simulations will 1) allow for the construction of a Pliocene climate
emulator capable of producing transient global reconstructions of isotopic
changes of the ocean, atmosphere, and land, 2) provide forcings for dynamic ice
sheet simulations, which will serve as an independent and complementary
assessment of past sea level and oxygen isotope variability, and 3) evaluate the
skill and sensitivity of the extensive Pliocene proxy
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.