* 2047118
* CAREER: Novel Spintronics Devices based on symmetry-broken systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Xin Fan, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,773.00

Spin is an intrinsic property of the electron, causing it to behave as a
miniature magnet that can be moved in materials by an electric current. The
field of spintronics aims to harness the electron spin to connect different
physics fields of electricity, magnetism, and optics, etc. One of the first
applications of spintronics was in the hard disk drive read head, which
significantly increased storage density, accelerating the development of
computers and the internet. In recent years, new developments in spintronics
have led to a plethora of novel applications, such as magnetic random access
memories that are fast and non-volatile, and Terahertz pulse generators that are
powerful and economic. These applications are all based on the interactions
between electric currents and electron spins. This CAREER project aims to
develop and understand new interactions between electric currents and electron
spins by using novel materials/structures with broken symmetries. Compared to
traditional spintronics devices, the use of symmetry-broken systems will unlock
new functionalities. Success in this proposed research will expedite the
development of next-generation non-volatile memory and logic devices with
enhanced energy efficiency and inspire development of new spintronics devices
such as light helicity and surface magnetization detectors. The teaching and
outreach activities include by leveraging the proposed research, the PI will
design undergraduate and graduate course modules that integrate hands-on
experiments in magnetism by using lab tools as well as smartphone applications.
The PI will continue to host online spintronics seminars and online tutorials,
which will serve as a platform for educating and attracting young scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Driven by the spin-orbit interaction, the interconversion
between electric current and spin current in conventional nonmagnetic materials
generally follows the spin Hall symmetry, such that the electric current, spin
current and spin orientation are all orthogonal to each other. This symmetry
restriction makes it challenging to generate out-of-plane polarized spin current
in thin film devices, which is highly desired in practical magnetic memory
applications. This CAREER project explores interconversions between electric
current and spin current with new symmetries in symmetry-broken systems. The two
main categories of symmetry-broken systems to be explored are (1) magnetically-
ordered heterostructures and (2) nonmagnetic films with microstructural
asymmetry. The symmetry and efficiency of spin current generation will be
detected by measuring spin-orbit torque exerted onto a neighboring magnetic
layer via complementary optical and electrical techniques. This measurement will
serve as a guideline to select and optimize the most efficient systems to
generate out-of-plane polarized spin current. Using the optimized system,
current-induced damping modulation and field-free switching of perpendicular
magnetization will be experimentally studied. In addition, new phenomena based
on the spin-charge conversion with unconventional symmetry will also be
experimentally explored in optical spin pumping and spin Hall
magnetoresistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.