* 2047040
* CAREER: Data-Driven Control of Dynamical Networks: Robustness, Risk, and Network Architectures
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Tyler Summers, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 03/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Recent spectacular technological advances and unprecedented availability of data
are providing opportunities to fundamentally reimagine the control and
information architectures and algorithms for emerging complex networked systems,
such as autonomous robot teams for transport&lt;br/&gt;and delivery and energy
grids with massive renewable penetration. However, these networks are posing
major challenges for safe, efficient, and robust operation and control. Their
accelerating complexity, especially from rapid integration of machine learning
components, threatens to outpace our understanding of their robustness
properties and lead to severe failure and safety risks. This project will build
a rigorous framework for analysis and design of robust, risk-constrained data-
driven control algorithms and architectures for dynamical networks. The proposed
innovations will have broad societal impact by enabling enhancements to the
safety, efficiency and robustness of various emerging complex networks that are
vital to future society. The application focus will be on autonomous energy
grids and distributed multi-robot teams, but the fundamental knowledge
advancements can also impact other emerging critical infrastructure networks.
Furthermore, the integrated research and education plan features an extensive
array of activities that will train scientists and engineers and promote public
understanding of data-driven control in dynamical networks, especially around
issues of robustness, risk, and safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
significantly advance knowledge via a transformative robust and risk-aware
integration of model-based control and data-based learning approaches that
explicitly incorporate uncertainty from finite-data estimates. The overall
approach will combine performance and robust-&lt;br/&gt;ness guarantees from
model-based stochastic control, dynamic game theory, and risk-based
distributionally robust optimization with modern non-asymptotic martingale
concentration bounds and bootstrap techniques from statistics. Robustness to
uncertainties in finite-data model estimates will be explicitly incorporated in
two innovative ways: (1) a rich stochastic dynamic game framework that combines
adversarial inputs and multiplicative noise to promote robustness to both
highly-structured parametric and non-parametric uncertainties; (2) the use of
axiomatic risk theory and distributionally robust optimization to guarantee
meaningful risk-based safety constraints. On this basis, the project will
develop techniques for fully data-driven dynamic output feedback control, active
exploration, and locally optimal, robust, and provable convergent algorithms for
nonlinear systems using iterative stochastic dynamic games with locally learned
and refined models. The proposed research will also advance knowledge by
developing innovative self-tuning architectures and regularized policy
optimization algorithms for network control architecture design, and
illuminating how underlying network structure and size impose fundamental limits
on data-driven control and estimation. The approach will be illustrated,
refined, and validated via numerical simulations and hardware testbed
experiments for autonomous energy grids and distributed heterogeneous multi-
robot teams. A complementary education plan will: (1) create interactive
exhibitions via extensive educational outreach programs at the Perot Museum of
Nature &amp; Science and UT Dallas; (2) enhance curriculum for dynamical
networks with new courses, interactive web technologies, and project-based
learning; (3) mentor senior capstone design projects and undergraduate
researchers that directly support the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.