* 2047894
* CAREER: Multiplexing Biomedical Sensor Systems for Automated Diagnosis by Machine Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,11/30/2022
* Sangho Bok, Southern Utah University
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 11/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The diagnosis of human health conditions has always been challenging due to the
complexity of human physiology. Therefore, multiple tests to identify multiple
biomarkers are often required for diagnosis and prognosis of diseases. This
process takes time and resources, including well-trained health providers,
laboratory technicians to run the tests, and clinicians to interpret the
results. To address this concern, this project will investigate multiplexed
biomedical sensors that are capable of ultrasensitive detection of multiple
biomarkers simultaneously so that health concerns could be identified in their
early stages. The project will also investigate automated data analytics and
diagnosis systems by utilizing machine learning algorithms for an accurate and
unbiased interpretation of the test results. Finally, this project integrates
research with educational and outreach initiatives designed to excite K-12
students about STEM opportunities and train undergraduate and graduate students
in the area of biosensors, machine learning, and nanotechnology for biomedical
stewardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project is to develop integrative
biomedical sensors for automated diagnosis by synergistic integration of new
sensing platforms for biomarker detection, as well as machine learning
algorithms for accurate and unbiased interpretation of the results. Four main
aims will be pursued: (1) study and fabricate plexcimonic structures, where
plexcimons are plasmon-exciton-plasmon hybrid systems exhibiting new energy
states that are suitable for multiplexed sensing, (2) develop a multiplexed
sensing system by exploring plexcimonic structures with multiple biomarkers, (3)
develop algorithms that correlate the sensor results for multiple biomarkers,
and (4) create an advanced understanding of light-matter interactions in
plexcimonic structures and machine learning in medical applications. This
approach offers advantages over the conventional methods such as plasmonic
sensors and ELISA that do not provide sensitivity and multiplexing
simultaneously. The technology will also advance Point-of-Care systems through
automated diagnosis. The educational component of this CAREER plan aims to
develop an education program for light-matter interactions for nano-engineered
structures. This effort will energize student learning by using nanostructures
in laboratories, demonstrate a multidisciplinary perspective of biomedical
sensors, and stimulate students' collaborative learning through biosensor
projects. This activity will enhance recruitment and retention of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields and will motivate students towards
lifelong learning and careers related to biomedical disciplines, computer
science, and engineering in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.