* 2047064
* CAREER: Toward Artificial General Intelligence for Complex Adaptive Systems: A Natural Concurrent “Learning-in-Learning” Control Paradigm
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Zhen Ni, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,105.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) technologies are transforming nearly every aspect
of our lives and reinforcement learning (RL) is viewed as one of next big
research topics in the current AI wave. While the existing AI and RL
achievements are exciting, the fundamental research of data aggregation,
learning and approximation capability, and the performance generalization during
uncertainties, is not fully yet developed. There is still a gap from the current
state-of-the-art techniques to the artificial general intelligence that can
bring good performance in learning speed, data efficiency, and generalization of
the optimization performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inspired by this observation,
the PI proposes a natural concurrent RL framework that carries three major
advantages over traditional RL methods, namely the i) advantages of
simultaneously learning multimodal properties of the complex system; ii)
structural advantages of using a personalized learning scheme; and iii)
implementation advantages of the data-driven sample-efficient design. Within
this framework, the PI proposes to design two concurrent RL methods to
consolidate past experiences and anticipatory knowledge and build the “learning-
in-learning” control paradigm. The theoretical results will certify that the
proposed RL framework can be deployed with high confidence for complex adaptive
systems under uncertain environments. The applications on smart energy community
will support the novel learning framework and theoretical
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the scientific impacts, the proposed
research has broader impacts for a wide range of research disciplines including
transportation, rehabilitation, and robotics. The integration of research and
education activities will also positively impact the institutions regionally and
nationally. A proposed workshop will bring world renown experts to engage (state
college) students and young researchers with limited financial supports to
attend professional conferences. The collaboration with the industry and the
national laboratory provides the students the opportunity to get external
training, which can lead to competitive job offers. The proposed take-home AI/RL
projects will promote interactive distance learning for schools with limited
research capacity (e.g., rural community college) and for students with the
preference of remote studying during the current pandemic. These activities will
vigorously contribute to the nation’s AI workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.