* 2047517
* CAREER: Effects of Nanomaterial Chirality on Immune Cells and Innate Immunity
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Jai Rudra, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 05/31/2026
* USD 639,361.00

Chirality, or handedness, is a property of an object which is not superimposable
with its mirror image. It is manifest at scales ranging from molecules to
galaxies and has fascinated scientists as well as artists, and mathematicians
for centuries. Biomolecules like proteins and sugars uniquely exhibit one
handedness in all living systems, and chirality also permeates at the
supramolecular level, for example, in DNA, microtubules, and actin filaments. An
emerging area of nanomaterials research is to extend chirality from molecules to
materials where naturally left-handed amino acids are exchanged for their right-
handed chiral counterparts. Cells can sense and respond to the chirality of
nanomaterials in their immediate environment, and cellular interactions
ultimately determine nanomaterial effectiveness and safety. Through this CAREER
project, the investigator will utilize natural and chiral versions of self-
assembling peptides to investigate how the chiral properties of nanomaterials
affect their interaction with cells of the immune system and their subsequent
intracellular fate. Such studies will further our understanding of how chirality
effects emerge from a molecular level to the bulk level and permit the
fabrication of right-handed nanomaterials for a broad range of applications in
biotechnology. Knowledge of chiral peptide assembly and their interactions with
immune cells will inform the design and development of cell-free and synthetic
nanomaterial vaccines against infectious and non-infectious diseases with better
safety profiles. This project also supports integrated education and outreach
activities where the investigator will develop data science-rich learning
modules to introduce concepts of chiral structures and nanoengineering in
classical undergraduate engineering courses. The project will also create
educational workshops for K-12 teachers which are focused on interactive
software modules to transition chirality concepts to the classroom. The
investigator will also engage community participation through outreach events to
take place at the St. Louis Science Center and Academy of Science.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports a transformative research and education
project to understand how sentinel immune cells like macrophages and dendritic
cells which have evolved to protect us from both external and internal threats,
interact and process chiral peptide-based nanomaterials. Understanding the
uptake and subsequent intracellular fate of chiral peptide nanomaterials by the
immune system is of fundamental relevance for the continued development and use
in biomedical and environmental applications. To advance this knowledge, this
project will use natural and chiral variants of peptide building blocks which
spontaneously self-organize into supramolecular three-dimensional nanomaterials.
Chiral versions are subtle in that they do not change side-chain size,
flexibility, hydropathy, charge, or polarity and allow focus to be placed solely
on the question of how changes in amino acid side-chain orientation and the
resultant alterations in peptide backbone structure affect cellular interactions
with nanomaterials. The objectives of this project are to: (1) characterize
mechanisms of cellular uptake for different chiral compositions using
physicochemical and pharmacological interventions; (2) determine cellular
clearance and activation of innate immune pathways; and (3) assess effects on
antigen presentation and adaptive immune responses. These studies will provide
new insight into interactions that will impact our understanding of chirality
and inform nanomaterial design to lay a foundation for lasting scientific
contributions in the areas of chiral biohybrid nanomaterials incorporating
peptides and inorganics, discovery of previously unknown scavenger receptors,
combining cellular data with modeling towards predictive nanomaterial
fabrication, and testing the role of nanomaterials in actively engaging cellular
processes. Closely tied to the research project are educational and outreach
events that will help the PI implement a multi-tiered, student, teacher, and
community-centered mentorship targeted at growing the infrastructure of
engineers with a strong background in nanomaterials research. Collaborative
efforts with the Saint Louis Science Center and Saint Louis Academy of Sciences
signature youth development project will help train teens who are socio-
economically disadvantaged and underrepresented minorities to set and achieve
educational and STEM-related career goals. The Science Center is also a member
of the Portal to the Public Network that actively works to connect public
audiences with the scientists working in their
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.