* 2047564
* CAREER: Scalable quantum photonics based on color center integration with angle-etched silicon carbide devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Marina Radulaski, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Quantum technologies promise to further our understanding of nature’s
fundamental phenomena, as well as to provide unprecedented infrastructure for
powerful computation and safe communication. While there is a multitude of
contenders for physical implementation of quantum systems, two desired
properties stand out. First, the light-based solutions benefit from the
advantage of long-distance connectivity; and second, the solid-state platforms
support advantageous device scaling. This proposal explores the intersection of
these two paradigms: optically active defects in semiconductors, called color
centers. More specifically, the technical part of the project aims to solve a
challenging problem of integrating color centers into nanophotonic devices, thus
improving the quantum hardware performance for applications in quantum
communication, computation and simulation. The educational impact of the project
is significant for the training of inclusive quantum workforce. The diverse
student population of UC Davis and Yolo County will obtain exposure to quantum
photonic programs, thus expanding the pipeline of students trained for STEM
careers. Here, the PI and her team will create an interactive quantum
educational software, organize outreach activities at a local youth club and a
high school, and integrate hands-on research modules in her Quantum Information
Technologies graduate course at UC Davis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
addresses integration of color centers with nanophotonic devices in industrially
mature substrate of silicon carbide (SiC) for applications in quantum
communication, computation and simulation. In order to develop high-performing
quantum optical devices, novel fabrication methods will be devised to support
angle-etching of SiC. This plan capitalizes on the PI’s quantum nanophotonics
expertise, the state-of-the-art cryogenic spectroscopy setup built in her lab,
and the unique clean room capabilities of the UC Davis Center for Nano and Micro
Manufacturing (CNM2). Novel fabrication methods will be devised to support
angle-etching of SiC and realization of high-performing 4H-SiC photonic devices.
The devices will be integrated with nitrogen-vacancy (NV) color centers for
exploration of quantum light generation and cavity quantum electrodynamics.
Photonic design, characterization and experiments, will be performed in the PI’s
lab at UC Davis, while the fabrication process development will be assisted by
the CNM2 staff. The proposed development of a new generation of photonic devices
in SiC will be transformative for the field of quantum photonics. Suspended
triangular SiC devices incorporating quantum emitters will be the first of their
kind and enable high fidelity quantum operations with color center photons
applied in long distance fiber-based quantum communication and measurement-based
quantum computing. Studies of multi-emitter cavity quantum electrodynamic
systems will explore new approaches to on-chip quantum simulation. The devices
developed in this project will also have an impact in the fundamental and
applied aspects of quantum and classical photonics, optomechanics, color center-
based sensing, and biophotonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.