* 2047415
* CAREER: Cognitive and neural factors shaping the multidimensional quality of episodic memory
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Maureen Ritchey, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 754,824.00

Episodic memories are an important part of how we interact with the world and
with one another. When we remember a past event, we call to mind details of what
we experienced at the time— the who, what, where, and when of the event. During
recall, our memories rebuild the past in our minds. This is an imperfect
process, however, and the resulting memories vary considerably in the precision
and in the types of details we can remember (e.g., remembering where you were
but not who you were with) and the specificity with which we remember them
(e.g., remembering the gist of a conversation, rather than the exact words that
were spoken). Understanding the sources of episodic memory variability has
significant societal implications, as improving the specificity of episodic
memory is a common goal in both educational contexts as well as in the treatment
of neurological and psychiatric disorders. This project uses functional
neuroimaging and cognitive testing to examine the brain processes that predict
the contents and specificity of episodic memory. It builds on prior research
showing that there is a core set of brain regions, including the hippocampus and
a group of cortical areas that play a key role in episodic memory. Although
these regions are believed to work together as a network to unify and encode the
specific details of episodic memories, the underlying neural mechanisms are
unknown. To deepen our understanding of episodic memory, this project identifies
the brain processes during memory encoding and retrieval that can predict which
event details are remembered and with what level of specificity. The project
also investigates individual differences in how event details are reconstructed,
with the goal of being able to predict how individuals will differentially
recall an event. The research plan integrates theories from cognitive psychology
and neuroscience with computational approaches for modeling and predicting
cognitive and neural function. This is complemented by related education and
service initiatives focused on communicating the science of memory to the
general public in Science Museums, and to K-12 audiences in public schools, and
enhancing computational training among psychology students through programming
coursework and workshops, facilitating access to STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to identify
the neural factors that predict the multidimensional quality of recollection
across events and individuals. Episodic memory has been reliably associated with
activity in the posterior medial brain network, a set of functionally co-active
brain regions in the medial temporal lobes, medial and lateral parietal cortex,
and medial prefrontal cortex. Yet much remains unknown about how these multiple
brain regions contribute to the specificity with which distinct event features
are bound and recalled. This project tests the hypothesis that there are
distinct pathways within the posterior medial network that serve to bind event
details in memory and to resolve their specific perceptual details, and that
these pathways are differentially involved in predicting memory outcomes during
event encoding and retrieval. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is
used to measure brain activity while healthy young adult participants encode and
retrieve multi-featural events. The first goal is to test whether brain activity
can predict memory, specifically whether retrieval-related activity in the
posterior medial network can be used to decode the contents and specificity of
episodic memory, and to examine how this relates to information from sensory
regions. The second aim is to determine the role that these memory networks play
in binding event features together, and resolving level of specificity of
detail, during different stages of event encoding. The third objective is to
assess individual differences in episodic memory, which are a crucial source of
variability in memory quality. A parallel series of online behavioral studies
examines whether individual differences in the contents and specificity of
episodic memory are dissociable from one another, and whether these
individualized memory profiles are predictive of memory quality for lifelike
events. Together, the research objectives test an integrated account of brain
region- and network-level contributions to memory for complex events, addressing
important gaps in our understanding of episodic memory, its neural bases, and
its variability across individuals. The results contribute to a foundation of
knowledge supporting the development of interventions to enhance
memory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.