* 2047556
* CAREER: Brain-inspired Methods for Continual Learning of Large-scale Vision and Language Tasks
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Christopher Kanan, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 549,988.00

The goal of this research project is to create deep neural networks that excel
in a broad set of circumstances, are capable of learning from new data over
time, and are robust to dataset bias. Deep neural networks can now perform some
tasks as well as humans, such as identifying faces, recognizing objects, and
other perception tasks. However, existing approaches have limitations, including
the inability to effectively learn over time when data is structured without
forgetting past information, learning slowly by looping over data many times,
and amplification of pre-existing dataset bias which results in erroneous
predictions for groups with less data. To overcome these problems, this research
project aims to incorporate memory consolidation processes inspired by the
mammalian memory system that occur both when animals are awake and asleep. The
new methods developed in this project could lead to machine learning systems
that 1) are more power efficient, 2) can learn on low-powered mobile devices and
robots, and 3) can overcome bias in datasets. In addition, a significant
educational component involves training the next generation of scientists and
engineers in deploying machine learning systems that are safe, reliable, and
well tested via new courses and programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In greater
technical detail, this project will develop new measures for neural networks to
1) test for biases, 2) assess the acquisition of robust concepts, and 3) study
forward transfer in neural networks trained over time. New brain-inspired
algorithms are proposed that learn online but then have downtime periods in
which they engage in greater levels of memory consolidation, which are informed
by findings in neuroscience for the neural activities that occur during the
wake-sleep cycles of humans and other mammals. The proposed algorithms are based
on the brain's complementary learning systems for memory formation, storage, and
retrieval. The models are evaluated on large-scale incremental image
classification tasks as well as tasks involving multi-modal scene understanding
and abstract reasoning. This research will provide building blocks that others
can use to create new algorithms and applications. All code and datasets will be
made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.