* 2047205
* CAREER: Binary-Level Security via ABI-Centric Semantic Inference
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Aravind Prakash, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 197,488.00

Understanding the inner workings of software is essential to protect desktop and
mobile computers. Lack of source code for most commercial software makes it
necessary to analyze and defend software binaries. However, unlike source code,
binaries are devoid of rich semantic information that is crucial for security.
Traditional binary analysis and reverse engineering approaches are limited by
factors such as obfuscation, choice of compiler and compilation flags,
availability of debug information, and underlying instruction set architecture.
This project bridges the semantic gap in binary analysis by leveraging the
interface between a binary and its environment. Such interactions are mandated
by the Application Binary Interface (ABI) specification. The project is based on
the insight that ABI adherence confers certain properties to a binary that form
a strong basis for reverse engineering. Because ABI adherence is necessary for
interoperability, relying on ABI cues for reverse engineering offers an
unprecedented level of robustness that is impervious to obfuscation and
compilation environment (e.g., optimization). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
utilizes two independent yet complementary mechanisms that leverage language
ABIs to vastly improve the state of the art in binary analysis and code-reuse
attack detection. It employs a combination of static and dynamic binary analysis
approaches in order to derive high-level design information (e.g., object-
oriented language class diagrams) from binaries. Such information is central to
solving problems in decompilation, software specialization, software similarity
detection, etc. While the project evaluates binaries that adhere to Itanium and
Microsoftâ€™s MSVC ABIs, the discovered techniques will be applicable to more
modern languages such as Rust. Additionally, this project leverages System V
ABI, the most popular C language ABI to derive integrity policies for binaries
that run on UN*X (unix like) operating systems, and addresses modern code-reuse
attacks that operate within the confines of a statically recovered control-flow
graph.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.