* 2047726
* CAREER:  Enabling Healthier Futures:  Understanding and Strengthening Sociotechnical Ecologies of Frontline Health Work
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Neha Kumar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2026
* USD 499,945.00

The COVID-19 pandemic emphasizes how sociotechnical ecologies of frontline
health work are vital to the wellbeing of society at large. This project will
work to develop new knowledge about how to make frontline health infrastructures
that deliver critical last-mile care in resource-constrained, underserved
communities more robust, by leveraging data-driven and technologically mediated
approaches to global health. Prior research has found that the data that such
approaches rely on is frequently biased, incomplete, or missing. As a result,
data infrastructures--individual health records, frontline health surveys,
activity on social media and online health fora—often fail to capture local,
sociocultural specificities. This project will work to actively engage the
underrepresented voices of predominantly women frontline health workers
(FHWs)—also among the most vulnerable and impacted—toward designing technology-
mediated frontline health workflows. It will investigate supporting these
technology workflows by making frontline health work more visible, distributing
the burden of care work through selective automation, and providing avenues
workers can use to transition toward improved economic livelihoods. It will work
toward improved health outcomes for care-seekers from underserved communities,
improved futures for the workers, and robust overall healthcare
ecologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will research how data-driven and
technologically mediated healthcare can be directed toward the design of
stronger frontline health ecologies, using community-centric, participatory
approaches. Advancing scholarship at the intersection of human-centered
computing and frontline health, the project will investigate three research
questions. First, how can data practices and tools be designed and augmented to
capture the work of FHWs that is currently not adequately visible, to enable
better recognition of this work across state and healthcare authorities? Second,
how can routine, everyday workflows be automated or supported to make work more
manageable and the burden effectively distributed? Third, how can mobile health
technologies support digital and data literacies among FHWs, to enable
professional growth and employment opportunities in increasingly sociotechnical
ecologies of frontline health? These research questions will be addressed
through a combination of data collection methods, in conjunction with designing
and developing systems, with local partners. The project will synthesize
elements to contribute a design framework that grapples with interlocking power
structures and oppressions, in order to impact future research undertakings with
communities that have been historically marginalized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.