* 2047521
* CAREER: Towards Efficient Accelerated Cloud Data Centers
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Daniel Wong, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 02/28/2026
* USD 295,097.00

Emerging large-scale compute-intensive applications, such as machine learning
and big data analytics, have led to the wide-spread adoption of compute
accelerators, such as Graphical Processing Units (GPUs), in cloud data centers.
However, the existing cloud management software stack introduces many layers of
abstraction that strip away application characteristics and hardware
architectural details leading to inefficient and uncoordinated cloud management
policies. This can lead to slow down of application performance and under-
utilization of hardware resources, which ultimately impacts the data center's
total cost of ownership. This project will design efficient accelerated cloud
data centers that are performance-efficient, resource-efficient, and cost-
efficient. The planned research has three main goals: (1) develop software
frameworks to measure and identify the causes of inefficiencies in accelerated
cloud data centers, (2) design inter-accelerator communication-aware cloud
management policies, and (3) design accelerator-assisted interconnect
topologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this project can improve
application performance, improve hardware resource utilization, and reduce
energy consumption; leading to greener data centers and reduced carbon
footprint. In addition, this project will enable data centers to cost-
efficiently scale computational power to keep pace with the growing societal
demands of emerging machine learning and artificial intelligence applications.
The tools and frameworks developed in this project will be made publicly
available to facilitate the efficient integration of compute accelerators in
cloud data centers. These new tools and frameworks will form the foundation for
new course development, undergraduate research opportunities, and outreach
efforts to train and prepare a new generation of engineers who will utilize
compute accelerators and cloud resources as a first-class design
choice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.