* 2047462
* CAREER: Structure-Exploiting Optimization for Power Systems and Applications to Large-Scale Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Richard Zhang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This NSF CAREER project will investigate structure-exploiting optimization
techniques for power system optimization. The project seeks radical,
transformative improvements upon the state-of-the-art by identifying and
exploiting the mathematical structures that make power system optimization
fundamentally distinct from general purpose optimization. While power system
optimization is intractable in the worst case, the advantage of a structure-
specific technique is that it can preferentially target those more tractable
instances that appear in the real world. The intellectual merits of the project
include: (i) provable guarantees on a high-quality solution within a fixed
amount of computing time; via (ii) low-complexity algorithms that directly and
explicitly make use of tree-like graph property of electric grids; and (iii)
understanding and exploiting the convex-like behavior in the quadratic
nonlinearity between voltage and power. The broader impacts of the project
include: (i) addressing the urgent need for software capable of meeting the
safety-critical, large-scale, and time-sensitive needs of power systems; (ii)
technology transfer to other societal applications with a large-scale network
structure, such as transportation, network statistics, machine learning, and
artificial intelligence; and (iii) integration of research and education at the
University of Illinois, including outreach efforts to attract and inspire K-12
students and educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What makes power system
optimization particularly challenging is that it entails making safety-critical
decisions on a large-scale system over a short span of time. General-purpose
optimization techniques are often too broad and all-encompassing to meet the
specific needs of the system. In developing structure-exploiting techniques,
this project will focus on two mathematical structures that have shown
exceptional promise in the existing and related literature. The first is the
tree-like graph structure of the electric grid, which allows many of the hardest
combinatorial optimization to be easily solved. Our study will aim to resolve
whether power system optimization can be easily solved on a tree-like graph. The
second is the quadratic nonlinearity between power and voltage, which exhibits a
convex-like behavior despite not being convex. The project will seek to
guarantee this convex-like behavior, and to explore its implications for large-
scale optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.