* 2047310
* CAREER: Algebraic and Geometric Complexity Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Michael Forbes, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 02/28/2026
* USD 301,819.00

Understanding the limits of efficient computation is central to the theory of
computer science. These limits dictate what can be expected from the algorithms
that are coded, and justify beliefs in the security of cryptography. The use of
algebraic techniques (multiplication, derivatives, and beyond) is pervasive in
the design of efficient computation. These techniques apply to problems
inherently of an algebraic nature, as well for tasks that seemingly lack
algebraic structure. This project seeks to understand the power of these
techniques through two different lenses. The first aims to show how to
efficiently eliminate the use of randomness in algebraic algorithms. The second
aims to leverage the deep mathematical structure of algebraic algorithms to
define limits on their computational power. These two aims are connected through
attention to common techniques and models of algebraic computation. The project
will promote study of algebraic computation in general through course design,
organization of workshops, and training of undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this project seeks to design
deterministic algorithms for deciding whether a given algebraic expression
simplifies to a trivial expression, a problem known as polynomial identity
testing (PIT). While efficient randomized algorithms for PIT have been known for
decades, developing deterministic algorithms has proven challenging. The project
identifies classes of PIT problems which are both of fundamental importance and
that are ripe for further progress. Deterministically solving these PIT problems
would settle key challenges in the area, and also lead to new algorithms in
areas outside algebraic computation. Developing such deterministic PIT
algorithms is known in general to be equivalent to establishing limits on
efficient algebraic computation, and as such this project seeks to establish
such limits through the geometric complexity theory (GCT) program. This program
has seen significant overall interest from the research community, but has seen
fewer than desired results due to the high barriers to entry arising from steep
mathematical prerequisites. The project offers a set of problems within this
program that both are of fundamental importance, but also are concretely
solvable. The selection of these problems is informed by corresponding progress
made in developing deterministic PIT algorithms, and as such the two parts of
the project will develop in tandem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.