* 2047187
* CAREER: Dysfunctional Osteocyte Mechanoresponse in Tumor-induced Bone Disease
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Maureen Lynch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2026
* USD 588,321.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will determine how
specialized force-sensing bone cells (osteocytes) are impaired by bone
metastatic breast cancer, and how this impairment leads to tumor-induced bone
disease. The skeleton is a common site for breast cancer metastasis, which
causes bone loss, fragility, and ultimately fractures. However, current
therapies do not address bone health. Mechanical signals, which occur during
daily physical activity, are well-known to improve to bone health, and they may
also be protective against tumor-induced bone disease. The working hypothesis of
this award is that osteocytes are the key to a better scientific understanding
of the causes and treatments of tumor-induced bone disease. Specifically, this
work will evaluate if bone metastatic breast cancer causes a dysfunctional
osteocyte response to mechanical signals, which causes bone loss. The results
from this project will expand basic knowledge about the role of both mechanical
cues and osteocytes in metastatic cancer. This award also exemplifies
interdisciplinary research. The Educational Objective is to train a diverse
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics workforce. Undergraduate
researchers from under-represented groups will gain and leverage research skills
critical to Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics careers through
formalized training. This training will include targeted professional
development and team-based interdisciplinary projects, which will expand career
possibilities for engineers in under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
test the working hypothesis, this award will examine the impacts of: 1) breast
cancer bone metastasis on bone remodeling mechanisms that are osteocyte-directed
and mechanically-regulated, 2) mechanical loading applied to breast cancer cells
on the mechanoresponse of osteocytes, and 3) breast cancer subtype on osteocyte
mechanoresponse. This research capitalizes on the innovative in vitro/in vivo
experimental approaches pioneered by the Principal Investigator. In vivo,
controlled mechanical loading will be applied to mouse models of breast cancer
bone metastasis. In vitro, osteocytes will be cultured in 3-dimensions and
subjected to multiple mechanical cues (fluid flow and matrix deformation) â€“ an
advancement over the most commonly used 2-dimension-flow only platforms. In
aggregate, results from this research will transform current understanding of
bone metastasis by establishing that bone metastatic tumor cells interfere with
the mechanoresponse of osteocytes, which is a new mechanism contributing to
tumor-induced bone disease and fragility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.