* 2047177
* CAREER: Distributed Intelligence in Future Wireless Networks: From System-Aware Learning to System-Learning Co-designs
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* Tianyi Chen, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 04/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Given the growing sensing and computing power of wireless devices, amplified by
increasing concerns on data privacy, a sizeable number of artificial
intelligence and machine learning tasks are running at the devices distributed
in wireless networks. Unfortunately, most of learning algorithm developments pay
little attention to the underlying system constraints; and, most of existing
communication and network designs rarely account for the unique characteristics
of running learning tasks. To catalyze the synergies between rapid machine
learning developments and the wireless network designs, this project aims at a
transformative co-design of distributed learning algorithms and wireless
networks. This CAREER project will further integrate an educational plan with
the research goals by i) revamping the existing sensor network course with
distributed learning components; ii) directly involving undergraduate and
graduate students in research, especially from under-represented groups; and,
iii) outreaching to the general public, in particular K-12 students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards this goal, this CAREER project will
pursue i) system-aware learning, and ii) system-learning co-designs. For system-
aware learning, the project will first develop resource-efficient distributed
learning algorithms, whereby learning updates will be executed parsimoniously.
Robust implementation of these resource-efficient algorithms will be studied to
account for user mobility and adversarial attacks in unreliable wireless
channels. Regarding system-learning co-designs, the project will develop new
learning-while-managing algorithms that maximize the learning accuracy through
joint learning, power control, queueing, and workload management schemes. This
project presents an ambitious plan to enable system-learning co-designs of
future wireless networks. Its fundamental advances will also impact
sociotechnical systems, such as power grids, urban transportation systems and
water/gas distribution systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.