* 2047667
* CAREER: Shedding light on the Photochemistry of the LOV Class of Flavin Photoreceptors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Samer Gozem, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2026
* USD 698,430.00

The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry Division is funding Dr.
Samer Gozem from Georgia State University to investigate the molecular and
electronic events that occur in Light-Oxygen-Voltage (LOV) protein domains
following light excitation. The earthâ€™s surface receives the majority of its
energy from solar radiation. Organisms that depend on solar energy, such as
algae and plants, must sense and respond to changing light conditions. LOV
domains are a class of proteins that use the molecule flavin to absorb light and
help organisms sense their environments. Dr. Gozem will apply a combination of
classical and quantum mechanical computer simulations to study how specific
amino acids in the protein coordinate changes in the electronic structure of the
flavin in LOV domains upon light absorption. The fundamental principles to be
established by this study have potential long term impact for the design of LOV-
based encodable biosensors, light switches, and generators of reactive oxygen
species. The project is anticipated to develop automated and user-friendly
computational chemistry tools that are more readily accessible to non-
computational students and scientists. High school and undergraduate students,
including those from under-represented minority groups, are to be introduced to
multidisciplinary science and research using these computational tools in
research immersion activities. An additional educational goal is to assess the
impact of introducing an interdisciplinary course connecting quantum mechanics
to chemistry and biology into the curriculum at Georgia State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LOV photoreceptors bind the ubiquitous
biological cofactor flavin, but undergo distinct photochemistry from other
flavoprotein photoreceptors. Upon excitation, the LOV flavin undergoes
intersystem crossing to a triplet state, forms an adduct with a nearby conserved
cysteine residue, induces an allosteric response, and then reverts to the dark
state thermally or, in some cases, photochemically. However, the details of this
mechanism vary in different organisms or upon mutagenesis. This project will
investigate the mechanistic details of each step of the LOV photocycle in
prototypical LOV domains from three kingdoms of life (plants, bacteria, and
fungi) and seeks to elucidate how LOV domain protein sequence variations alter
the photophysical and photochemical properties of the flavin cofactor. The
computational methods being developed and employed in this research include
electrostatic tuning maps and hybrid quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical
(QM/MM) tools. The QM/MM calculations are being performed with an MM subsystem
that partially captures the protein structural ensemble generated by molecular
dynamics simulations to sample local side chain
flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.