* 2047503
* CAREER: Ultrasensitive Multiplex Nanopore Biosensing for Point-of-Care Testing of Infectious Diseases
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Chang Liu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2026
* USD 400,001.00

The ongoing global pandemic of COVID-19 has reminded us the importance of
diagnostic testing technologies. Current point-of-care testing (POCT)
technologies are inexpensive and easy to use, store, and transport. However,
their simplicity causes a significant loss of sensitivity and specificity
comparing to lab based diagnostic tests. The major goal of this NSF CAREER
research program is to develop a new nanopore testing technology to enable
ultrasensitive detection of infectious diseases at a reasonably low cost. Upon
the successful completion of this project, the proposed nanopore test will meet
the urgent need for a POCT technology with accuracy that exceeds current POCTs
or even lab-based testing technologies. This platform technology presents great
potential for changing the current paradigm of POCT for existing infectious
diseases. Also, it can be readily modified with minimal optimization as soon as
new diseases and biomarkers are identified for rapid deployment in clinics and
at the point of care. This project also includes education and outreach
activities, such as organizing a summer research workshop and internship for
high school students on the fundamentals of Biomedical Engineering and
Nanotechnology, broadly presenting our research to local communities, and
starting an infectious disease research symposium that brings an additional
synergy among local clinicians, biomedical engineers, and scientists. Special
attention will be given to students from underrepresented groups and first-
generation college students, who constitute a significant part of our student
population. This CAREER program should result in achievement awards and
authorships on research publications for undergraduate and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the era of personalized medicine, rapid and
accurate quantification of multiple biomarkers at the point-of-care is
fundamental to a successful control and management of infectious disease
outbreaks. Classical point-of-care testing (POCT) technologies are inexpensive
and easy to use, store, and transport. But their simplicity causes a significant
loss of sensitivity and specificity comparing to lab based in vitro diagnostics.
The nanopore technology is a promising alternative because of its single-
molecule analysis capacity, portability, and low cost. However, existing
nanopore technologies are not suitable for detecting analytes in complex human
samples, can only analyze charged biomarkers of certain sizes, and are not
device compatible. The major goal of this CAREER program is to develop a next
generation nanopore biosensor to enable ultrasensitive detection and
quantification of multiple infectious disease biomarkers from human blood at the
point of care. The program has three research objectives: (1) Develop and
optimize a nanopore biosensor with unprecedented sensitivity, robustness, and
reproducibility for various purposes; (2) Enable sensitive and specific
biomarker detection by automated immunoprecipitation and novel signal
transduction mechanisms; (3) Demonstrate ultrasensitive multiplex quantification
of circulating proteomics biomarkers and its applications in infectious disease
diagnosis and prognosis. Proposed approach has several innovative elements:
several amplification methods are employed to achieve the sub-femtomolar level
detection limit; special single strand DNA structures are used as detection
surrogates for biomarkers, so that the readout signal can be easily
differentiated from other biomolecules to prevent false-positives; an integrated
microfluidic automatic immunoprecipitation module can reduce sample-to-answer
time and human errors in the assay protocol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.