* 2047682
* CAREER: Improving the Practicality of Configurable Static Analysis Tools through Analysis, Testing, Refinement and Adaptation
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Shiyi Wei, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2026
* USD 273,773.00

Due to the scale and complexity of modern software, critical errors, such as
security vulnerabilities, are hard to discover. In the past few decades,
researchers and practitioners have invented many static-analysis algorithms for
bug detection and program verification. To take advantage of the theoretical
advances, static-analysis algorithms are often implemented as configuration
options in static-analysis tools. For example, taint-analysis tools for Android
apps incorporate different algorithms, underlying frameworks, and programming
styles to support language features that complicate the detection of critical
security vulnerabilities. These configuration options allow developers and users
to tune the tool behavior to achieve the right balance between precision,
soundness, and performance. However, the unique challenges of the large and
complex configuration space in configurable static-analysis tools have prevented
them from being broadly adopted in practice. Improving configurable static-
analysis tools will lead to higher software quality, a potentially large
societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to improve the
maintainability, correctness, usability, and performance of the configurable
static-analysis tools through configuration analysis, testing, evaluation,
refinement and adaptation. The project will initially focus on the configurable
taint-analysis tools for Android apps to address the following specific research
goals. First, unspecified relationships between configuration options, which
makes it difficult to tune the tools’ configurations, will be identified and
analyzed. The result will be presented to users via a unified configuration-
aware user interface. Second, configurable static-analysis tools will be better
tested and evaluated via test-case generation and benchmark collection. Third, a
human-in-the-loop iterative-refinement process will be designed to explore the
configuration space and classify the results to significantly reduce the manual
efforts needed in this process. Fourth, learning-based adaptive analysis will be
developed to selectively apply analysis algorithms at fine granularity to
produce practical results. The practical impact of the research will be
evaluated in terms of the tools’ capabilities of detecting real-world
vulnerabilities. Once the key research problems are addressed in Android taint-
analysis tools, the project will generalize the research to configurable static-
analysis tools for different programming languages. The project will
significantly improve the state-of-the-art of configurable static-analysis tools
and result in their broader adoption in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.