* 2047003
* CAREER: Development of a proxy for past and present plant photorespiration rates based on 13C-D and D-D clumping in wood methoxyl groups
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Daniel Stolper, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2026
* USD 409,992.00

Forests are a visually dominating part of the U.S. landscape, key to our
construction industries, and an important area of where future emissions of CO2
are proposed to be sequestered. Thus, having a better understanding of how
environmental factors affect the terrestrial biosphere has inherent societal
benefit. A fundamental aspect of the study of plants is understanding what
controls how well they grow — put another way, what sets the amount of carbon
plants can take up from the atmosphere and convert into biomass? All else being
equal, plants are generally found today to grow better the more carbon dioxide
(CO2) they have available. The dependence of carbon fixation rates on CO2 is
termed the ‘CO2 fertilization effect’. It is based on the idea that increasing
CO2 will increase global photosynthetic rates and is of great relevance for
future climate. The focus of this proposal is on the geological past where CO2
concentrations have changed over the past 65 million years by ~1000 ppm from
glacial lows of 180 ppm to ~1000 ppm tens of millions of years ago. A question
is whether, as seen in modern plants, ancient plants responded to changes in CO2
concentrations over geologic time? Did plants starve during the last glacial
episodes due to low CO2 and thrive tens of millions of years ago in CO2 rich
atmospheres? Models predict that this is true, but there are no ‘proxies’ that
can reconstruct how plant growth rates responded to changing CO2 levels in the
geologic past. Here the investigator proposes to develop such a proxy to test
these ideas using the stable isotopic composition of wood based on the abundance
of rare stable isotopes of carbon and hydrogen bound together in wood tissues.
He will calibrate the measurement experimentally and on modern plants and then
study samples from the geological past. As part of this work, he will
additionally create new online teaching resources for 9-12th educators through
the Global Climate Change educational resources of the University of California
Museum of Paleontology and that will also be integrated into classes taught at
UC Berkeley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models of earth history predict that changes
in CO2 concentrations over the Phanerozoic have altered global terrestrial
primary productivity by changing the relative rates of photorespiration vs.
photosynthesis in plants. These changes are predicted to have had global-scale
consequences, including changing global silicate weathering rates and causing
ecosystems to have been in near starvation during glacial pCO2 lows. There are
no available proxies for past photorespiration rates that can be measured on
fossil materials to test these hypotheses. This project proposes an integrated
research and education plan focused on the development of a first-of-its-kind
proxy for photorespiration rates based on the isotopic composition of lignin
methoxyl groups with two rare isotopes (termed clumped isotopes; 13CH2D-O-lignin
and 12CH2D-O-lignin) that can be measured on modern and fossil material. The
proxy will be developed and calibrated based on theory, experiments, and a
survey of modern environmental samples. It will then be applied to test the
long-standing hypothesis that terrestrial ecosystems were carbon starved in the
last glacial period due to elevated photorespiration rates associated with low
atmospheric CO2. Proposed methodologies that will be employed are: (1) Chemical
extraction and purification of methoxyl groups from wood lignin and conversion
to the analyte CH3Cl. (2) Use of a high-resolution isotope-ratio mass
spectrometer to measure intensities of 12CH3+, 12CH2D+, 13CH3+, 13CH2D+, and
12CHD2+ from CH3Cl ion fragments. (3) Growth of plants in growth chambers under
controlled conditions. (4) Collection of modern and fossil wood from archives.
(5) Theoretical calculations of partition function ratios of isotopologues. This
work will provide the community with a new, calibrated proxy and allow for the
immediate testing of a long-standing hypothesis on how changes in pCO2 on
geological timescales has or has not affected terrestrial ecosystems. Through an
integrated educational and research program, the research will be incorporated
into educational materials for the general public and for teachers. These
materials will be hosted and disseminated by the Understanding Global Change web
resource developed by the University of California Museum of Paleontology
(UCMP). The educational websites hosted by the UCMP receive millions of visitors
per month and thus reach a broad, diverse community that includes the general
public, students, and educators. Finally, the research will be integrated into
the classes taught by the investigator, including development of a graduate
seminar course and creation of new lessons and exercises. The teaching materials
developed for these classes will in turn be posted onto the Understanding Global
Change website in order to provide examples lesson and exercises for educators
using this website to develop their own lesson plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.