* 2047980
* CAREER: Cross-Boundary Program Analyses for Web Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Weihang Wang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2023
* USD 298,892.00

Modern web applications are built atop the integration of programs written in
diverse programming languages and distributed by multiple parties. While such a
development model provides maximum modularity and flexibility, it raises unique
challenges to traditional software-engineering principles. When web applications
fail to behave as intended, developers often need to analyze code components
written in various languages independently due to the lack of cross-language
analysis support. Dynamically including source code from multiple parties makes
it challenging to identify the root causes of errors because developers do not
have access to third-party internals. Diverse languages and the use of third
parties create technical boundaries that prevent web developers from obtaining a
comprehensive understanding of the heterogeneous code on the client side. This
project addresses the challenges of the technical boundaries existing in complex
web applications and the creation of a scientific foundation for understanding,
analyzing, and debugging web applications involving diverse languages and
multiple parties. The project will support web-application reliability, increase
web development productivity, and provide critical assurance for web users by
shielding them from common web issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plans
to build a policy-specification language that enables web developers to compose
specification policies to regulate many aspects of their code execution, such as
enforcing control flow of critical events, securing web pages in the presence of
unknown third-party services, and ensuring user experience. Based on these
policies, novel program analyses and runtime techniques will be developed to
expose possible violations (for problem identification) and automatic policy
enforcement (for problem fixing), respectively. The policy specification and
enforcement will provide assurance for web developers and enable them to control
the code executed on their websites, which is lacking with current technologies.
Approaches that support a cross-language analysis will be developed to handle
interactions between diverse programming languages, including WebAssembly and
JavaScript. Together, these activities will deepen the scientific understanding
of the technical boundaries in complex web applications and create new program-
analysis techniques to support more efficient web
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.