* 2047506
* CAREER: Integrating Information Theory with Data-Driven Mechanics: Toward Predictive Modeling of Material Behavior far from Equilibrium
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Celia Reina, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2026
* USD 652,025.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will support fundamental
research on the modeling of material behavior far from equilibrium, such as
crystal plasticity in metallic systems, solid-solid phase transformations, or
particle rearrangements in disordered media. In all these examples, the
observable macroscale material behavior is affected by the underlying atomic or
particle microstructure. The lack of understanding of the linkage between
microstructure and macroscale mechanical response hinders high-fidelity
predictive capacity critical to structural and industrial applications, e.g., in
infrastructure, transportation, and manufacturing. To illustrate further, in
manufacturing, it leads to economic losses and barriers to innovation in
processing of particles, forming of metals, and additive manufacturing. Progress
aimed at closing this gap is therefore important and needed to advance the
national health, prosperity, and welfare, as well as to secure the national
defense. In addition, this grant will support an educational and outreach
program to increase gender and racial equity in STEM fields, as well as to
promote critical thinking and scientific literacy within the public.

The long-term goal of this project is to realize a computational paradigm that
delivers continuum macroscopic models of far-from-equilibrium mechanical
behavior with atomic or particle fidelity. In pursuit of this goal, the
objective is twofold: 1) integrate information theory practices with machine
learning to identify precise macroscopic state variables that would represent
coarse-grained multiscale processes starting from the atomic or discrete
particle behavior, and 2) use state-of-the-art physics-based variational
formulation to determine the continuum evolution equations for these variables.
The approach will be validated using experimental rheological data for shearing
of dense packings of colloidal particles, a scientifically rich and
technologically relevant example of far-from-equilibrium mechanical behavior.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.