* 2047020
* CAREER: Mechanisms regulating neural identity, connectivity and function- From stem cells to circuits
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Mubarak Hussain Syed, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,415,347.00

Nervous systems contain circuits that regulate essential processes such as
perception, locomotion, navigation, memory, and sleep. During development,
neural stem cells (the precursor cells that produce the entire nervous system)
divide to self-renew and generate diverse kinds of neural cells over time, a
process called neurogenesis. As they divide and give rise to daughter cells,
neural stem cells also alter their gene expression, turning some genes on, and
switching other genes off; this is essential for generating different neural
cell types. Defects in this process in humans lead to neurodevelopmental
disorders such as autism, schizophrenia, attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), or microcephaly. Exactly how diverse neural cell types are
generated and how these neural types acquire distinct functions remains poorly
understood. This research project will investigate the genetic and molecular
mechanisms regulating neural diversity using the fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster. We will study the neural stem cell-specific developmental,
genetic, and hormonal programs that govern the formation of circuitry that
generates sleep and waking in fruit flies. Given the conserved nature of
developmental programs and sleep-wake circuits across animal species, these
studies will provide fundamental insights into understanding how neural cell
types and the circuits they participate in form. This work will also further the
scientific understanding of brain systems involved in sleep, as well as
explaining why some sleep deficits are commonly associated with
neurodevelopmental disorders. The project will also contribute to efforts to
harness stem cells to replace neural cells lost to injury or disease. In
addition to these intellectual goals, the project will enhance human diversity
in the next generation of neuroscientists through a lab-based course for
undergraduate students, and the Pueblo Brain Science outreach program, which
will visit local Pueblo schools to demonstrate live fruit fly experiments that
align with high school Next Generation Science Standards. These activities will
focus on genes, brain, behavior, and substance abuse addressing New Mexico's two
grand challenges, Education and Addiction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of an
animalâ€™s behavioral repertoire is a product of neural cells of diverse types and
functions, interconnected into discrete neural circuits. Understanding how
neural cell types become specified and specialized, connect, and assemble to
form neural circuits is a central challenge of neurobiology. This project
studies the cellular and molecular mechanisms regulating neural diversity and
function of the Drosophila central complex - a phylogenetically conserved brain
region regulating a wide range of behaviors including sleep. Specifically
focusing on the sleep-wake circuit, the proposed studies will use lineage-
specific genetic analysis, imaging, and behavioral assays to unravel the
mechanism(s) by which neural stem cells generate neural diversity. Neural stem
and intermediate neural progenitor-specific transcription factors that regulate
the formation and function of sleep-promoting neurons will also be studied, as
well as the role of inherited factors in establishing connectivity and function.
The proposed experiments will provide vital information to link neural fate
specification and connectivity with the function of the sleep-wake circuit.
Given the evolutionarily conserved nature of the molecules, developmental
principles, and circuits studied here, the results will provide novel
contributions to our understanding of neural cell type formation and function
across species, and to the principles that govern the evolution of conserved
brain structures. The project will also improve science education and promote
diversity in neuroscience by incorporating the proposed research into training a
diverse population of undergraduate researchers in an active learning
neurogenetics lab course, and by visiting local Pueblo Schools to demonstrate
fruit fly experiments related to the brain and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.