* 2047000
* CAREER: Multiscale Surface Structuring by Ultrafast Lasers for Multifunctional Glass Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Xin Zhao, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 02/28/2026
* USD 605,852.00

The global glass manufacturing industry is a principal economic enterprise which
was estimated by Global Market Insights at $238.39 billion in 2018 and is
growing. Glass has specific and useful properties including its 100%
recyclability embodying sustainable manufacturing. Multifunctional glass
surfaces are essential in the areas of optics, photonics, electronics,
biochemical sensing, micro/nanofluidics, optofluidics, and biomedicine. This
Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award supports fundamental
research to provide needed knowledge for creating self-cleaning, anti-fogging
rough glass surfaces while maintaining good optical properties. This laser-based
surface texturing technology is highly scalable with a potential throughput of
over 10 m2/hour allowing for commercialization and application in industry. This
technology could have a direct impact on society, by enabling cost-effective and
fast manufacturing of self-cleaning and anti-fogging windows, vehicle shields,
eyeglasses, electronic device screens, face shields for medical personnel, among
other functionalized surfaces. The program supports interdisciplinary research
and education opportunities to both graduate and undergraduate students. An “Art
of Bio-Inspired Manufacturing” program will be developed for Artisphere Fine Art
festival to inspire the younger generation’s interest in manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrafast laser structuring of glass surfaces has
potential to create surface texturing at multiple length scales. There are
currently knowledge gaps including the formation process of newly discovered
structures, unclear structure formation mechanisms, inability to fabricate
hierarchical structures, and lack of structure geometry control. This CAREER
project bridges these knowledge gaps by establishing the fundamental
understanding of multiscale surface structure formation on glass by ultrafast
lasers. Experimental studies will be conducted to elucidate the formation
mechanisms of ultrafast laser-induced nano-ripples and newly discovered micro-
ripples. A multiscale hybrid numerical model will be developed to gain further
insights about the surface structure formation and be validated by experimental
data. The underlying physics of creating hierarchical structures on glass
surfaces will be explored by both experimental study and numerical simulation. A
double scanning method will be created to fabricate both microscale and
nanoscale two-dimensional structures on glass surfaces manipulating surface
color effects. The optical and wetting properties resulting from different
surface structures will be characterized, and the process-structure-property
relationship will be disclosed for this technique. The outcome of this project
will not only advance the understanding of surface structure formation in
dielectrics and other materials, but also be readily transferrable to other
laser manufacturing processes, such as laser ablation, micro/nanomachining, and
laser-induced plasma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.