* 2047966
* CAREER: Transcending Barriers between Natural Hazard Researchers, Educators, and Practitioners - An Integrative Approach to Multi-Hazard Probabilistic Assessment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Michelle Bensi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 07/31/2026
* USD 500,796.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will create a strong
quantitative and qualitative foundation that enables researchers, students, and
other science/engineering professionals from traditionally separate disciplines
to work together to develop better strategies to improve the resilience of
infrastructure. An essential step toward improving infrastructure resilience
involves assessing risks from numerous natural hazards and then using the
resulting risk-insights to plan for and respond to events in real-time.
Probabilistic hazard assessments serve as the starting point for risk
assessments. Typically, these assessments focus on specific hazards such as
earthquakes or hurricanes. However, major disaster events often result from
combinations of multiple hazards. Probabilistic hazard assessments that do not
capture “multi-hazard events” can ultimately lead to suboptimal risk mitigation
and event response. Research and education gaps currently prevent fully
integrated multi-hazard assessments. These gaps exist because the approaches
used for various natural hazards were developed in relative isolation. This has
led to meaningful differences in the tools professionals use to assess hazards
and how hazard assessment is taught, researched, and addressed in regulation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves research and education activities
centered around three aims that provide a strong foundation for creating
dynamically updatable, multi-hazard risk assessment models for spatially-
distributed infrastructure. Aim #1 will focus on developing Bayesian-network-
based formulations to assess multiple, spatially-distributed hazards. This will
provide a unified quantitative and graphical structure for “linking” hazard-
specific models based on their probabilistic dependencies. Aim #2 will focus on
computation enabling strategies needed to implement Bayesian networks for
probabilistic assessments of multiple, spatially-distributed hazards (modeled as
random fields) at practical scales. Physically-informed surrogate models will be
developed using statistical and machine-learning methods to reduce the
computational (processing) demands associated with generating conditional
probability tables required by the Bayesian networks. Surrogate model
development research will be coupled with a project-based university course on
the subject. Finally, Aim #3 will focus on creating a dynamically updateable,
multi-hazard Bayesian network case study to demonstrate, validate, communicate,
and seek feedback on project outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.