* 2047057
* CAREER: Mlcrobial Lipidomics in Changing Oceans (MILCO)
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Julio Sepulveda, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2026
* USD 417,860.00

The response of ocean ecosystems to global environmental change is an important
concern for ocean scientists and the public. The proposed research focuses on
developing chemical tools to investigate how marine microbes respond and adapt
to changes in their surrounding environment, such as increasing temperature,
ocean acidification, oxygen loss, and availability of nutrients. Modifications
in the lipids (a.k.a. biomarkers, or fats) present in the cell membranes of all
known forms of life allow organisms to cope with environmental stress. The team
will use “lipidomics,” an emerging field that involves studying the complete set
of lipids produced by a given organism or an entire ecosystem, to understand how
microbes can adapt to the global-scale changes in the environment impacting the
ocean. They will do this using mesocosm and microcosm experiments. Mesocosms are
large-scale outdoor experimental systems that examine the natural environment
under semi-controlled conditions. Microcosms are small-scale indoor experimental
systems that allow controlled experimentation of individual organisms or
simplified ecosystems with one or more parameters. These systems offer
unparalleled teaching opportunities about the functioning of aquatic ecosystems
and their interaction with the physical and chemical environment. In parallel
with the research efforts, the CU Boulder team will lead an effort to enhance
bilingual (English/Spanish) ocean educational curriculum and activities for
school children and teachers, particularly from underprivileged backgrounds, as
well as the general public in the landlocked state of Colorado.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in lipidomics now allow the use of lipids
as indicators of microbial adaptation to environmental change. This CAREER
project uses an integrated experimental and educational approach to examine: (a)
lipid remodeling in natural microbial communities exposed to multiple
environmental stressors tied to varying upwelling intensity, explored through
large scale mesocosm experiments; b) lipid remodeling in key phytoplankton
groups isolated from upwelling ecosystems, subjected to selected environmental
stressors in microcosm and culture experiments; and (c) new bilingual
(English/Spanish) educational modules and outreach opportunities that will
enhance ocean literacy with the aim of inspiring and empowering citizens to
promote the health of our oceans. The work will test the overarching hypotheses
that experimental studies allow the distinction between changes in lipidome
caused by varying biological sources (phylogeny) and physiological adaptation
(lipid remodeling) of source organisms exposed to changing physical-chemical
conditions. Results will illuminate the application of intact polar lipids
(IPLs) in observational oceanography for the study of microbial adaptation to
future scenarios of global change—something that to date has not been rigorously
tested. In addition, this study will further inform the interpretation of
biomarkers preserved in marine sediments as tracers of past microbial and
biogeochemical processes. The educational focus will be implemented through the
School at Sea that includes: (a) development of educational modules (Microcosm-
in-a-Mason-jar and Mesocosm-in-my-backyard experiments) for students in grades
5-8 that will be tested in local schools and then disseminated in stablished
education and outreach programs at CU Boulder; (b) promotion of ocean literacy
among high school students as well as minority and community college
undergraduate students; (c) training of the next generation of science educators
and volunteers (Sea Rangers) in activities that will promote ocean literacy.
Furthermore, results from this study will serve as the basis for curriculum
development for undergraduate courses in global change and organic geochemistry.
Key partnerships with CU’s Museum of Natural History through the Girls At the
Museum Exploring Science (GAMES) program, Science Discovery Program, and CIRES’s
Education and Outreach Office, as well as the Inland Ocean Coalition will
provide platforms for the dissemination of School at Sea to a broader audience
of students and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.