* 2047119
* CAREER: Topological dynamics of three-dimensional active fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Guillaume Duclos, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2026
* USD 397,427.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Spontaneous collective motion can be witnessed
at different scales in nature: flocks of birds, migrating ants, and even cells
within our own body moving collectively to close a wound. The goal of this
research project is to better understand how these collective motions appear by
employing simple three-dimensional biomimetic materials. These active materials
are composed of proteins that can self-propel by harvesting energy from their
environment. Two types of 3D liquid crystals will be investigated where the
propulsion is driven by either molecular motors or by biofilaments that grow
from one end and shrink from the other, recapitulating two fundamental
mechanisms employed by living cells to migrate. This research project will
address how to relate the forces generated at the microscopic scale to the
emergent collective properties in 3D, a critical step towards the predictive
design of novel active materials for robotic or bioengineering applications. On
the educational side, this project will improve diversity and retainment of
underrepresented minorities at each academic level, from Kindergarten through
postsecondary education. The principal investigator will leverage the tangible
nature of active matter to i) create a bilingual science childrenâ€™s book, ii)
monthly Science/Pizza talks and iii) interactive demonstrations in local
schools, and iv) an annual active matter bootcamp for REU
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Simple biomimetic
materials composed of biopolymers have become a paradigm for studying active
fluids that spontaneously flow. At the macroscale, these flows often drive the
nucleation of motile singularities such as topological defects. Investigating
such topological dynamics in 3D presents novel conceptual and experimental
challenges. In addition, connecting these system-sized topological features to
the microscopic driving forces is required to rigorously test hydrodynamic
theories of active fluids. This CAREER award aims to elucidate how the magnitude
and the symmetry of mesoscopic active stresses drive the emergent topological
dynamics of 3D active fluids with orientational order, with a particular focus
on 3D active nematics and 3D polar fluids. Together, these two complementary
research projects provide a comprehensive description of the out-of-equilibrium
hydrodynamics of motile topological defects in 3D. They will set the foundations
for building advanced biomimetic materials endowed with life-like
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.