* 2047470
* CAREER: Wastewater Counts: Real-time de facto Population Estimation for Quantitative Wastewater-based Epidemiology
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* Fangqiong Ling, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2026
* USD 416,185.00

Wastewater-based epidemiology (WBE) has emerged as a complementary approach to
existing clinical tools to track the spread of infectious disease. WBE is based
on using microbial biomarkers in wastewater to monitor the onset, spread, and
community transmission of infectious diseases. Although WBE has provided
valuable insight into the spread of SARS-CoV-2 virus during the COVID-19
pandemic, much work remains to be done to enable accurate quantitative estimates
using this technique. The goal of this CAREER project is to address this
critical challenge through the development of computational approaches, models,
and tools to accurately predict the size of a disease outbreak from wastewater
biomarker data. Successful completion of this project will benefit society
through the development of new and experimentally validated computational tools
to predict community disease spread. This will allow a fuller exploitation of
the large amount of WBE data that are being collected in the United States to
advance public health. Further benefits to society will be achieved through the
mentoring of a doctoral student at Washington University in St. Louis.
Additional benefits derive from the development of an education kit focused on
environmental data sciences to advance science literacy in K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to
advance the science and engineering of wastewater-based epidemiology (WBE)
through the development and validation of new computational tools to estimate
the size of affected population in real time from biomarkers in untreated
wastewater. This will be achieved through specific research designed to (1)
build a computational framework for wastewater microbiome-based population
models, (2) develop and experimentally validate models and computational tools
for estimating the size affected populations in infectious disease outbreaks
using community wastewater surveillance data, and (3) apply these new models and
tools to evaluate and improve the design of WBE sampling programs. The
educational plan will (1) engage wastewater treatment and public health
practitioners in refining and disseminating microbiome-based population models
and design tools for WBE, 2) enhance the interdisciplinary training of
environmental engineering undergraduate and graduate students by integrating
data science into the educational curriculum, and 3) develop and distribute a
K-12 educational kit on environmental data science based on Next Generation
Science Standards. The successful completion of this project has strong
potential to transform our ability to track disease outbreaks through the
development of new computational tools for WBE surveillance programs. The
broader impacts of this project will be enhanced by training practitioners and
providing educational resources to diverse student populations at the K-12,
college, and postgraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.