* 2047210
* CAREER: Collective mechanics, particle transport and morphological adaptation in living multiphase matter: from mechanisms to the control of microbial swarms and films
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Arvind Gopinath, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2026
* USD 420,080.00

This CAREER award will support an integrated research and education plan to
study and model the formation and evolution of living multiphase materials -
microbial swarms and films. Bacterial and fungal colonies constitute a
significant fraction of the biomass on earth. These organisms cause more than
two-thirds of human disease including most hospital-acquired infections.
Bacteria and fungi typically colonize surfaces and tissue by forming rapidly
spreading multicellular swarms and growing fibrous films. The goal of this
research is to understand the mechanisms by which these form and to quantifying
emergent properties of the composite. The knowledge gained can inspire new
technologies to control bacterial and fungal infections in physiologically
relevant settings. The research team will investigate the fundamental physical
and biochemical mechanisms that underlie formation, growth, and adaptability in
microbial swarms and films. The team will use the bacteria Serratia marcescens
and Escherichia coli, and the fungus Candida albicans as model experimental
systems. Experimental data will be used to develop and test analytical theories
and numerical models to identify and understand the mechanisms involved.
Insights obtained in the research will be useful in several fields including
tissue engineering, soft matter, swarm robotics, and microbiology. The award
will also enhance undergraduate and graduate bioengineering curricula through
the design of new courses with both wet and dry laboratory components based on
the proposed research. The research team will also create a series of
customizable, standalone and modular graphics and visualization heavy “SynLab”
toolkits and applications inspired by this research. These will be implemented
in K- 12 classrooms to motivate students toward STEM careers. The award will
enhance education, contribute to community directed outreach, and provide
research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, especially those
from underrepresented groups, including American Indian youth in the Central
Valley region of California. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Bacteria and fungi cause
more than two-thirds of human infections, separately and sometimes as coexisting
communities. In the infectious phase, these microbes colonize surfaces by
forming rapidly spreading multicellular swarms and films. These living
multiphase composites, while composed of independent agents (units), exhibit
bulk macroscale properties, and remarkable collective response and adaptations.
There are significant gaps in our understanding of how biomechanical and
physicochemical mechanisms initiate, develop and stabilize such collective
response and composite properties. This project aims to study these fundamental
questions through a comprehensive and integrated research, general education and
community-engaged outreach program. The research plan builds on the following
foundational hypothesis: active multi-scale multiphase frameworks provide a
novel, complete and insightful means to interrogate, analyze and understand
microbial swarms and films. The PI and his group will combine experiments on the
bacteria Serratia marcescens and Escherichia coli, and the fungus Candida
albicans, with multiphase continuum theories and stochastic agent-based
simulations to understand the collective mechanics, particle transport and
morphological adaptation in collectively moving swarms and rapidly growing
fungal films. The specific aims are to: 1) interrogate and understand how micro-
scale mechanics and transport, cell-cell interactions, and physicochemical
interactions control the onset of collective multicellular swarms and films; 2)
track evolution of mesoscale spatiotemporal properties and morphology in these
composites and quantify any adaptations in response to external flow, chemical,
and mechanical perturbations; 3) synthesize experiments with first-principles
continuum theories, minimal models and stochastic simulations to identify
physical mechanisms underlying the stability of bacteria/fungal microbiomes; 4)
significantly enhance undergraduate and graduate bioengineering curricula by
incorporating dry and wet laboratory components; 5) create a series of
customizable modular graphics based standalone applications inspired by this
research; and 6) provide research opportunities for underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.