* 2047589
* CAREER: Control of Additively Manufactured Solid Rocket Fuel Grain Geometries and Combustion Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Trevor Elliott, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2026
* USD 542,220.00

Energetic materials such as explosives, fuels, pyrotechnic compositions, or
propellants have a relatively large amount of stored chemical energy. The energy
conversion processes that energetic propellants undergo, coupled with gas
expulsion, lead to a highly efficient method for vehicle propulsion. This is
typically achieved by igniting the propellant, which is constructed in segments
called grains, causing it to burn and expel gasses, such as those expelled from
a rocket during powered flight. Presently, there is limited understanding of
energetic material additive manufacturing, or 3D printing, when a three-
dimensional part is constructed from multiple layers of material deposited as a
slurry or paste. The current grain manufacturing processes are limited by the
thick nature and resistance to pouring of the energetic materials during grain
formation. The research supported by this Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award aims at building fundamental knowledge about the effects of the
additive manufacturing process, material parameters, and part geometry on
printability and combustion efficiency. The work encompasses several disciplines
including combustion, fluid dynamics, computational sciences, material science,
controls, and propulsion. The outcomes from this research directly relate to the
aerospace, aeronautic, and defense industries with additional benefits for
similar materials and processes used in the automotive, chemical, energy, and
healthcare sectors. The project also incorporates an engineering education
component involving outreach to middle school students and integration of
research outcomes into undergraduate coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additive
manufacturing provides a means to create complex grain geometries not possible
with current conventional manufacturing methods, which typically involve a
casting process. Producing propellants through additive manufacturing offers
several advantages including the ability to create helical ports, center
perforations with internal size and shape variations, different materials, and
embedded components. With these advantages come performance improvements such as
increased combustion efficiency, improved regression rates, and better
controllability. The limiting factors for additive manufacturing of these
energetic materials are knowledge gaps in governing parameters for optimal
performance and manufacture such as viscous parameters for slurry or binder
transfer, interlayer bonding, layer/surface roughness, sedimentation during
material transfer, layer composition, resolution, and void defects. This award
supports the development of mathematical models for the manufacturing process,
grain performance simulations, the experimental apparatus to manufacture grains,
and the testing of manufactured grains. This work will test the hypothesis that
a formulation of parameters – viscosity for slurry or binder transfer,
layer/surface roughness, resolution, and sedimentation – can be achieved to
obtain optimized propellant efficiency of motors constructed using additive
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.