* 2047433
* CAREER: Automated Synthesis of Electromagnetic Devices for Nanophotonic and Radio Frequency Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Constantine Sideris, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 02/28/2026
* USD 289,689.00

The ever-increasing performance and efficiency demands on new technologies, such
as the upcoming 5G cellular standard and next-generation computing, will
necessitate a transformative approach towards electronic hardware design all the
way down to the electromagnetics level. Significant progress has been made
towards the automation and optimization of circuits, especially digital logic
circuits, via computer-aided design techniques. In fact, the advent of digital
synthesis, or the automated design of digital circuits by computers, has brought
hardware into reality which was previously thought impossible, such as
microprocessors with billions of transistors occupying form-factors of a few
square-cm and capable of performing billions of mathematical operations per
second. Presently, the underlying circuit components of a system are designed
separately from the electromagnetic (EM) blocks, often by different engineers or
even different institutions altogether. Unfortunately, most EM devices such as
antennas, microwave devices, and even nanophotonic devices in photonic
integrated circuits must be painstakingly designed manually from the ground up
by a human engineer. This process is not only tedious and time-consuming, but
also suboptimal and often leaves significant performance gains on the table due
to the enormous degrees of freedom available for designing such devices which
are impossible for a human to explore. This project aims to tackle these issues
by developing an automated synthesis platform for EM devices, analogous in
spirit to digital logic synthesis, which will save human engineers significant
time spent designing these devices manually and lead to novel, non-intuitive
structures. This will be the first generalized synthesis platform which can
handle a wide class of devices across the EM spectrum. This research will be
complemented by an educational plan which includes the development of a new
graduate class, training graduate and undergraduate students in multi-
disciplinary fields, and motivating K-12 students to pursue careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analytical solutions for Maxwell's equations, which
describe all EM devices, do not exist except for simple toy problems. This
significantly complicates the design of new EM devices and requires heuristic
approaches and many time-consuming manual parameter sweeps. Despite the
potential for unprecedented performance and time savings, there does not
presently exist an automated synthesis framework for general EM devices which
can operate with modest computing power. This project will lead to the design of
such an automated EM synthesis platform by developing a scripting language to
describe arbitrary EM devices in both the optical and radio-frequency regimes,
advancing high-speed EM simulation methods based on boundary integral equations
to decrease compute time and memory required by several orders of magnitude, and
leveraging automated optimization algorithms capable of realizing new devices
with little to no human intervention. The long-term goal of the project is to
enable even the nonexpert with only modest computing capability, such as a
desktop workstation, to design many types of different electromagnetic devices
rapidly and efficiently in a matter of minutes to
hours.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.