* 2047199
* CAREER: Decision Theoretic Life Cycle Assessment
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Weiwei Mo, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2026
* USD 362,899.00

This CAREER project aims to create a decision theoretic life cycle assessment
(DT-LCA) framework to critically advance LCA’s predictive power and usefulness
in support of decision-making. In particular, the project will use DT-LCA to
address health, economic, and environmental aspects related to drinking water
emergency planning and response. The goal is to enable LCA to address important
questions regarding how various human decision factors influence sustainability
outcomes, and in turn, how sustainability outcomes influence decision-making.
The DT-LCA approach will use an immersive game-based approach to engage
stakeholders in simplified but realistic decision scenarios. Unlike the
deterministic LCA approach, DT-LCA simulates sustainability outcomes in an
iterative, dynamic manner based upon actual decisions made by stakeholders
during the game. It combines social experimenting, computer modeling, education,
and outreach into one integrated framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
seeks to enhance the way LCA is conducted by tightly coupling it with
stakeholder decision- making through serious gaming. Decision factors including
risk attitudes, interorganizational networks, and access to LCA results will be
introduced into the game’s experimental design to investigate their influences
on sustainability outcomes. Stakeholder concept maps before and after game
participation will be collected to study the influence of the DT-LCA on
learning. These influences will be characterized by analyzing the quantitative
and qualitative data obtained from the serious game through statistical and
machine learning techniques, network analysis, and text mining. This project
aims to generate new knowledge in 1) the influences of human decision factors
including risk attitudes and interorganizational networks on sustainability
outcomes; 2) the influences of knowledge about sustainability outcomes on
decision-making; and, 3) the effectiveness of a tightly coupled decision-
assessment framework on stakeholder learning as well as on improving the
sustainability of drinking water emergency planning and response practices. This
project will also result in the development of 1) a DT-LCA framework that allows
for the tight coupling of assessment and decision-making; 2) a novel serious
game for engaged learning about drinking water emergency planning and response;
3) a safety planning model and an emergency response model that incorporate
various decision scenarios and the associated system responses; 4) a method to
integrate impacts related to failure risks into sustainability measures; and, 5)
a teaching packet that can be integrated into undergraduate and graduate level
courses and be used by self-learners. This project will engage at least 50
stakeholders from New Hampshire along with additional water industry
professionals and the general public through workshops and crowdsourcing. A
teaching packet will be developed to encompass the game and the simulation tool
from this project, and the teaching packet will be integrated into three
undergraduate and graduate courses at University of New Hampshire (UNH). This is
targeted to help students obtain new knowledge and skillsets that are critical
to manage the complexity behind sustainability challenges. Key outcomes from the
project will be further disseminated to a broader community through the UNH’s
Research Experience for Teachers of Engineering (RETE) program, an existing
science educator network (NHISE), conference workshops and presentations,
webinars, social media posts, and journal
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.