* 2047150
* CAREER: Observational Constraints on Neighborhood-level Air Quality in Major United States cities and Dakar, Senegal
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Sally Pusede, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2026
* USD 563,286.00

The project seeks to advance understanding of sources and impacts of variability
of air pollutants in cities across the U.S. and in the city of Dakar, Senegal.
Variability in urban pollutant distributions have shown to result in inequality
in pollutant exposure with neighborhood demographics, resulting in significant
disparities in health and life expectancy. Field work is planned in Dakar that
will lead to the training of U.S. and Senegalese students in an international
collaboration involving physical and social scientists. Education and outreach
activities are planned for middle school to university level students, as well
as the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A range of datasets will be
integrated, including novel high spatial resolution nitrogen dioxide (NO2)
airborne spectrometer observations, satellite-based NO2 columns, in situ
aircraft measurements of numerous trace species, vehicle-based in situ
observations, ground-based NO2 columns, and U.S. and Senegalese demographic
datasets. The work will further expand the application of NO2 satellite remote
sensing to study controls over intra-urban spatiotemporal variability,
especially as it results in air pollution inequality, and advance land-use
regression modeling methods through the use of new predictor variable datasets
and constraints on pollutant temporal variability between weekdays and weekends.
Educational and outreach activities align with research themes, including the
development of a middle school experiential air pollution curriculum that
explores student motivation in STEM when STEM is framed as a tool for
environmental justice, the development of an interdisciplinary and international
undergraduate and graduate course on West African urban air pollution, and the
creation of a visually-appealing API depicting city-wide NO2 disparities in at
least twenty U.S. cities and Dakar, featuring data and code sharing and
educational content in English, Spanish, French, and
Wolof.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.