* 2047444
* CAREER: Advances in Modern Causal Inference: High Dimensions, Heterogeneity, and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Edward Kennedy, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2026
* USD 156,103.00

Causality is at the heart of many of the most important questions in science and
policy. Which cancer treatments are best for which patients? Does incarceration
impede or encourage recidivism? Causal inference is concerned with formulating
such questions mathematically, exploring whether answers can be obtained from
data, and if so, determining how well and with what methods. The classical setup
in causal inference explores effects of simple interventions, and presumes
confounding relationships are straightforward enough to estimate with relatively
low error. However, simple "all-or-nothing" effects may mask underlying
heterogeneity, and can be practically unrealistic or nearly impossible to
estimate, for example if some subjects have no chance of receiving treatment.
Further, in modern contexts, confounders are often high-dimensional and relate
to exposures and outcomes in unknown and possibly very complex ways.
Accommodating realistic confounding and heterogeneity are two of the most
central challenges in modern causal inference. These pursuits yield myriad open
questions, from understanding fundamental limits of causal inference in high
dimensions to exploring entirely new effects altogether. This project aims to
help address these questions by developing novel theory and methods and
advancing the application of causal inference in fields such as public policy
and medicine. Outreach is also a major component. New software will be made
freely available in R. The PI will design an undergraduate course on
quantitative causal reasoning, to help push data literacy forward from
association to causation. A textbook will be written, and there will be numerous
opportunities for broad participation, including summer programs, workshops, and
short courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new theory and
methods for the study of more nuanced - yet practical - effect measures,
accommodating the complex data structures often found in practice. The research
will focus on (1) adjustment for high-dimensional confounding and (2) flexible
estimation of heterogeneous treatment effects and optimal treatment regimes.
Extensions will also be pursued for multivalued time-varying exposures subject
to unmeasured confounding. For (1), the PI aims to develop novel non-asymptotic
risk bounds for both classical and new propensity-based effects, as well as
minimax lower bounds. This is accomplished in a high-dimensional discrete model
(new to causal inference) as well as with continuous data. For (2), the PI plans
to determine the fundamental limits of heterogeneous effect estimation in
flexible nonparametric models, develop and analyze novel heterogeneous effect
estimators, and study optimal treatment regimes under novel "contact
constraints." This work has the potential to help transform our understanding of
causal inference in the modern big data era. The projects will also directly
contribute to research on specific applications in sociology, criminology, and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.