* 2047683
* CAREER: Multi-Component Dispersions for Multi-Layer Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* John Boley, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 02/28/2026
* USD 669,748.00

Droplet-based printing is an additive manufacturing process that uses droplets
of materials as building blocks to form two and three dimensional (2D and 3D)
objects. Because of their high production speeds and ability to precisely place
droplets of various organic and inorganic materials, these types of processes
have been adopted in a variety of important applications. However, current inks
used in droplet-based printing are largely limited to a single material. As
such, scaling to multi-layer structures comprised of multiple materials requires
an additional printhead for each material and additional time to sequentially
deposit each material layer, making single printhead approaches prohibitively
costly and time consuming. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
project will explore principles for developing multi-component dispersions and
corresponding deposition sequences for droplet-based manufacturing of multi-
material, multi-layer films using a single ink by leveraging a new self-assembly
process. Such complex films, incorporating a wide variety of organic and
inorganic materials, are increasingly finding application in diverse areas such
as electronics, energy devices, optical and mechanical coatings, biological
materials, and pharmaceuticals. This interdisciplinary research combines aspects
of manufacturing, chemistry, materials science, controls, and machine learning.
Along with an outreach program leveraging innovative modes of learning, this
will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research and
positively impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-component
dispersions could enable more practical approaches to droplet-based
manufacturing of multi-material, multi-layer structures. However, there is a
dearth of knowledge regarding the chemical and thermodynamic mechanisms
necessary to guide multiple components into desired multi-layer structures and
the fluid mechanics involved as the deposited droplets coalesce to form a 2D
film. To fill this gap, the research team will develop a combined theoretical,
experimental, and computational framework for the rapid determination of both
the multi-component dispersion composition and the subsequent print routine
needed to manufacture films of a desired multi-layer morphology. In particular,
the research team will utilize a combination of modeling, computational, and
characterization techniques to develop an understanding of 1) the solvent,
particle, and polymer thermodynamic relationships necessary to form multi-layer
multi-material deposits, 2) the effects of solvent/particle/polymer chemistry
and concentration on layer thickness, deposit formation dynamics, and multi-
layer deposit morphology of drying droplets, and 3) the effects of drop spacing
and deposition sequence on migration of ink between deposited droplets and the
resulting morphology of the 2D film.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.