* 2047109
* CAREER: Fundamental Investigation of the Wave Nature of Lattice Thermal Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Yan Wang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2026
* USD 409,033.00

Heat transfer is a limiting factor in nanoscale engineering: if the finely tuned
elements such as microchips or lasers get too hot or conduct heat
uncontrollably, the devices will not function as intended. Thus, understanding
how to control heat transfer at the nanoscale is critical in many engineering
applications. Heat conduction in semiconductor crystals is dominated by
collective atomic vibrations known as phonons. Conventionally, phonons are
treated as particles that can propagate through a material, thus carrying heat,
and can be scattered by material defects or other phonons. However, the wave
nature of phonons can emerge or even dominate heat conduction in structures
composed of periodically or quasi-periodically arranged components, e.g.,
quantum cascade lasers made of alternating layers of materials and integrated
circuits containing densely packed nano-transistors. In those structures, the
propagation of phonons can be promoted by constructive interference or halted by
destructive interference. This project aims to explore these intriguing wave
behaviors and elucidate the transition between particle-like and wave-like
phonons through complementary computational and experimental techniques. This
research will lead to novel engineering strategies to maximize heat dissipation
in modern devices like quantum cascade lasers and integrated circuits or
minimize heat conduction in thermoelectric materials and thermal barriers. This
project will tightly integrate research, education, and outreach—including
themed science exhibits, new curriculum development, hands-on research
mentoring, and online course and research tool sharing—to have a broad, long-
term impact on STEM education for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this project are to: 1)
rigorously understand the transport, scattering, and localization of wave-like
phonons in periodic, quasi-periodic, and aperiodic structures, leveraging
complementary spectral phonon analysis and phonon spectroscopy techniques; and
2) minimize lattice thermal transport through decoupled suppression of wave-like
and particle-like phonon transport, leveraging machine learning-aided spectral
phonon analysis and structure optimization. The proposed research on the wave
nature of phonons can greatly advance the state of knowledge of thermal
transport in crystalline solids, which has until now been primarily based on the
particle nature of phonons. Such knowledge will enable the development of novel
engineering strategies based on the wave nature of phonons, breaking the
bottleneck of the thermal design or management of various heat transfer-limited
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.