* 2047144
* CAREER: Developing a Flexible Serverless Multimedia Streaming Cloud Platform
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Mohsen Amini Salehi, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 01/31/2026
* USD 351,069.00

As multimedia streaming is becoming an integral part of many applications, there
is a desire to build a special-purpose platform that enables rapid development
of streaming services and accommodates them in a robust and cost-efficient
manner across the edge-to-cloud continuum. Accordingly, the goal of this project
is to design the Multimedia Streaming Cloud (MSC) platform with high-level
management abstractions that can reap the benefits of the continuum while hiding
the complexity of working with it. MSC promotes the Function-as-a-Service
computing paradigm and offers the Object-as-a-Service (OaaS) abstraction as a
first-class citizen to represent various streaming sources, hence, relieving the
users and developers from both the resource and data management difficulties.
OaaS enables flexible migration of the objects across the continuum and
accelerates the development of streaming services too. Preserving the object's
state facilitates seamless object migration, hence, elasticity and mobility of
objects across the edge-to-cloud continuum are achieved. MSC offers cost-
efficient and robust QoS to each streaming object via smart task management and
resource allocation methods operating on heterogeneous cloud resources. An open-
source prototype of the MSC platform is developed and tested via recording
devices, a local edge computing system, and a public cloud to assess its
usability and robustness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MSC platform democratizes
multimedia streaming and lays the foundation for the next generation
applications operating based on multimedia streaming. MSC will pave the way for
stream providers to become solution-oriented and let them focus on developing
advanced streaming services and integrate them to their applications. The
project results will impact not only the forefront of scientific discovery, but
also benefit the society by offering flexible and robust streaming services
across various applications. The object abstraction and the intelligent resource
allocation methods of the MSC platform can be adapted to and employed in other
soft real-time computing systems. The project will impact computer science and
IT education by integrating applications into the distributed computing
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.