* 2047971
* CAREER: Foundations for a Resource-Aware, Cyber-Physical Vehicle Autonomy
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Justin Bradley, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2026
* USD 311,828.00

Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UASs), or drones, have tremendous scientific,
military, and civilian potential for data collection, monitoring, and
interacting with the environment. These activities require high levels of
reasoning, perception, and control, and the flexibility to adapt to changing
environments. However, like other automated agents, UAS don't possess the
ability to refocus their attention or reallocate resources to adapt to new
scenarios and adjust performance. This project will provide a new class of
control and planning algorithms capable of adjusting performance as computing
resources are continually reallocated, such as when transitioning from waypoint
navigation to environmental sample collection. A computing framework to make use
of freed resources will be developed allowing autonomous agents to focus
attention where it is needed, for example, away from navigation and to
perception. Together, these will provide a blueprint for making use of similar
algorithms with adjustable performance (e.g., anytime algorithms) which can be
adapted to other robotics platforms, as well as water, space, or ground
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These technology innovations will improve the
ability of agents to learn more, perceive more accurately, collect better data,
and respond more appropriately to changing environments and mission objectives.
Specific to UAS, this project will help maintain U.S. air superiority goals
through agile planning, targeted and persistent Intelligence, Surveillance, and
Reconnaissance (ISR), and flexibility and adaptability. The project goals are
coupled with outreach and educational activities focused on increasing the
understanding of rural populations of the value of investing in scientific and
technological research. The educational efforts, targeted at K-12,
undergraduate, graduate, and adult engagement are designed to dramatically
increase the CPS educational pipeline in the
Midwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on achieving its
goals by providing a complete framework for a class of performance-adjustable,
resource-aware algorithms called "co-regulation." First, a new modeling and
analysis framework, Co-regulated Hybrid Systems (CHS), will provide a
mathematical foundation for optimal control, control synthesis, and performance
analysis for systems that can dynamically vary sampling rate and other
computational resources to adjust performance. Next, using the CHS formalism,
computational workload is predicted forming the basis for a novel Co-regulated
Real-Time Kernel (CRTK) to dynamically reallocate computing resources while
guaranteeing real-time schedule feasibility. Finally, a co-regulated Markov
Decision Process (MDP) forms the planning portion of a resource-aware autopilot
for adaptable UAS. The system will be implemented in a multi-agent, rainforest
monitoring scenario requiring periods of surveillance, sampling of plants, and
emplacement of sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.