* 2047108
* CAREER: Electron-primed photocatalysis as a platform to expand aryl radical reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Zachary Wickens, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 02/28/2026
* USD 685,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Zachary Wickens of the University of Wisconsin â€“ Madison will explore new
ways to rapidly synthesize compounds that are important to the pharmaceutical
and agrochemical industries using more sustainable processes. Dr. Wickens and
his team are designing a family of catalysts that combine electrical and visible
light energy to drive energetically demanding reactions under safe, selective,
and mild reaction conditions. These studies are expected to enable the
development of new reactions useful for the assembly of complex molecules from
inexpensive building blocks that are underutilized because they are inert to all
but the harshest chemical reagents. In parallel with these research activities,
Dr. Wickens will work to advance educational and outreach initiatives to
increase the accessibility of organic chemistry through student-centered
teaching innovations and collaborations with local artists to cultivate interest
in science among the community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Zachary Wickens and
his research group are developing new strategies to promote thermodynamically
challenging reductions under mild conditions. Strong reductants, such as alkali
metals, possess a sufficient thermodynamic driving force to induce reactivity
from even the most reductively recalcitrant molecules; however, these reagents
are typically limited to polar reaction manifolds. In contrast, visible-light
photoredox catalysis is a powerful strategy to selectively promote radical
chemistry but the energy from visible light alone is insufficient to match the
reduction potentials of alkali metals. The Wickens laboratory is working to
bridge this gap and using electrochemistry to generate persistent radical anion
photocatalysts with excited state reduction potentials far beyond conventional
photoredox catalysis. These studies are expected to enable previously
inaccessible transformations of abundant feedstocks under sustainable
conditions. Synergistically, these research activities are providing training
for a diverse cohort of graduate and undergraduate students and Dr. Wickens is
also developing a new graduate-level course to facilitate the transition to
graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.