* 2047283
* CAREER: Communication Synchrony
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Rachit Agarwal, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 02/28/2026
* USD 479,837.00

Today’s data center networks provide best-effort service—it is impossible to
predict the time taken to transmit data across the network. Such
unpredictability reduces the set of assumptions that system designers can rely
upon from the network, resulting in correctness issues, poor performance and
scalability, and high resource overheads. This project aims to design
predictable data center networks. Such networks will enable systems that are not
only correct by design, but also achieve orders of magnitude better performance
and efficiency than today’s systems. Predictable data center networks also have
the potential to enable technologies and applications that are infeasible today.
This project will also have broader community impact through educational and
outreach activities that include creation of publicly available pedagogical
materials and tools, and participation in programs that aim to improve the
fraction of undergraduates from disadvantaged backgrounds choosing computer
science as a major. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project introduces a
fundamentally new service model—communication synchrony—that enables data center
networks to guarantee bounded, predictable, data transmission times. The project
will be organized around three core research thrusts: (1) design and
implementation of distributed packet-switched data center networks that enable
communication synchrony; (2) development of a theoretical framework to establish
fundamental limits, as well as Pareto-optimal designs for networks that enable
communication synchrony; and (3) demonstration of the benefits of communication
synchrony by designing end-host network stacks that can achieve microsecond-
scale latency while scaling to Terabit Ethernet. Communication synchrony has the
potential to provide solutions to some of the most difficult and important
technical questions surrounding distributed systems, operating systems and end-
host hardware for the post-Moore era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.