* 2047270
* CAREER: Hydrological Sensitivity Across Timescales
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Jie He, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 854,388.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As greenhouse gas concentrations
continue to rise, the Earth’s surface will continue to warm, and the amount of
rainfall is expected to change substantially. Predicting how rainfall will
change is of great importance for preparing adaptation and mitigation plans.
Currently, predictions of long-term rainfall changes rely predominantly on
simulations of climate models. However, models disagree on many aspects of
rainfall changes, which greatly undermines the usefulness of rainfall
predictions. Because observations are generally too short to be used to directly
infer long-term rainfall changes, constraining model predictions has been a
great challenge. Fortunately, there are abundant observations of short-term (for
example, annual or monthly) rainfall variations. These observations allow
scientists to study mechanisms of rain, some of which operate at both short and
long timescales. The investigator has identified several aspects of long-term
rainfall changes that are fundamentally tied to how rainfall responds to short-
term surface temperature variations. Based on such relationships, he will
evaluate long-term rainfall predictions from climate models by using observed
short-term rainfall variations. This work will yield a better understanding of
the uncertainty in rainfall predictions and will identify key processes of which
observational constraints are available to improve models. This method will then
be applied to a state-of-the-art global climate model, where the identified
observational constraints will be used to improve model parameters and
ultimately, its prediction of future rainfall changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
understanding mechanisms of rainfall changes and causes of prediction
uncertainties, this project will identify key processes that require
observational validation to improve model predictions. Such an improvement will
ultimately help society to cope better with climate variations. The educational
component of this project involves the teaching and application of climate
models at graduate, undergraduate and high school levels. Specifically, the
investigator will (1) create a hands-on a climate modeling course for graduate
students in climate science, (2) design a climate science and modeling module
that can be incorporated into high school science curriculum, and (3) train
undergraduate students to conduct and analyze climate model experiments via the
summer NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.