* 2047482
* CAREER: Real-Time Sampling, Estimation, and Inference in Networked Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Shirin Saeedi Bidokhti, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/28/2026
* USD 275,486.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) and social networks have provided unprecedented
platforms for the generation, dissemination and collection of real-time
information. The information is often governed by processes that evolve over
time and/or space (for example, on an underlying network). Estimation and
inference for such processes, especially in time-critical applications, require
efficient real-time and adaptive sampling strategies. This project will develop
theoretical foundations and algorithmic designs for real-time sampling,
estimation and inference in networked systems and considers applications such as
estimation and control in IoT, testing and quarantine for diseases (e.g.
COVID-19), and timely detection and control of the spread of misinformation in
social networks. The project is interdisciplinary and features a synergistic
plan to enrich the graduate and undergraduate curriculum at the University of
Pennsylvania with the goal of narrowing the theory-practice gap. It will further
provide undergraduates with research opportunities, targeting in particular
underrepresented minorities. The outreach plan includes partnerships between
academia and industry through the NSF-funded Innovation Corps program, public
literacy and engagement concerning the spread of misinformation, as well as
improved STEM education and mentorship of low-income and first-generation
students through the NSF-funded Upward Bound Math Science
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to develop
foundational frameworks for real-time (sequential) sampling strategies that
exploit partial information for decision making in networks. It establishes
fundamental tradeoffs between information extraction and reward maximization
with the former traditionally rooted in information theory and the latter in
networking, and develops solutions by merging ideas from information theory,
stochastic processes, network sciences, graphical models, and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.