* 2047851
* CAREER: Understanding and Overcoming the Fundamental Barriers to the Direct Reduction of Aluminum Hydroxide to Aluminum Metal
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Eric Detsi, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2025
* USD 596,262.00

Aluminum is the second most used metal worldwide after steel, however, aluminum
rarely exists in nature in the form of pure metal. Aluminum does abundantly
exist in the Earth’s crust in the form of aluminum hydroxide found in bauxite
ore from which it is extracted. The 130-year-old method, known as the Bayer
(1888) and Hall-Héroult (1886) process, is used to produce aluminum from
bauxite, but it is a highly energy- and carbon-intensive industrial process.
Production of one kilogram of aluminum consumes over 15 kilowatt-hours of
electrical energy and releases up to 14 kilograms of carbon dioxide. Therefore,
an alternative process that significantly reduces energy consumption and carbon
emissions would greatly impact the economy and utilization of aluminum. This
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research to elucidate
and overcome the fundamental barriers that impede the direct conversion of
aluminum hydroxide to aluminum at room temperature. This is a process that has
the potential to shift the conventional aluminum smelting paradigm by avoiding
direct carbon emissions and eliminating energy waste in melting the starting
and/or intermediate materials. Beyond the positive environmental impact, since
most of the aluminum used in the U.S. is imported from countries with cheap
hydroelectric power, the lower energy-consumption process proposed here allows
the U.S. production of aluminum to be more competitive and benefit the U.S.
economy and society. The proposed research is integrated with various education
and outreach activities involving the aluminum life cycle, which will be
showcased to students with physical disabilities from the Pennsylvania School
for the Deaf and underrepresented K-12 students from Philadelphia and its
surrounding counties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermodynamically,
aluminum hydroxide can be electrolytically reduced into aluminum metal at room
temperature in a process that involves hydroxide ions and requires an aqueous
electrolyte. Unfortunately, the high reactivity of metallic aluminum with water
renders the use of an aqueous electrolyte problematic. To overcome this
obstacle, an innovative hybrid aqueous/nonaqueous electrochemical cell is being
developed and used to achieve direct electrolytic reduction of aluminum
hydroxide to aluminum at room temperature. The reaction pathways is studied
using X-ray scattering techniques in real time during the reduction process to
map the evolution of size, curvature and crystal structure of the aluminum
created. In parallel, the reaction overpotentials and interfacial charge
transport kinetics will be investigated using electrochemical techniques. The
fundamental insights gained from electrochemical measurements and real-time
structural characterization based on X-ray scattering will inform process
optimization techniques to achieve maximum hydroxide-to-aluminum yield and
scalability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.