* 2047189
* CAREER: Human-Computer Integration: Designing the Next Interface Paradigm
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Pedro Lopes, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2026
* USD 566,000.00

In the early days of computing user and device were distant, often located in
separate rooms. Then personal computers "moved in" with users, and eventually
mobile devices moved computing into users' pockets. More recently, wearable
devices have brought computing into constant physical contact with the user's
skin, which allows these devices to sense more of the user and act in a more
personal manner. The main question that drives this project is: what is the next
interface paradigm that supersedes wearable devices? To study the next
generation of human-computer interaction, this research will create new devices
that stimulate a wide range of bodily senses, such as smell, temperature, and
skin sensations, to inform the engineering of the technology we will use in the
future to communicate with each other and with data. While some posit that the
next step will be to implant the interface within our bodies, much like what is
already being done with pacemakers and insulin pumps, this project instead
focuses on how new devices will integrate with the user's biological senses and
actuators. This body-device integration approach will allow the engineering of
interactive devices that intentionally "borrow" parts of the body for input and
output, rather than adding more technology to the body (for example, interactive
systems based on electrical muscle stimulation that are able to move the user's
muscles using computer-controlled electrical impulses and thereby to achieve the
functionality of haptic devices such as exoskeletons without the bulky motors).
In particular, the work will develop new hardware for the senses of smell,
temperature and touch, and will test applications in accessibility (for smell-
impaired individuals) and skill-acquisition. The work will leverage
collaborations with neuroscience to ensure that project outcomes ultimately have
broad impact by enabling the creation of more realistic and natural
interactions, which are especially important for the success of virtual and
augmented reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To these ends, three classes of
challenges must be tackled. (1) Hardware layer: devices that output to the body
will require new types of actuators smaller than those found in wearables, and
the project will realize this by leveraging the user's senses and actuators,
respectively, for input and output. (2) User layer: devices that influence the
user's biology provide benefits (for instance, they can accelerate the user's
reaction time) but also reduce the user's sense of agency, so the project will
develop interaction techniques that prioritize the user's sense of agency while
retaining the benefits of using the interactive device. (3) Application layer:
for any new interface paradigm to succeed requires determining in which
application areas it performs well and why. Special attention will be paid to
investigating the effects of the new technology on
accessibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.