* 2047513
* CAREER: Developing, Designing and Distributing Technology to Increase Equitable Outcomes in Energy, Information and Aerospace Sectors
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2026
* Danielle Wood, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2026
* USD 273,851.00

The project will create and validate a framework to explain, evaluate and
prescribe approaches to designing technical systems that consider and increase
equity. The project will define a scale to measure society’s relationship to
technology using four categories: Concept, Artifact, Complex Product System and
Complex Sociotechnical System to evaluate case studies. These case studies will
be used to develop interventions in the development, design, and distribution of
technology as well as the creation of a curriculum for training graduate
students and industry representatives. The project will be of interest to
designers of technology, decision makers in industry, scholars of technology and
students training in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using scholarship from the
history of science and political science, the project will create analytical
narratives of case studies of technical systems from the Energy Sector and the
Information &amp; Aerospace Sector. The case study analysis is organized based
on a Systems Architecture Framework drawn from Systems Engineering. The product
of Phase I of the research agenda is a series of publications stating
theoretical propositions. Phase II of the research agenda uses the same case
studies to perform or observe an intervention designed to increase equitable
outcomes in the design, development, and distribution of technology. The
research is complemented by an education agenda that will create curriculum
modules for graduate students in the Media Lab’s Program in Media Arts and
Sciences as well as short courses for the public sector that reflect how to
design, develop, and distribute technology to consider multiple axes of
oppression and privilege.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.