* 2047390
* CAREER: Safe and Scalable Learning-based Control for Autonomous Air Mobility
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Peng Wei, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2026
* USD 293,761.00

The vision for Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) or formerly Urban Air Mobility (UAM)
is to enable an air transportation system that moves people and cargo between
places previously underserved by the current aviation market (local, regional,
intraregional, urban) using revolutionary new electric vertical take-off and
landing (eVTOL) aircraft. AAM has received significant attention from federal
agencies. Companies around the globe are competing to build and test eVTOL
aircraft to ensure the AAM will become an integral part of peopleâ€™s daily life.
The AAM has enormous economic potential and societal impact, but its success
will depend on its ability to scale the operations to the expected high demand
with safety guarantee. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project lays the foundation of
safe and scalable learning-based planning and control for autonomous air
mobility. Concretely, the project will (i) focus on algorithmic advances of
scalable multi-agent aircraft autonomy for real-time separation assurance to
increase the airspace capacity; (ii) develop and integrate the online safety
guard and offline adaptive stress testing model to provide safety enhancement
for the multi-agent aircraft autonomy; (iii) design the collaborative traffic
flow planning framework for flight operators and the airspace service provider
to improve safety and efficiency when facing demand and capacity uncertainties
on the AAM network; and (iv) integrate the developed models and algorithms to
build an autonomous AAM ecosystem testbed to perform simulation/flight tests and
system level validation. The multidisciplinary approach is based on multi-agent
reinforcement learning, safe reinforcement learning, multi-agent stochastic
game, and bi-level robust optimization. The proposed effort has transformative
impacts to enable safe and scalable advanced air mobility. It could have impact
in the way that other CPS tools are designed and implemented to support
increasing autonomy and unmanned operations in civil aviation, autonomous
cars/trucks, and robotics. The project has an integrated education plan in (i)
student innovation competitions, teams and clubs; (ii) interdisciplinary
curriculum development and improvement for AI and autonomy in aerospace; (iii)
bringing industry experts to students in classroom; and (iv) international
student research exchange. The project will engage elected officials and policy
makers in AI and machine learning via podcast series, which will provide basic
knowledge and insights on legal, ethical, and societal implications of AI. The
project will establish a workforce pipeline from high school to postdoc for
women in in aerospace via AI and computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.