* 2047939
* CAREER: Diversity in the darkness: Integrating environmental genetics, comparative genomics, and citizen science to shed light on groundwater biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Matthew Niemiller, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 08/31/2026
* USD 604,000.00

Many organisms are found in subterranean water (groundwater), yet the diversity
and relationships of these organisms are poorly known, in part because caves and
other subterranean habitats are particularly challenging to access and study.
However, new sampling and emerging environmental genetic approaches, such as
environmental DNA (eDNA), offer great promise for studying biodiversity in
challenging ecosystems. Environmental DNA is DNA that is left in the environment
by the organisms that live there. With modern techniques it is possible to
isolate and sequence this DNA to identify, monitor, and study the organisms
living in many different habitats. This project will harness traditional, eDNA,
and genomic approaches to identify patterns and drivers of biodiversity within
and among cave groundwater habitats in the central and eastern United States. In
addition, this project will explore how aquatic cave organisms have responded to
changes to their habitats that are associated with human impacts on groundwater
both spatially and over time. Best practices for employing eDNA and its
integration with genomic approaches in the study of aquatic cave ecosystems will
be developed. Research will directly involve K-12 students and educators,
undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and community
scientists, with an emphasis on groups that are grossly underrepresented in
caving and science through several educational and outreach programs, including
a student-focused community-science initiative for aquatic cave biodiversity
monitoring, grades 3â€“5 educational summer camps, an undergraduate student
research and training program, and teacher workshops. Finally, this project will
support the development of an online data portal for groundwater and cave
biodiversity data and resources for future research and support conservation and
management efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will harness a large,
existing specimen and tissue collection and integrate traditional and eDNA
sampling with genomic approaches, such as ultraconserved elements and
restriction site-associated DNA sequencing, to compare levels of species and
genetic diversity at different scales within and among three diverse karst
biogeographic regions in the central and eastern United States to better
understand spatial patterns and the underlying processes that shape them. In
addition, the effects of human impacts in land use on spatial and temporal
patterns of biodiversity in groundwater populations and communities will be
examined using population genomic approaches. Finally, the integration of eDNA
with genomic approaches will be studied to explore the application of eDNA in
providing insights into the spatial and temporal dynamics of groundwater species
and communities using time-series analysis of sediment cores in caves.
Groundwater ecosystems are particularly attractive for such studies, as the lack
of UV radiation, stable temperatures, and generally low microbial activity in
groundwater habitats may promote long-term eDNA
persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Systematics and Biodiversity Science program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.