* 2047061
* CAREER: Graph Streaming, Communication Games, and the Quest for Optimal Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Sepehr Assadi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 02/28/2026
* USD 329,275.00

Massive graphs appear in most application domains nowadays: web-pages and
hyperlinks, neurons and synapses, papers and citations, or social networks and
friendship links are just a few examples. Due to the sheer size and evolving
nature of these graphs, processing them via traditional algorithms is often no
longer a viable option. As a result, there is a rapidly growing interest in
developing algorithms that explicitly account for the restrictions of processing
massive graphs. Graph streaming algorithms have been particularly successful in
this regard; these are algorithms that process input graphs by making one or few
passes over their edges while using a limited memory, much smaller than the
input size. This project focuses on further developing the theoretical
foundations of graph streaming algorithms: what graph problems can be addressed
efficiently via streaming algorithms, what are the inherent limitations of
streaming algorithms, and how these limitations can be mitigated through better
modeling assumptions? The research directions in this project go hand-in-hand
with educational initiatives such as integrating related topics in advanced
courses that provide research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students, and introducing high-school students to exciting ideas in theoretical
computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the focus of this
project is on understanding the powers and limitations of graph streaming
algorithms for several foundational problems such as coloring, matching,
reachability, shortest path, and minimum cut. These are among the most studied
problems in theoretical computer science with an extremely broad range of
applications. However, despite significant attention, many fundamental questions
regarding these problems have remained unanswered in the streaming model. This
research focuses on resolving some of these questions and moving toward
determining the optimal bounds on the tradeoff between space, number of passes,
and approximation ratio of graph streaming algorithms for these problems. This
project plans to achieve this goal by designing and analyzing better streaming
algorithms as well as using communication games as a powerful tool to prove
lower bounds for these problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.