* 2047794
* CAREER: Extracellular Barriers to Adeno-Associated Viral Gene Therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Gregg Duncan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2026
* USD 606,114.00

Gene therapy offers the means to potentially cure or halt the progression of
diseases with known genetic origins (e.g. cystic fibrosis) or with known genetic
modifiers (e.g. cancer). Virus-based approaches have been primarily used for
gene therapy applications, as they possess the natural ability to efficiently
deliver genetic cargo to target tissues. Adeno-associated virus (AAV) has
emerged as a leading therapeutic gene delivery system and recently became the
1st virus to be granted approval by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for
clinical use. Given its growing and broad potential utility, it is important to
understand how AAV traffics and distributes throughout the body to ensure it is
a safe and effective modality for gene therapy applications. Prior work has
shown that the interactions of AAV with components of the bloodstream and
tissues like the brain, liver, and heart can cause inactivation or limit
penetration of AAV within target organs. The aim of this NSF CAREER project is
to develop the tools necessary to comprehensively assess these biological
barriers to AAV gene therapy in order to optimize its performance and maximize
therapeutic benefits in diseases such as arthritis, cancer, and hemophilia. The
project includes a synergistic education plan that promotes research exposure
and awareness of career opportunities for URM students, enhances undergraduate
courses and provides training opportunities in research for undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral researchers from diverse backgrounds. Specific
activities include developing a summer research immersion and educational lab
activity development program for science teachers in Baltimore City and
incorporating new lab modules focused on nano- and microparticle transport in
blood into an undergraduate course on biofluids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-
term goal of this CAREER project is to build quantitative tools to support the
development and rational design of gene therapies using natural and novel
bioengineered AAVs. Though AAV shows serotype-dependent interactions with serum
proteins in the blood that can either inhibit or enhance AAV-mediated gene
transfer, it is unknown if these interactions with serum proteins promote or
compromise the stability of AAV in circulation. In addition, target receptors
used for cell entry by many AAV serotypes (e.g. heparan sulfate) are present at
high levels in the extracellular matrix (ECM), which could lead to adhesion of
AAV to the ECM and as a result, poor distribution in target tissues. However,
these potential barriers to effective AAV gene therapy have not been studied. To
address this issue, the investigator will pursue three research objectives: (1)
characterize AAV-serum interactions and protein corona formation, (2) examine
AAV stability in whole blood under physiological flow conditions, and (3)
evaluate AAV diffusion through ECM and ex vivo tissues. The investigator will
use expertise in measuring and modeling protein adsorption at interfaces,
protein-mediated particle aggregation, and diffusion of nanoscale particles in
3D biological matrices to understand the behavior of AAV in the blood and tissue
microenvironment. The results of these objectives will be interpreted with
analytical models to determine (1) how competitive adsorption of serum proteins
and protein corona formation on AAV particles influences their stability in
circulation and (2) how tissue-specific properties of ECM (e.g. density and
composition) influence distribution of AAV within target organs. If successful,
this work will establish new assays that are generalizable to viral gene
therapeutics and can be used as an additional screening tool for pre-clinical
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.