* 2047655
* CAREER: AutoEdge: Deep Reinforcement Learning Methods and Systems for Network Automation at Wireless Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2021,11/30/2021
* Tao Han, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 11/30/2021
* USD 88,188.00

The next-generation wireless technology promises advanced network capabilities
with extremely high bandwidth and ultra-low latency that will catalyze a wide
range of new mobile services and customer applications in vertical sectors such
as transport, media, and manufacturing. The explosion of networking connections
and the diversification of network services will dramatically increase the
complexity of network management. This CAREER project aims to develop domain-
specific deep reinforcement learning (DRL) methods and systems to automate the
configuration, provisioning, and orchestration of network resources and services
in next-generation wireless edge computing networks. The successful completion
of this CAREER project will advance the understanding of the inherent
relationships among DRL, communications, computing, and networking and lay a
solid foundation for studying learning-based algorithms and systems for network
automation in wireless edge computing. Besides, the technologies developed in
the project will significantly reduce the operational cost of wireless networks
and thus allow affordable high-performance wireless connectivity for all
communities including low-income and remote communities. Moreover, the project
provides interdisciplinary education to cultivate next-generation engineers and
researchers who master both advanced wireless and Artificial Intelligence (AI)
technologies via the integration of research into education and industrial-
academic and cross-disciplinary collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
project aims to develop deep reinforcement learning (DRL) methods and systems
that automate end-to-end resource orchestration in wireless edge computing
networks. Toward this end, two fundamental research problems are investigated:
1) how to design domain-specific DRL that can effectively solve end-to-end
orchestration problems in large-scale wireless edge computing networks and 2)
how to efficiently deploy DRL-based orchestration solutions in large-scale
networking systems. To solve the first problem, the project studies the design
of states, reward functions, training algorithms, and neural networks of domain-
specific DRL, develops methods of handling various constraints in DRL-based end-
to-end resource orchestration to avoid constraint violations, and designs
context-aware multi-agent DRL methods to leverage domain knowledge of wireless
edge computing to improve the learning efficiency of DRL. To solve the second
problem, this project develops policy distillation methods to address the DRL
deployment issues caused by the divergence between network simulations and real
network systems, and designs cross-scale knowledge transfer methods to address
the DRL deployment issues caused by the mismatch of the dimensions of small-
scale testbeds and large-scale wireless edge computing systems. The project also
develops an augmented network simulator and an edge computing system prototype
for evaluating DRL-based end-to-end orchestration
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.