* 2047822
* CAREER: Human Mobility Prediction and Intervention based on Cross-Domain Infrastructure-Human Interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Desheng Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2026
* USD 194,008.00

This project aims to model and support human mobility in real time at an urban
scale. Better models of human mobility can help meet both sustainability
challenges (through predicting traffic congestion, air quality, and energy
consumption) and improve urban resilience to disruptive events (such as
infrastructure failures, natural disasters, or pandemics). The key idea of the
project is that people's increasingly frequent interaction with transportation,
communication, financial, and other infrastructure can be used to understand
mobility patterns. However, collecting and integrating this information into
mobility models is still an open challenge. Further, people's collective
decisions can negatively impact infrastructure, increasing wait times and
reducing capacity in both transit and information infrastructures. Through
collecting and integrating mobility-related behavior across multiple sources,
the project team will advance the state of the art around mobility modeling
methods and develop interventions that encourage people to make choices that
improve mobility outcomes at scale, especially during crisis events. The team
will also develop educational materials to train students to be both future
researchers and workers who possess data collection and modeling expertise,
particularly around questions of human mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is structured as two main thrusts that align with the goals of mobility
modeling and mobility interventions. The first thrust for mobility prediction
will explore the correlation and interdependency of interactions across multiple
types of infrastructure, notably transportation, communication, and financial
interactions. This will be done through advancing techniques based on multi-view
learning to integrate cross-domain interactions, which will be integrated into a
prediction framework using a correlation-driven multi-task recurrent neural
network architecture. The second thrust aims to improve urban resilience by
developing interventions to improve mobility under disruptive events. The team
will use a novel dynamic Markov decision process formulation solved with
distributed deep reinforcement learning to develop recommendations that enhance
collective mobility, such as new departure times or routes for individuals, or
road closures and transit capacity allocations for city planners. These models
will leverage and be evaluated using existing datasets of infrastructure
interaction and disrupted mobility collected before, during, and after the
COVID-19 pandemic. Together, this work will lead to general principles, design
methodologies, and a long-term research trajectory for cross-domain
infrastructure-human interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.