* 2047330
* CAREER: Architectures of Responsiveness: Coordinating Primitives for Soft Robot Locomotion in Confined Spaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Kathryn Daltorio, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will create a
vocabulary for robot motion in confined spaces, enabling new types of healthcare
and infrastructure inspection systems. The soft bodies of animals such as
earthworms allow them to travel through narrow spaces and to navigate complex
arrangements of obstacles. Soft robots have the potential to emulate those
capabilities through the combination of passive mechanical compliance and active
response. Like their biological analogs, these robots continually make and break
contact with their surroundings as they move. The high number of degrees of
freedom of structurally soft systems, combined with the dynamically changing
contact points, makes centralized control of this type of robot motion an
intractable problem. In contrast, studies of animals such as earthworms have
shown that complex whole-body maneuvers may be generated as the collective
action of simple movements of individual body segments. Inspired by this
example, this project will develop composable architectures of dynamically rich,
but easily computed local response primitives that will combine to produce
desired motions. These architectures will provide the basis for an on-going
project to translate the locomotion strategies of soft-bodied animals into new
classes of intelligent and responsive robots. The research program is
complemented by an educational plan to provide an alternate to traditional
"pipeline" models for students who want to contribute to science -- including
students learning from home. The goal is to create in-place connections between
scientists, engineers, and students to increase awareness of scientific
research, expand access to STEM careers, and foster public trust in communities
that would otherwise rarely meet scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
hypothesis of this project is that building responsive movement primitives
around saddle points in state space will enable an especially rich and versatile
architecture of composable dynamic response. Using saddles instead of the
typical stable attractors enables sensory input to influence trajectories
without altering underlying dynamics, leading to more modular control within a
larger network. This will be demonstrated by developing tools to coordinate
control primitives in architectures that scale spatially for many degrees of
freedom, hierarchically for broad sensor information, and topologically for
decision-making. The different scaling approaches will be validated and
demonstrated by adding responsiveness to earthworm-like locomotion for confined
spaces. Spatial recruitment of neighboring segments in response to local
failures will address the problem of slip. Hierarchical nested responsiveness
will resolve competition between passive vs active turning. Topological
switchable consensus will enable qualitatively different strategies (e.g.
bracing with undulation versus peristaltic gaits) to suit different
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.