* 2047819
* Collaborative Research: Integrative ecological perspectives on extinction processes - a multi-proxy case study of Hispaniolan subfossil and extant rodents
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* George Perry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 140,941.00

This project brings together researchers and educators specializing in genetics,
anatomy, and ecology to explore the factors that led to the recent extinction of
endemic rodents on Hispaniola. Hispaniolan rodents provide an exceptional case
study for examining the triggers and timeline of island extinction events.
Biodiversity loss is a global concern, and over 70% of mammalian extinctions in
the last 500 years have occurred on islands. The Caribbean has suffered the
greatest species loss of any region in the world. Fossil data generated from
this project have the potential to contribute to conservation policy by
clarifying which factors most contributed to extinction events, and will be
helpful for understanding the disappearance of species on other islands. This
project will contribute to education by providing mentorship to young scientists
at multiple levels, including Caribbean and Caribbean-American undergraduates
and by developing teaching modules for K-12 students. Finally, a database of
extinct Hispaniolan mammals will provide better public access to scientific
information both in Haiti and the USA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
use morphometrics, stable isotope ecology, and ancient DNA to (1) identify the
ecological relationships among Hispaniola’s extinct endemic rodents, (2)
determine the timing of species loss, (3) resolve phylogenetic relationships
among extinct taxa, and (4) clarify extinction triggers. The research team will
rely on previously collected fossil material from three paleontologically-rich
caves on the Tiburon Peninsula in southwestern Haiti. The data generated will
allow a more nuanced understanding of the roles that human behavior, climate,
and individual species characteristics (e.g., body size, habitat, genetic
diversity) have played in extinctions on Hispaniola. The data generated can be
leveraged by conservation biologists to inform conservation policy aimed at
preserving the remaining biological diversity on Hispaniola and in island
systems more generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.