* 2047259
* CAREER: Kinetic Behavior of Post-Flameout Ignition Events
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2025
* Nicole Labbe, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 11/30/2025
* USD 394,763.00

Flameout is an adverse event in aircraft operation in which the flame in the
combustor is extinguished during flight. It can occur in fully operational
engines under extreme flight conditions, presenting a critical safety issue for
aviation. While chemical ignition behavior has been studied for aircraft on the
ground before takeoff, far less is known about how the extreme conditions
experienced after flameout at high altitude may influence the fundamental
chemistry of ignition. This project will help to fill a critical knowledge gap
by investigating the fundamental chemistry of post-flameout reignition, which is
necessary in designing effective engineering strategies to re-light stalled
aircraft engines at altitude. The project will use computational chemistry
methods and fundamental experiments to understand the chemical mechanism of
post-flameout ignition and determine how pressure and temperature influence the
behavior of ignition. It includes strong educational and outreach components;
training graduate and undergraduate students, developing mentoring programs at
the college and national level, and creating virtual lab modules for combustion
science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI’s primary goal is to obtain a
fundamental understanding of the chemical mechanism for ignition of jet fuel,
which is critical in enabling the design of novel post-flameout ignition
technology. She will use a combined theoretical and experimental approach to
identify how the chemical pathways for ignition differ at takeoff and flameout
conditions. The project will address two central research questions: 1) How does
the mechanism for ignition vary at extreme temperature and pressure conditions?
and 2) What is the effect of boosting ignition with thermal radical precursors
after flameout? Two different jet fuel surrogates (JP-10 and a POSF 4658
surrogate) will be studied using electronic structure theory approaches to
determine the relevant reactions for ignition, calculate the rates by which
those reactions occur, and develop combustion kinetic models to predict their
chemical behavior under relevant temperature and pressure conditions. To confirm
the accuracy of the theoretical work, the study will use complementary
experimental studies to detect combustion intermediate via photoionization mass
spectrometry and infrared spectroscopy. Further, it will conduct a kinetic study
of the effect of radical precursors as ignition boosting additives to assess
their viability as a chemical solution to post-flameout re-ignition. The
resultant fundamental understanding of aviation fuel ignition behavior at
extreme conditions and in the presence of radical precursor additives is
expected to spur new innovations in aviation safety
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.