* 2047073
* Biomechanics of the Primitive Matrix in Embryonic Cartilage and Meniscus
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Robert Mauck, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2024
* USD 445,522.00

This grant will support research on the development of cartilage and meniscus.
Knee joint pain affects approximately 25 percent of adults, resulting in limited
mobility and impaired life quality. Knee pain is often caused by the
degeneration of two joint tissues, articular cartilage and meniscus. This
degradation can be the result of disease and/or injury. Articular cartilage
covers the ends of bones. Mechanically speaking, articular cartilage provides
compressive load bearing and energy dissipation in the knee. The meniscus,
another knee structure, increases join stability. Despite decades of efforts,
there has been limited success in the regeneration of cartilage and meniscus.
One major obstacle is that we do not understand how the two tissues are formed
during embryonic development. This work will combine novel nanotechnology,
microdissection and gene expression tools, to project will study the development
of these two tissues from gestation to newborn ages in mouse knees. Outcomes
will provide new insights about the initial molecular events that give rise to
these two tissues. This will establish a new engineering benchmarks that can be
used in regenerative medicine efforts to restore cartilage and meniscus
biomechanical functions. Education and outreach activities will be integrated
with the research goal to give trainees a better understanding of biomechanics.
These activities will include senior design projects, science workshops, museum
exhibitions and YouTube crash courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Articular cartilage
and meniscus have distinct extracellular matrices (ECMs). Cartilage ECM is
mainly composed of type II collagen fibrils and proteoglycans, while meniscus
ECM is dominated by circumferential type I collagen fibers. Preliminary data
show that at the embryonic stage, the primitive matrices of both tissues show
ubiquitous presence of type VI collagen and perlecan, the biomarkers of
pericellular matrix (PCM). This work will thus test the hypothesis that the
embryonic primitive matrix resembles the PCM of mature tissues, and elucidate
the roles of this PCM-like primitive matrix in cell mechanobiology and matrix
development. This work will 1) identify the critical time point, at which the
primitive matrix separates into the PCM and bulk of ECM, 2) elucidate the
biomechanical evolvement of the primitive matrix via atomic force microscopy
(AFM)-based nanomechanical tests, and 3) determine the contribution of sulfated
glycosaminoglycans (sGAGs) in the primitive matrix biomechanics and cell
mechanotransduction. Studying cartilage and meniscus together, this work will
identify the common and differentiated molecular events that contribute to the
formation of the two tissues. In conclusion, this project will generate new
knowledge on the molecular, structural and mechanical events during the initial
formation of cartilage and meniscus, providing a new basis for guiding tissue
regeneration and disease intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.