* 2047249
* CAREER: On-Skin Interface Prototyping Toolkits: Democratizing Next Generation Wearable Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Cindy Hsin-Liu Kao, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2026
* USD 415,496.00

This project will investigate on-skin interfaces, an emerging, next generation
form of wearable computing. On-skin interfaces come in forms such as smart
tattoos and bandages. They expand the sensing capabilities of current mobile and
wearable devices by facilitating direct access to signals that represent
peopleâ€™s physiology. This technology holds promise for realizing the vision of
an "invisible computer" for pervasive healthcare, elderly assisted living, the
future of work, and national defense. While prior on-skin interfaces have
suggested benefits to society, the difficulty of prototyping on-skin interfaces
is limiting progress in this nascent, yet potentially transformative field. The
project will advance the prototyping, design, and use of on-skin interfaces
through the development of toolkits that combine traditional crafting methods
and unorthodox materials, with digital fabrication techniques and electronics.
It will incorporate diverse perspectives, outside of laboratory settings, for
the design of social interactions, form factors, and applications. It will bring
scientists, engineers, and artists together to invent the future of human
experiences of on-skin technologies. The investigation will introduce young
girls and rural area youth to interdisciplinary STEM learning through on-skin
interface workshops using the developed toolkits. Novel collaborative programs
with craftspeople and artists, and teaching innovation at the graduate and
undergraduate level will contribute to educating new STEM workers, who combine
on-body design with emerging miniaturized technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will hybridize digital and physical realms, connect cultural and
technological materials, and blend craft, computing, and electronics. It will
investigate innovative wearable computing through these research aims: (1)
construction toolkits that enable populations previously without access to
electronics development to prototype on-skin interface applications; (2) novel
fabrication processes that blend readily accessible textile and paper materials
with emerging slim electronics for rapid prototyping of on-skin interfaces; and
(3) novel programs for transdisciplinary collaboration between STEM researchers
and craftspeople. The research aims will be evaluated through (1) wearability
and durability studies of the developed tools; and (2) workshop studies that
provide novel assessments of how diverse populations build on-skin interfaces,
including how they approach the process, the type of applications they want to
build, how they envision the technologies integrated in everyday life, and the
STEM-related skills they develop through the making
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.