* 2047297
* CAREER: Expanding the Interaction Bandwidth between Physicians and AI
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Xiang Chen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 03/31/2026
* USD 340,113.00

This project will enable physicians to use artificial intelligence (AI) to make
more informed medical diagnoses from image data (e.g., X-ray scans). The recent
development of AI makes it possible to automate medical diagnosis by using AI to
process large amounts of imaging data. However, in reality the adoption of AI in
clinics has been slow because most AI functions as "black boxes" -- physicians
cannot see why AI makes a given diagnosis or to correct AI when seeing a
mistake. As such, there is a lack of trust that prevents AI from being
integrated into and enhancing physicians' work. This project develops methods to
make AI's diagnosis explainable to physicians while allowing physicians to
interact with and control how AI works, such as telling AI to adjust its
parameters based on a specific patient's case and teaching new medical knowledge
to AI to improve its performance. The outcome of this project will contribute to
a new generation of AI-enabled medical diagnostic systems that can collaborate
with human physicians by cost-effectively communicating results with physicians
while giving them easy and sufficient control over the underlying
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, the investigator seeks to
expand the interaction bandwidth between physicians and AI by adding a user
interface layer that guides a physician to see, ask and understand what AI is
doing and enable them to delegate tasks to AI while being able to tell or teach
how AI performs those tasks. Specifically, the investigator will conduct studies
to understand physicians' need for explanatory information in existing
practices, and use this information to co-design with physicians interactive
visualization that enables physicians to comprehend the AI's findings via
question-and-answer. This project will also investigate methods that enable
physicians to express their intents to control the AI behavior (e.g., specifying
rules at run-time to complement an existing model's limitation). The project
will also enable physicians to convey their domain knowledge to AI to control
its long-term behavior for future diagnoses (for example by extracting AI-
learnable medical concepts from physicians' labels and annotations on medical
imaging data).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.