* 2047832
* CAREER: An Integrated Framework for Resilience Analytics: From Physics-based Modeling of Building Components to Dynamics of Community Level Recovery
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Arghavan Louhghalam, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 524,940.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program will perform fundamental
research that advances the field of resilience analytics and enhances the
ability of civil infrastructure systems to cope with natural disasters. The
research will push the frontier on infrastructure resilience by developing a
holistic methodology to define and quantify infrastructure damage and functional
integrity (the ability to continue to function after a hazard event) at multiple
scales ranging from a single building to an entire community. The research will
account for the probabilistic nature of resilience. The research will provide
quantitative data that inform design, adaptation and mitigation strategies in
hazard prone areas, and as such lead to significant reductions in economic loss
and negative societal impacts of natural hazards. Furthermore, the integration
of dependencies within and between infrastructure subsystems (e.g. buildings)
allows for systematic characterization of the relationship between the type and
extent of damage and disruption, the supply chain response, and the estimation
of how recovery can be achieved at the community scale. In addition, this
proposal provides opportunities for positive societal impacts from the
perspectives of education and outreach. Relevant activities include training the
next generation of scholars in resilience engineering with strong emphasis and
experience on computation, and broadening the participation of underrepresented
groups in STEM fields by capitalizing on the PIs strong track record on
impactful commitment to inclusiveness and diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goal of this research is to advance the boundaries of infrastructure
resilience through integration of a combined theoretical and computational study
that allows for a holistic, systematic and efficient evaluation of all
dimensions of resilience. The activities to achieve this goal include: (i)
Adapting statistical physics and discrete modeling techniques to model the type
and extent of damage in structural and non-structural elements and subsystems,
as well as to predict the functional integrity of the system. The primary idea
is to leverage the versatility of statistical physics and discrete modeling
techniques in modeling complex failure mechanisms and their capability in
defining precise associations between performance and vulnerability. The
adaptation to modeling complex structural behavior is complemented with
strategies for modeling local and global structural damping mechanisms; (ii)
Development of novel learning strategies that rest on smart and optimal sampling
and multi-fidelity information fusion allowing for accurate and efficient
estimation of the statistics of damage (and loss) in the presence of low-
probability extreme events; (iii) Devising a systems dynamics platform for
modeling supply chain response that feeds from integration of inter- and intra-
building dependencies for estimation of aggregated community level damage and
recovery trajectory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.