* 2047123
* CAREER: Understanding thermal phase change processes in metal additive manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Patricia Weisensee, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2026
* USD 455,313.00

Laser-based additive manufacturing, including 3D metal printing, has
revolutionized manufacturing processes by allowing manufacturers to make parts
with complicated shapes that can be highly customized and making it possible to
incorporate patterns of composition and micro-structure that may ultimately lead
to new classes of materials and applications. Yet widespread implementation of
additive manufacturing is limited by both technical issues, such as lack of
quality control and part-to-part repeatability, and societal factors, such as
the readiness of the engineering workforce. Mechanical properties, such as
strength, hardness, and fatigue resistance – important quantities for any load-
bearing component - are dictated by the material microstructure. These material
properties are, in turn, governed by the details of the process: laser
characteristics, the behavior of melted material, solidification, and the
temperature of the workpiece over time. The opacity of metal has previously
limited the ability to study the behavior of the melted material and the
mechanism of solidification. Through an innovative research and educational
approach, this project addresses challenges in implementing additive
manufacturing, both the technical aspects, including microstructure and defect
control, and the workforce development, laying the foundation for the broad
implementation of robust and reliable additive
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific focus of this interdisciplinary
project is to provide a comprehensive understanding of the thermal processes
governing powder melting, convective mixing, and solidification in laser-based
additive manufacturing of compositionally graded metals. Ex-situ experiments
using an optically transparent surrogate system enable the characterization of
phase change and fluid mixing. Based on preliminary experiments, two scenarios
will be highlighted: i) the influence of powder impact location on melting and
mixing, and ii) melting, mixing, and solidification of dissimilar materials.
Using a unique in-situ high-speed thermal infrared imaging setup, capable of
capturing transient events within the melt pool at the millisecond time scale,
solidification dynamics in the transition zone of two metals will be quantified.
Correlation of ex-situ and in-situ measurements along with post-deposition
material characterization has the potential to lead to transformative
advancements in additive manufacturing by creating a fundamental framework to
couple process parameters with microstructural and defect development.
Leveraging the fascination of 3D printing, educational activities aim at
broadening and deepening participation of young people in science and
engineering. At the core of these activities is the development of a 3D
chocolate printer, which integrates hands-on scientific learning experiences
with the appeal of high-speed imaging with different learning modules for both
K-12 and undergraduate students. A specific focus is on empowering middle-school
aged girls to pursue careers in STEM by providing a fun and low-stake
introduction to additive manufacturing and thermal-fluid
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.