* 2047689
* CAREER:  Thermomechanical Property Control of Confined Conjugated Polymeric Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Xiaodan Gu, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2026
* USD 445,129.00

This project is jointly funded by the Polymers Program in the Division of
Materials Research and by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the dynamics of electronically active
polymeric materials is crucial for the development of next-generation foldable
and deformable electronic devices. It is also envisioned that in the near future
implantable electronic devices could provide unique interfaces between the human
body and emerging electronics, thus restoring lost human function, such as
hearing, vision, and bodily movement. However, there are no established design
roles to understand, control, and predict the softness and pliability of such
new electronically active materials. This project aims to address this challenge
by developing fundamental new knowledge on the dynamics of polymer
macromolecules and thus provide a pathway to make ultra-soft electronics that
can enable the next generation of soft electronic devices for future wearables
and implants. The researchers at the University of Southern Mississippi will
develop, test, and validate new electronically active polymers using special
instrumentation and develop new models to predict and control their softness.
The research will include development of design rules to achieve tunable control
of the electronic and mechanical properties of semiconducting polymers by
measuring, understanding, and manipulating their mechanical properties and
molecular entanglement behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to research
involvement of graduate and undergraduate students, the educational effort of
the project would implement an integrated and curiosity-driven virtual and in-
person education platform on polymeric and optoelectronic materials to local
K-12 students, including school districts comprising a majority of
underrepresented students. Broader impacts will also include a focused Southern
U.S. X-ray/neutron scattering workshop to bring new scientific techniques to the
local scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic semiconductors based on conjugated polymers
exhibit unique optoelectronic properties and have been widely applied in a broad
range of applications for efficient lighting, health care, energy harvesting,
and storage. Despite promising advances in their optoelectrical properties, the
ability to predict and control thermomechanical properties is lagging behind.
Thus, the overall goal of this project is to develop new design rules to achieve
tunable control of the electronic and mechanical properties of conjugated
polymers by measuring, understanding, and manipulating their glass transition
temperature as well as their molecular entanglement behavior. Researchers at the
University of Southern Mississippi will target the following goals: 1)
accurately determine the glass transition temperature for conjugated polymers
and its influence on the mechanical properties in both device-relevant thin-film
confined states and bulk state; 2) illustrate the design rules for engineering
highly entangled polymer chains to understand the role entangled semi-rigid
chains have on final fracture behavior of free-standing thin films under
confinement; and 3) understand the deformation mechanism of semi-rigid
conjugated polymers using multimodal in-situ spectroscopy and scattering
techniques, and thus guide the design of future deformable electronics. The
fundamental knowledge gained through this project will lead to precise control
of the thermomechanical properties of conjugated polymers, thus contributing to
the development of future soft robotics, implantable health care, and robust
energy harvesting devices.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.