* 2047572
* CAREER: Exploring the windows of selection for insecticide resistance evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,10/31/2026
* Silvie Huijben, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2026
* USD 812,596.00

The evolution of resistance against herbicides, fungicides, pesticides,
antimicrobials, antivirals, and anticancer drugs is a major global challenge. To
develop effective resistance management strategies, it is important to
understand how the different combinations and concentrations affect the
evolution of resistance. This knowledge could be used to understand how
resistance evolution changes under varying exposures or as concentrations wane
over time. The aim of this project is to fill the gap in this knowledge by
focusing on insecticide resistance evolution in mosquitoes as a model system. A
comprehensive evolutionary framework of insecticide resistance evolution will be
developed by measuring the selection acting upon resistant and susceptible
mosquitoes under different insecticide combinations and concentrations.
Furthermore, with problems as complex as resistance evolution that is predicted
to continue globally in the foreseeable future, a diverse workforce is urgently
needed. This project will develop research and inquiry-based experiences for
undergraduate and K-12 students around insecticide resistance evolution. The
focus will be on students from lower socio-economic or underrepresented
backgrounds to bolster student engagement in science and expose a diverse group
of students to the process of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resistance evolution
is driven by increased survival of resistant organisms in a xenobiotic
environment (an environment with pesticides, antibiotics, or other "-cides")
relative to susceptible organisms. The window of selection is the range of
concentrations at which differential mortality is observed and is used as a
framework to identify concentrations at which selection occurs, or identify the
length of time this window is open at inevitably waning concentrations. Often
missing from this framework is the role of interspecific competition at
concentrations for which both strains survive: at low concentrations. The
research goal is to test the hypothesis that the window of selection contains
one or more sub-windows of competition, followed by a window of negative
selection. The specific aims are to: 1) establish the selection coefficient of
insecticide resistance alleles at different doses within the window of
selection, 2) determine the magnitude of fitness costs associated with
insecticide resistance alleles and 3) determine selection following various
resistance management strategies using experimental and mathematical
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.