* 2047236
* SCC-CIVIC-PG Track A - The Lily Pad Neighborhood Mobility Hub Planning and Feasibility Study
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2021,10/31/2021
* Illya Azaroff, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 10/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The project is to study the feasibility and create a conceptual plan for a
resilient neighborhood-based mobility hub in the Rockaways Peninsula, New York
City. The mobility hub provides a single point of connectivity where different
travel options: walking, biking, transit, and shared mobility – come together.
It addresses the long standing challenges between location of affordable housing
and jobs by providing lower cost transportation choices, as well as bridging
connections to high-speed transit and jobs. The mobility hub would also provide
support for vulnerable residents by building resilient capacity to disasters. In
times of crisis, the Hub would transform and support preparation, response, and
recovery; providing key connections to critical emergency services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rockaways was selected because of its mobility,
housing, and social equity issues. It provides an ideal community for evaluating
mobility options to solve long standing issues between housing affordability and
jobs as it leverages New York City Housing Authority (NYCHA)’s long term
commitment to this community. The goals of this project are 1) through the use
of community engagement and data gathering, create a feasible mobility program
to connect the community, neighborhoods, isolated / vulnerable populations with
affordable housing, jobs and critical services, 2) establish a functional plan
and budget for implementing the mobility solutions pilot program. The project
directly addresses challenges of the CIVIC Innovation Challenge Track A:
Communities and Mobility: Offering Better Mobility Options to Solve the Spatial
Mismatch Between Housing Affordability and Jobs. CIVIC is a collaboration
between the NSF, the Vehicle Transportation Office of the Department of Energy,
and the Science and Technology Directorate of the Department of Homeland
Security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.