* 2047084
* CAREER: Computer Assisted Experimental Phase Equilibria (CAEPE)
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Scott McCormack, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 363,248.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Phase diagrams are the process maps that are used to
assist and direct nearly all materials design. In ceramics engineering, many
phase diagrams for two and three component systems (components can be elements;
such as Zr-C, or groups of elements; such as ZrC-NbC) have been developed.
However, as the number of components in the system increases, the number of
available phase diagrams decreases due to the complexity involved. Additionally,
high temperature ceramic phase diagram data is typically unavailable due to
their ultra-high melting points. Some carbides do not melt until ~4000 ˚C. This
project remedies both of these issues by integrating computational methods with
advanced ultra-high temperature experimental techniques to more efficiently
develop multi-component (5 component) phase diagrams at ultra-high temperatures
(~ 4000 ˚C). These multi-component ultra-high temperature phase diagrams will be
essential for materials engineers to develop next generation ultra-high
temperature materials for applications in hypersonics, nuclear (fission and
fusion) reactors and shielding for space craft. In addition, this project is
building mentoring chains across age and demographics to facilitate diverse next
generation science and engineering leaders. This is achieved through a variety
of outreach activities that connect high school students to university students
(at the undergraduate and graduate level), and university students to
professionals in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The core
focus of this research is developing a computer-assisted experimental phase
equilibria (CAEPE) methodology that utilizes CALculation of PHAse Diagrams
(CALPHAD) modelling in combination with Bayesian inference and Markov-Chain
Monte-Carlo for error quantification that enable strategic targeted experiments.
Core experiments involve collecting thermodynamic and physical data from room
temperature to ultra-high temperatures (~4000 ˚C) using a series of advanced
synthesis, calorimetry, diffraction/scattering, and aerodynamic levitation laser
heating techniques. This experimental data is essential for processing and
engineering next generation ultra-high temperature materials systems for
applications in hypersonics, nuclear (fission and fusion) reactors and shielding
for spacecraft. The first material system to be targeted with CAEPE approach is
the 5-component monocarbide ZrC-NbC-HfC-TaC-TiC pseudo-quinary system, as it
contains the highest melting point material known. Finally, this project will
prepare graduate students to think using an integrated computation materials
engineering (ICME) approach, and train them on pioneering, advanced high
temperature experimental techniques. These skills will be essential for the
future materials engineers that will push limits of ultra-high temperature
materials design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.