* 2047239
* CAREER: Top-down and bottom-up controls on species coexistence in a variable world
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Lauren Hallett, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2026
* USD 746,831.00

Part 1. &lt;br/&gt;The diversity of plants species in a given ecosystem can be
shaped by resource availability (called a “bottom up process”), and herbivorous
animals (called a “top down process”). Ecologists frequently ask how so many
species can coexist in a community? Multiple limiting resources can increase
species diversity; for example, if one plant species is more competitive for
nitrogen and another is more competitive for water, limitation in both resources
can help both species persist in the system without one outcompeting the other.
Temporal variability in resources can also increase diversity; for example, if
some plant species grow fast under wet conditions, but others better tolerate
dry conditions, rainfall variability over time can help to maintain more plant
species in a site. At present, the temporal dynamics of resources that limit
plant growth are changing – the amount of available nitrogen has doubled due to
atmospheric inputs from human-related sources, and the climate is shifting –
with potentially profound consequences for plant biodiversity. Top-down
processes like grazing animals or insect herbivores, may moderate the effect of
these resource changes, however; for example, an increase in the growth of
species favored by nitrogen enrichment may be offset by animals favoring those N
loving plants. This CAREER project first experimentally disentangles the effect
of shifting bottom-up and top-down processes in a highly diverse California
grassland. Second, it assesses how these patterns shift along climate gradients
by capitalizing on data from the a globally distributed experiment called
NutNet, that has been manipulating nutrients and grazing animals in grasslands
around the world for 10+ years. The overall goal of this project is to advance
our understanding of the processes that maintain plant biodiversity and to
further the capacity to predict how biodiversity will respond to global change.
The project integrates research and educational aims throughout by involving
undergraduate and graduate students in data collection, management, and
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2. &lt;br/&gt;Modern coexistence
theory has emerged as a tool to partition the mechanisms of coexistence among
species, providing a potential framework to predict how diversity will respond
to on-going global environmental change. However, modern coexistence theory has
been notoriously difficult to test empirically in field settings, reducing its
applicability to natural systems. This CAREER project extends empirical tests of
modern coexistence theory to quantify how bottom-up nutrient addition and top-
down consumer pressure alter coexistence in environments varying in rainfall
both across years, and over space. First, in an annual grassland system
characterized by high climate variability, the project experimentally targets
key resource-consumer-competitor interactions and interprets them using
quantitative methods that partition coexistence mechanisms in an empirically
tractable way. In addition, it parameterizes the range of conditions that
support multi-species coexistence, better reflecting community dynamics than the
pairwise species comparisons frequently employed in coexistence models. Second,
the project assesses the generalizability of these patterns by synthesizing
Nutrient Network data within a graduate seminar that trains students in team
science, data analysis and data visualization. In addition, local Nutrient
Network data is collected in conjunction with an undergraduate course sequence
that pairs a summer field methods class with a data science class that uses the
field-collected data. Finally, the project incorporates an independent
undergraduate research program to support thesis students to test additional
top-down and bottom-up dynamics at a local Nutrient Network
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.