* 2047500
* CAREER: Time-Aware Multi-Objective Recommendation in Online Learning Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Shaghayegh Sahebi, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2026
* USD 229,067.00

Online education is playing an increasingly essential role in workforce
training, skill development, and life-long learning. Given the scale of online
learning systems and their dependence on student self-regulation, automatic
recommendation and instructional tools are crucial for students' success in
online education. Ideally, these tools should provide personalized guidance to
students to work with the most effective type of learning material (e.g., a
problem to solve or a video lecture to watch), at the right time, to efficiently
accomplish their personal study goals (e.g., to fulfill their interests or to
learn a topic in the shortest time). Current solutions, however, focus on
instructing one type of learning activity, ignoring the importance of studying
time intervals, and only satisfying one goal for all students. This project will
research a new generation of educational recommender systems towards achieving
students’ long-term goals by automatically detecting and balancing between their
different, potentially conflicting study goals. This project will develop
computational models and algorithms that can suggest various types of
personalized learning activities and optimally selected study times for
students. The resulting solutions will be applicable to machine learning and
data mining fields, especially, to long-term utility and time-sensitive
recommender systems in domains such as health and fitness. The products of this
research will improve the accessibility of online education to better serve
underrepresented learners. The findings can be used in the Education domain to
improve students' learning. This project includes an integrated teaching plan
that facilitates training the next generation of interdisciplinary undergraduate
and graduate students in the convergence of Computer Science and Education
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to research time-aware, multi-
objective, multi-type, personalized educational recommender models and
algorithms. The recommender systems designed in this project will be optimizing
for students’ long-term learning interests, behavioral preferences, and learning
goals. They will be capable of recommending both assessed and non-assessed types
of learning materials to students and modeling the best study time intervals for
them. The contributions of this project are realized via three research thrusts.
In the first thrust, personalized knowledge tracing models, student choice
models, and behavioral preference models are designed and integrated to model
long-term rewards that facilitate multi-objective recommendations. In the second
thrust, the project will investigate multi-type knowledge models and algorithms
to suggest both assessed (e.g., problems) and non-assessed (e.g., video
lectures) learning materials to students while considering their multiple
objectives. The third thrust focuses on a new modality of educational
recommender systems by incorporating point process modeling to detect the
continuous-time influence between different activities and find the optimal
personalized return-to-study time. These research thrusts build upon educational
data mining, recommender systems, temporal process modeling, and reinforcement
learning literature and extend each of them while contributing actionable
insights in student learning processes. To assess the results of this project, a
comprehensive evaluation plan is incorporated that includes simulations, offline
evaluation on real-world datasets, online integration with live systems, and
user studies. The results of this project will be disseminated to the broader
Machine Learning, Artificial Intelligence, and Educational Data Mining
communities via open-source software and publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.