* 2047472
* CAREER: Genomic and Phenotypic Evolution of a Social Symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Joseph Parker, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 02/28/2026
* USD 673,135.00

The biosphere is a network of ecological relationships connecting organisms
across all grades of complexity. Whether between microbes or mammals, ecological
relationships depend on features that enable organisms to interact across
species boundaries. A major goal of modern biology is to identify these traits,
understand how they function, and infer how they evolved at the genetic level.
An outstanding challenge in the study of biological interactions is explaining
how animals evolve relationships with other species via changes in the brain,
behavior and communication. This proposal addresses this challenge by examining
a symbiosis between two animals—an ant species, and a rove beetle that lives as
a social impostor inside the ant’s colony. By studying the beetle’s nervous
system and chemical glands, mechanisms will be uncovered that enable the beetle
to accurately detect and chemically manipulate its ant partner, consequently
integrating into colony life. Comparisons with related beetle species that live
independently of ants will reveal how the symbiotic beetle’s behavior and
chemical communication systems evolved. This work will illuminate how different
animal species recognize and interact with each other, informing our
understanding of how brains process sensory information about other organisms
and generate social behavior. This research could advance agricultural control
strategies by discovering novel compounds that disrupt pest species biology. It
may also aid in countering invasive species. This program also provides
undergraduate research experience that is trans-disciplinary, preparing the next
generation of scientists to participate in the bioeconomy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex interspecies relationships pervade the Metazoa,
but knowledge of the molecular and neurobiological mechanisms underlying these
lifestyles is scarce. Animal symbioses are often hard to reconstitute in the
laboratory, whereas classical models such as Drosophila and mice exhibit
negligible interactions with other species. Rove beetles (Staphylinidae)
comprise a remarkable clade in which numerous lineages have convergently evolved
into 'myrmecophiles': behavioral symbionts of ant colonies. Evolution of this
way of life involves radical changes in behavior and chemical communication,
allowing rove beetles to hijack ant chemical cues and assimilate into the social
fabric of the nest. This proposal will break open the molecular architecture of
animal symbiosis by pioneering the myrmecophile rove beetle Sceptobius as a
model. This goal will be achieved by: 1) Uncovering adaptive chemosensory and
neuroanatomical changes enabling Sceptobius to recognize and socially interact
with its host ant; 2) Revealing cellular and molecular mechanisms permitting
Sceptobius to chemically mimic and behaviorally manipulate ants; and 3)
Leveraging population genomic variation in this ant-myrmecophile system to
illuminate coevolutionary dynamics of symbiotic animals and their hosts.
Development of a behaviorally symbiotic model insect will impact understanding
of species interactions across the spectrum of biological complexity. This
proposal has ramifications for the fields of neuroscience, behavior and chemical
ecology, and will enhance our knowledge of genomic, cellular and developmental
evolutionary processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.