* 2047176
* CAREER: OneSense: One-Rule-for-All Combinatorial Boolean Synthesis via Reinforcement Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* CUNXI YU, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2026
* USD 246,615.00

Combinatorial optimization problems over graphs arising from numerous
application domains, such as planning, scheduling, and electronic design
automation (EDA), are NP-hard, and have recently attracted considerable interest
from the theory, algorithm design, and machine learning communities. For
example, many of the EDA problems such as Boolean optimization are combinatorial
optimization problems, which are unlikely to be solved by polynomial-time
algorithms. In practice, those problems can be solved using scalable
optimization algorithms with approximations and domain-specific heuristics,
which are mostly developed by extensive hand-engineering efforts with strong
domain knowledge. However, recent progress in developing such algorithms and
associated heuristics is slowing down significantly due to the high barrier of
technical knowledge, time-consuming hand-engineering, and several misleading
designing strategies. This project aims to employ reinforcement learning and
neural networks to enable self-learning high-performance algorithms and
heuristics over graphs, which can outperform existing hand-crafted approaches
without human supervision and domain knowledge. This will can be generalized to
autonomously learn and discover novel graph-based combinatorial optimization
heuristics at a wide range of application domains without any human guidance.
This project will produce open-source software and conference tutorials to
facilitate technology transfers and fruitful industry-academia interactions in a
multidisciplinary community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops the
OneSense system, a graph learning driven reinforcement learning framework for
exploring self-learning novel algorithms and heuristics over graphs, with
special focuses on graph-based large-scale Boolean optimization problems. The
core of the project includes novel reinforcement learning formulations and
neural architecture with domain-specific online graph sampling techniques to
enable self-learning high-performance graph optimization heuristics. The
reinforcement agent with the various reward formulations and novel training
methodologies and algorithms will enable effectively learning novel
combinatorial optimization heuristics with a wide range of performance
customization. OneSense system will be integrated with an open-source end-to-end
EDA design space exploration system, which will allow productive exploration and
deployment of self-learned optimization heuristics over graphs in Boolean
optimization. Moreover, the OneSense reinforcement learning framework will be
released to allow exploring self-learned graph optimization algorithms in other
research domains and be used as an educational
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.