* 2047019
* CAREER: Room Temperature Electrochemical Synthesis of Ordered Intermetallic Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Anthony Shoji Hall, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2026
* USD 333,752.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Ordered intermetallic compounds (OICs) are
metallic alloys with a periodic atomic arrangement of two (or more) metal
elements. These OICs play an important role in technologies such as catalysis,
batteries, and shape-memory alloys. Their application space is limited, however,
because these materials can only be prepared at high temperatures, often eroding
control over important material parameters. Making the low-temperature synthesis
of OICs possible requires a precise understanding of how atoms move within solid
materials. This Faculty Early Career Award (CAREER) will support research in the
laboratory of Dr. Anthony Shoji Hall at the Johns Hopkins University to examine
pathways that allow for the control of atom movement at low temperatures and
thereby enable the preparation of ordered intermetallic nanomaterials at room
temperature and atmospheric pressure. By enabling the synthesis of these
materials at low temperatures, this work will substantially broaden the
application space of OICs because it now allows for more fine control over
important materials parameters. Dr. Hall’s laboratory will actively share their
scientific passion and discoveries with the broader community by engaging in
outreach at inner-city Baltimore high schools and universities. The first
activity will leverage an established program, STEM achievement in Baltimore
elementary schools (SABES), to encourage elementary students to pursue a degree
in STEM. This project will also create a new program to encourage URM high
school students to pursue degrees in STEM and to improve the retainment of URM
(under)graduate students in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Despite decades of intense research, OIC nanoparticles have
failed to replace conventional nanomaterials due to (1) lack of low-temperature
synthetic methods that can overcome slow solid-state diffusion rates which
inhibits atomic ordering, (2) inability to tune composition and phase to
optimize the desired application, and (3) lack of fundamental understanding
needed for progress on these issues. The purpose of this CAREER proposal is to
examine the phase transformations of low melting point alloys to higher melting
point OICs richer in the nobler and more active metal at ambient temperature and
pressure by removal of the less noble component (e.g., transforming PdBi2 to
Pd3Bi, or CuZn4 to Cu5Zn8) via a process known as dealloying. Fundamental
insights from this project will enable the rational development of OIC
nanostructures for applications of technological relevance and improve our
understanding of material stability under electrocatalytic conditions. To
understand the origin of the electrochemical dealloying-mediated phase
conversion process, the PI will investigate the following objectives: (1)
Elucidate the role of melting temperature on bulk diffusion and lattice
reorganization. (2) Develop synthesis methods for controlled compositions of de-
alloyed OICs. (3) Elucidate dealloying via in-situ spectroscopic methods.
Materials made by this electrochemically mediated phase conversion process will
be evaluated as anodes for Li-metal batteries to demonstrate the utility of the
synthetic method. The broader impacts of this proposal will encourage
underrepresented minority (URM) K-12 students and (under)graduate students to
pursue careers in STEM through engagement in outreach programs. URM students
lack access to relatable role models in STEM fields because of
underrepresentation. To address this issue, Dr. Hall will make himself available
for informal “coffee hour discussions” to serve as a mentor and role model for
URM students (high school-aged, undergraduate, and graduate students) in the
Baltimore area. The Hall group will also work with K-12 aged URM students on
inquiry-based scientific projects by participating in the STEM Achievement in
Baltimore Elementary Schools (SABES) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.