* 2047529
* CAREER: Neural Dynamics of Sleep-Mediated Learning in Brain Computer Interface (BCI) Applications
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Sujith Vijayan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 452,412.00

Brain Computer Interfaces (BCIs) allow an individual’s brain activity to control
an external device or application (e.g., a prosthetic arm, wheelchair, or cursor
on a computer screen), but learning to use BCIs proficiently often takes
significant time and effort, which can be frustrating to the user. A better
understanding of the role of sleep in BCI learning may allow for interventions
that speed up learning in BCI applications. Sleep is known to boost learning and
memory consolidation for a variety of tasks and sleep can be manipulated to
enhance and speed up learning (e.g., by playing task-related auditory cues
during sleep). However, the importance of sleep for BCI learning remains
unknown. This research will examine whether sleep plays a role in learning BCI
tasks and whether sleep can be manipulated using covert auditory sounds to speed
up BCI learning. This work will provide the basic science knowledge needed for a
safe, non-invasive, sleep-based intervention that will allow individuals to
master the use of an assistive BCI device more quickly by engaging learning
pathways that are active during sleep. An enhanced understanding of the
fundamental relationship between sleep and learning will also lead to better
treatment for diseases in which cognitive and memory deficits are tied to
abnormal sleep (e.g., schizophrenia). This project also offers research
opportunities that will enhance undergraduate and K-12 education through
curriculum development and outreach initiatives that incorporate aspects of
sleep and learning, BCIs, and brain activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will employ computational and experimental methods to investigate the role of
sleep in BCI learning. Subjects will move a cursor by modulating their brain
activity before and after sleep. Simultaneously, neural data will be collected:
either EEG data from healthy subjects (to probe large-scale neural dynamics) or
human intracranial depth electrode data from patients undergoing invasive
monitoring (to probe circuit-level and single neuron dynamics). In additional
studies using the same basic design, task-related or carefully chosen non-task-
related auditory cues will be played covertly during sleep. These studies will
identify the neural dynamics crucial to sleep-mediated learning of BCI
applications and the ways in which to optimally engage these processes and
manipulate sleep to speed up learning. The generalization of the adaptive
stimulation paradigm developed for this work could be applied in broad contexts
in which stimuli are presented to manipulate, probe, and characterize brain
dynamics; to facilitate such investigations, the software will be made freely
available. The proposed work will lay the foundation for a large-scale and
potentially transformative research program to investigate sleep and learning,
as the experimenter’s ability to choose and perturb the mappings that control
BCI tasks may facilitate the identification of the neural features critical for
sleep-mediated learning and potentially reveal novel mechanisms related to
sleep-mediated learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.