* 2047291
* CAREER: Molecular Layer Deposition of Porous Organic Frameworks
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Siamak Nejati, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2026
* USD 478,379.00

The technological advances made to control the synthesis and growth of materials
have been the cornerstone of many scientific discoveries. To that end, the goal
of this project is to realize a new green pathway enabling the high-precision
deposition of ultra-thin nanoporous films. A molecular layer deposition (MLD)
approach is proposed to construct films that feature a wide and tunable range of
porosity in a single-step solvent-free coating process. This project represents
a major step towards realizing the vapor-phase synthesis of porous organic
frameworks (POFs) and will pave the way to integrating these films into energy
efficient and highly selective filters for water purification, gas and liquid
separation systems, and implantable bioartificial organs and drug delivery
systems. The proposed work will create a novel manufacturing process, as it
enables the synthesis of POFs that have not yet been processed as thin films.
Additionally, the proposed research pathway allows for studying the physical and
chemical properties of these frameworks, essential for developing fabrication
processes with low environmental impact and energy footprint. The principal
investigator (PI) of this study will leverage their unique materials processing
platform and separation science expertise to integrate organic frameworks as
active layers in high-efficiency molecular separation technologies. A priority
of this project is to translate research findings into educational and outreach
activities, engaging underrepresented K-to-graduate level students in STEM by
exploring advanced concepts in molecular engineering. Summer programs for
undergraduate and high school students will expose students to the fundamentals
of reaction engineering, inspiring them to pursue research-oriented careers and
become lifelong learners - a critical need highlighted in the National Science
Foundation's 10 Big Ideas. All the educational components developed in this
project will be maintained on an online portal to help increase public literacy
pertaining to molecular and macromolecular engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to tackle the challenges
associated with the bottom-up synthesis of porous organic frameworks (POFs) by
dry polymerization of polyfunctional monomers that have limited solubilities or
in cases where their polymers are solvent intractable. By investigating the
vapor phase processing parameters for a solvent-free polymerization pathway, a
new platform for the in-situ synthesis of covalent porous frameworks will be
developed. To realize dry polymerization of organic frameworks, two different
polycondensation schemes (oxidative and imine-based) will be studied within a
molecular layer deposition (MLD) process. Because no known dry routes to
deposition of thin-film POFs have been reported, the current project will create
new knowledge pertaining to processing these materials with molecular precision.
By navigating the space of parameters governing polymerization reaction network
rates, chemical composition and porosity of the growing films can be controlled
to tune film permeability and selectivity based on the target separation
application. To achieve this objective, the parameters that control the
oxidative polycondensation reactions will be identified using Scholl's scheme,
then the role monomer chemistries play in MLD processing will be evaluated, and
lastly the in-situ synthesis and integration of these porous frameworks for
nanofiltration applications will take place. A similar approach will be taken
for second set of imine polycondensation reactions. Congruent with the proposed
research plan, significant effort will be placed on integrating research and
teaching activities to foster a reciprocal relationship between the two.
Outreach and educational activities will strive to enhance the participation of
students from minority and underrepresented groups in academia in research
topics relevant to materials processing, surface science, and molecular
engineering. A summer program, informed by research, will be developed to
improve public science literacy and to attract students to research in molecular
engineering. A new interdisciplinary course centered on thin-film processing for
semiconductor manufacturing is planned. The resulting educational content of
this course, the outreach activities, and summer programs will be available to
the public via the University of Nebraska-Lincoln public digital library,
Digital Commons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.