* 2047165
* CAREER: Sustainable Nitrogen Management across Spatial and System Scales
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Xin Zhang, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2026
* USD 478,960.00

Managing nitrogen (N) is fundamental, yet challenging, for sustainable
development. Nitrogen plays a critical role in boosting agriculture productivity
but it has adverse impacts on the environment. Technologies and management
practices have become increasingly available and affordable to improve the
efficiency of N use in crop and livestock production, but limited improvement
has been observed in environmental outcomes. For example, Nitrogen Use
Efficiency (NUE) in crop production has significantly increased and N fertilizer
use has leveled off in the U.S., but the dead zones in the Gulf of Mexico are
still expanding, mostly driven by N and phosphorus (P) loaded from agriculture
production. The improvement of N management in a crop or a livestock farm does
not necessarily translate to N pollution reduction on a regional to global scale
due to the complex responses of natural and human systems and lack of
coordination among stakeholders and across spatial scales. This project will
develop an N management framework that encompasses the complex N dynamics across
systems and spatial scales, yet is simple enough to guide policies and actions
of various stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes the
following activities: (1) Design a hierarchical framework across systems
including Cropping system nested within Animal- crop system, which is nested
within the Food system, and finally nested within Ecosystem (CAFE); (2) Develop
N budget databases according to the CAFE system framework on various spatial
scales for the past three decades, including county-, watershed-, national, and
global scales, and identify major gaps in N management at each scale; (3)
Develop a case study for the Chesapeake Bay watershed to implement the CAFE
system framework, and characterize spatial and temporal variations of N budgets
and their drivers: (4) Facilitate the co-development of models, indicators, and
communication products by students and stakeholders in order to effectively
inform decision-making on N management. This project will advance the knowledge
in N cycles by establishing a theoretical framework for integrated N management
across spatial and system scales, and applying it to unpack N challenges on
multiple spatial scales. This approach, leveraging the most recent advances in N
cycle studies in both ecological and social science disciplines, will track
changes in N management performance over time and space, identify management and
engineering gaps that have been often neglected, help enable innovative
technological and policy solutions, and assist and coordinate decision- making
by stakeholders. A course will be developed to provide students unique
opportunities to work with stakeholders on co-developing communication products
targeted for wide distribution and use. Models and indicators developed from
this project will are planned for implementation through collaborations with
Chesapeake Bay Program, Environmental Defense Fund, and several international
organizations, seeking direct impact on policies and informing consumers and
producers. The data, indicators, models, and course materials produced by this
project will be made publicly available online for use by other scientists,
educators, farm advisors and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.