* 2047365
* CAREER: Design Rules for Electrical Transport in Suspensions of Conductive Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Jeffrey Richards, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2026
* USD 518,109.00

Soft materials consist of microscopic buildings blocks whose nanoscale
interactions can be engineered to yield radically different material behaviors.
Suspensions are one class of soft material that contain solid particles
dispersed in a fluid. The development of new electrochemical energy storage
technologies has generated renewed interest in understanding the properties of
suspensions containing electrically conductive nano- and micro- particles,
especially for applications requiring suspensions that exhibit low viscosity and
high electrical conductivity. While the rheology of dense suspensions has a firm
theoretical and experimental basis, the electrical properties are less well
understood. This knowledge gap presents a unique challenge and opportunity to
design suspensions with optimal properties. This project will address this
challenge by combining new synthesis techniques with advanced structural and
electrical characterization methods to bridge the current gap in understanding
electron transport in fluid suspensions of conducting particles. This project
will also prepare the future workforce with foundational knowledge in the
properties of soft materials and their potential application to emerging and
contemporary societal challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by recent rheo-
electric measurements of suspensions of carbon black in polar and non-polar
solvents, this project will test the hypothesis that particle dynamics play a
significant and underappreciated role in mediating electron transport in fluid
suspensions of conducting particles. The objective will be to test this
hypothesis with three novel approaches. New synthetic approaches will control
the size, shape, and interactions between conductive nano- and micro-particles,
while new rheo-electric characterization techniques will allow for direct
quantification of electrical transport characteristics. These new synthetic and
characterization approaches will be augmented by microstructural measurements
using small angle scattering techniques. The combination of these three
approaches will result in the development of design rules that can be used to
engineer the electrical properties of suspensions for electrochemical energy
storage technologies and other useful purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.