* 2047232
* CAREER: Harnessing Interpersonal Common Sense for Social Grounding in Natural Language Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Snigdha Chaturvedi, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2026
* USD 549,700.00

When interacting with other individuals, human behavior significantly depends on
the relationship between the interactants. For example, when speaking to someone
with a higher social status, people often exhibit language coordination by
mimicking the linguistic style of the other speaker. Even children as young as
12 to 18-months old can adjust their behavior depending on who they are with. In
other words, humans possess and employ interpersonal common sense: common-sense
knowledge of the behavior acceptable in different interpersonal relationships,
and use it in their day-to-day interactions. In contrast, computers lack this
interpersonal common-sense knowledge. In order for computers to model the social
behavior exhibited by humans and operate in a human-like manner, they need
interpersonal common sense. This need to equip computers with this capacity has
become even more important in recent times with technology, such as artificial
conversational agents and robots, becoming increasingly pervasive in our day-to-
day lives. The goal of this CAREER project is to instill interpersonal common-
sense knowledge and reasoning capabilities in computers. To achieve this goal
the project develops resources that store interpersonal common-sense knowledge
together with techniques to leverage them for designing computer systems that
are more aware of social dynamics prevalent in the human world. The project
involves interdisciplinary efforts by researchers and students from within and
outside of Computer Science. It includes developing interdisciplinary courses
and seminars for graduate and undergraduate students in Computer Science,
Linguistics, and Psychology. It also involves organizing workshops, demos and
talks for attracting historically underrepresented minorities like women to
computer science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops technologies that
will help Natural Language Processing (NLP) systems to acquire and incorporate
interpersonal common sense in their functioning. The project’s efforts are
divided into three thrusts. The first develops a knowledge base of human-
annotated instances of interpersonal common-sense knowledge. Given a text
excerpt containing interaction between two entities, the knowledge base will
contain annotations about various facets of interpersonal inferences about the
two entities. The second develops methods for continually and automatically
expanding the knowledge base and generalizing to unseen situations. These
methods are based on multi-task learning in order to automatically and jointly
infer the various facets of interpersonal common sense, including those about
unseen scenarios. The inferences, in turn, are also used to improve the methods
in a semi-supervised framework. The third utilizes this interpersonal common-
sense knowledge to improve NLP systems like those for dialog generation,
summarization and information extraction for digital humanities. These NLP
systems learn about interpersonal common sense from the knowledge base and
utilize it while focusing on the entities mentioned in the text in order to
improve the downstream task. Each thrust is accompanied by extensive and
continual evaluations of the developed techniques. The research will result in
publicly available resources, data and technologies for others in the field to
use and train their systems on. Overall, this project pushes research in the
direction of designing more socially cognizant and human-like NLP
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.