* 2047620
* CAREER: Quantum Computing with Circular Rydberg Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Jeff Thompson, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Coherent, programmable quantum systems have enabled fundamental advances in our
understanding of quantum dynamics and quantum technologies including quantum
computing, sensing and networks. Arrays of individually trapped, laser-cooled
atoms are a leading experimental implementation of programmable quantum systems
in the lab. In this project, the PI aims to advance the state of the art in this
field by studying new types of atomic states, called circular Rydberg states,
which are believed to perform better because of their extremely long lifetimes.
However, techniques to efficiently create, manipulate and measure these states
are largely unexplored. The PI will carry out fundamental investigations of
these states and their properties, as well as their application to both
fundamental science and technology. Additionally, this research will provide
valuable scientific training for undergraduate and graduate students in physics
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rydberg atom arrays are a leading platform
for quantum computing and simulation, combining strong, long-range interactions
with highly coherent operations and flexible geometries. Despite recent
improvements, achievable fidelities are limited by technical imperfections and
the finite lifetime of the Rydberg states. In this work, the PI proposes a novel
approach to Rydberg atom arrays based on long-lived circular Rydberg states in
optical traps. The low efficiency of exciting circular states is overcome using
a quantum nondemolition measurement-based rearrangement scheme, and local
manipulation of circular states is performed using the ponderomotive potential
of focused Laguerre-Gauss beams. Based on the extremely long lifetime of these
states (exceeding seconds in cryogenic microwave cavities) and robust control
techniques, the PI projects that arrays of up to one thousand circular Rydberg
atoms with two-qubit gate errors in the part-per-million range can be realized
using current technology. This is a significant improvement on the current
state-of-the-art in any quantum computing or simulation
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.