* 2047298
* CAREER: Neural circuit mechanisms of spatial target selection in the mammalian midbrain
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Shreesh Mysore, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 06/30/2026
* USD 800,000.00

When faced with multiple competing stimuli in the natural world, animals display
a remarkable ability to process selectively the most salient target location to
guide behavior. Such stimulus selection is central to behavioral and cognitive
functions such as spatial attention and decision-making, as well as their
impairments in psychiatric conditions. However, how the brain achieves spatial
target selection remains poorly understood. This proposal combines cutting-edge
technologies and analytical methods to discover neural mechanisms underlying
spatial target selection in mammals. Specifically, it focuses on the mouse
midbrain and unravels the biological implementation of key aspects of ‘winner-
take-all’ selection. In parallel with this research effort that links
experimental neuroscience with mathematical descriptions, the educational,
training and outreach goals, here, also couple neuroscience and mathematics
training. This proposal supports the expansion and improvement of a recently
created course for graduate students and undergraduate seniors called
‘Quantitative Methods for Brain Sciences’, trains high school students to
perform ‘physical’ simulations of our neural circuit models in robot vehicles,
engages in STEM outreach with local elementary schools, and creates an annual
‘Neurons in robots’ showcase for the public. In sum, the proposed efforts will
advance understanding of how the brain implements selection in its neural
hardware, and create a foundation for addressing the dysfunction of stimulus
selection found in psychiatric disorders. Additionally, deconstruction of the
biological implementation of the winner-take-all operation will inform the
design of efficient artificial intelligence systems for target selection in
cluttered environments (during navigation, scene analysis, etc.).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research employs a combination of
electrophysiological, optogenetic, and calcium imaging methods in mice to
dissect the mechanistic logic of spatial target selection. The research
hypotheses tested here are motivated by insights from recent work in barn owls.
Specifically, they focus on the evolutionarily conserved midbrain sensorimotor
hub, the superior colliculus (SC), and a group of satellite inhibitory neurons,
called the periparabigeminal lateral tegmental nucleus (pLTN). Aim 1 will
investigate the neural correlates of spatial target selection in the
intermediate and deep layers of SC (SCid) using electrophysiology. The
hypothesis is that SCid signals the most salient stimulus categorically (i.e.,
in a winner-take-all manner). Aim 2 uses optogenetic manipulations to
investigate inhibitory mechanisms underlying this SCid selection signal. The
hypothesis is that a donut-like pattern of inhibition from pLTN controls spatial
target selection in SC. Aim 3 uses endoscopic calcium imaging to investigate the
mechanisms that allow selection in SCid to operate at all pairs of stimulus
locations. The hypothesis is that a combinatorial inhibitory strategy enacted by
sparse pLTN neurons that tile space in an unusual manner achieves such
selection. Uncovering neural mechanisms of spatial target selection in mice will
not only address long-standing open questions pertinent to spatial attention,
decision-making, and perceptual categorization, but also illuminate whether
neural circuit principles underlying selection may be conserved across
vertebrate species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.