* 2047296
* CAREER: Mobile Sensor-Based Adaptive Emotion Prediction and Feedback Delivery
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Akane Sano, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 03/31/2026
* USD 566,000.00

Recent advances in wearable, mobile technologies and the Internet of Things
enable us to collect moment-to-moment physiological, behavioral, social, and
environmental data on mobility pattens, sleep, central and peripheral nervous
system activity, and social interactions, all without disrupting daily routines.
Such data show a potential for revolutionizing how we diagnose, ameliorate, and
prevent health disorders. This project designs, implements, and evaluates
personalized, adaptive algorithms to detect and predict emotional states using
multimodal sensor data, and to provide feedback to users to improve management
of mental state. The emotion detection and feedback algorithms adapt to changing
human physiology, behavior, context, and preferences. This research will result
in emotion assistive technologies that enhance human performance, health, and
wellbeing, thus improving quality of life. The project will provide a platform
for integrating mobile sensor data and providing feedback to subjects valuable
to a broad range of populations for personalized medicine. The project will
yield insights into ethical issues in the development, evaluation, and use of
human data and artificial intelligence technology. The research activities will
train graduate students, be integrated into classroom curricula in data science,
and provide research opportunitites and summer internships for undergraduate and
high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop dynamic
emotion modeling and feedback systems to harness multimodal human data for
automatic human emotion recognition and prediction. The system will provide safe
and personalized feedback delivery to help manage emotional states. This goal
will be achieved by addressing three fundamental research challenges: (1) multi-
modal, multi-timescale physiological and behavioral pattern interpretation and
analysis; (2) adaptive emotion label sampling for effective emotion detection
and prediction; and (3) safe and sustainable automatic personalized feedback
delivery. The resulting emotion detection and feedback systems will be
integrated to help users in poor health manage emotion. The performance,
usability, safety, and effectiveness of the technologies will be evaluated via
human subject studies.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.