* 2047553
* CAREER: Mapping Protein Interactions that Link DNA Replication and Nucleosome Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Lynne Dieckman, Creighton University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 01/31/2026
* USD 457,573.00

Genes are compacted and organized in the nucleus of a cell in a precise manner
to keep inactive genes “off” and active genes “on.” Aberrant changes in these
on/off states result in genomic instability and ultimately affect gene
expression in offspring. Maintenance of gene expression relies on several
proteins that function together to condense DNA immediately after it is
synthesized. This research aims to understand the function and three-dimensional
structure of these proteins and how their functions are coordinated to maintain
inactive regions of the genome. Another major goal of this project is to create
a comprehensive learning environment for young scientists. College students will
be heavily involved in performing all experimentation throughout the calendar
year and students from local high schools will also have opportunities to
participate in research projects every summer. Students will attend weekly
scientific development workshops on campus and present their research results to
other scientists and the public. The activities proposed are intended to inspire
these young students’ interest in science and prepare them for successful future
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eukaryotic genome is organized into
nucleosomes immediately following DNA replication in a process called
replication-coupled nucleosome assembly, which is mediated by two key proteins:
chromatin assembly factor 1 (CAF-1) and proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA). The project will employ kinetic, thermodynamic, and structural
approaches to understand how PCNA regulates CAF-1 activity. Techniques such as
isothermal titration calorimetry and surface plasmon resonance will be used to
quantitate interactions between these proteins, and a combination of methods
such as X-ray crystallography and small-angle X-ray scattering will be used to
determine the structures of complexes formed. The completion of these studies
will lead to a greater understanding of the link between DNA replication and
nucleosome assembly and how disruptions in this regulation lead to aberrant gene
expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms program of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the
Biological Sciences Directorate and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.