* 2047105
* CAREER: Improving Interracial Contact in STEM: Examining the Effect of Repeated Interracial Contact in VR On Racial Anxiety and Attitudes, Social Networks, and Performance
* EDU,EES
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Valerie Taylor, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 01/31/2026
* USD 948,877.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty who
exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent
education, and the integration of education and research within the context of
the mission of their organizations. This CAREER award supports experimental and
longitudinal studies that aim to increase diversity and inclusion in higher
education STEM culture. The project will use virtual reality to explore
interracial interactions and race-related cognitions and emotions. Study
findings will inform theory and interventions on inclusion in STEM using virtual
reality. This project integrates research and education by involving
undergraduate and graduate students in the development of virtual reality
simulations and research, as well as high school girls through partnership with
the Black Girls Code organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Employing quantitative
and qualitative methods, this project includes virtual reality simulations, in-
person experiments and focus groups to examine the repeated virtual reality
interracial contact hypothesis in STEM. Phase I of the project examines the
extent to which virtual reality interracial interaction processes in STEM
contexts mirror in-person interracial interaction processes. Applying insights
from research on deliberative practice and exposure therapy in virtual reality,
Phase II of the project will provide STEM students multiple opportunities to
interact with virtual reality simulations in common STEM settings, such as
laboratories, organization meetings, and study groups. Phase III will examine
the long-term impacts of virtual reality interracial interactions on the
academic performance of students from underrepresented groups. This research
will strengthen and diversify STEM pathways by fostering more inclusive and
welcoming environments for students from groups historically marginalized in
STEM and training diverse students in programming and research. This award is
supported by the EHR Core Research program which supports fundamental STEM
education research initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.