* 2047018
* CAREER: Engineering laminin globular domains for accelerated cardiomyocyte proliferation: validation with a 3D bioprinted in vitro infarct model
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Jangwook Jung, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 02/28/2026
* USD 264,148.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Finding optimal candidate
and composition of engineered biomaterials is a challenging task with
significant experimental cost and effort. To design effective, de novo
biomaterials for cardiac repair, this CAREER award supported by the Biomaterials
program aims to investigate a new biomaterials design strategy with data-driven
approaches. The first objective is to create a large number of functionally
relevant proteins with a computer algorithm, which are subject to systematic
screening and selection. The second objective is to assess the selected pool of
candidate proteins in a 3D model tissue including healthy and infarct
conditions, where the model tissue is 3D bio-printed with another computer
algorithm to minimize experimental trials and effort. With data-driven
approaches, the PI seeks to attain 1) optimal, newly designed sequences of
therapeutic proteins to accelerate the proliferation of cardiomyocytes and 2)
optimal combinations of biomaterials and 3D bio-printing parameters to fabricate
the model tissue with minimal experimental cost. In contrast to conventional
approaches, the proposed data-driven approaches are adaptive to altered
experimental conditions to reach the optimal target of biomaterial properties
with enhanced experimental efficiency. The outcome of this CAREER award can
potentially provide a novel platform of engineering therapeutic proteins and
fabricating a model tissue with optimal cost and effort. Outreach activities and
educational curricula are proposed to engage a range of students from middle
school to undergraduate students to promote the exposure of biomaterials
research to those students in highly agricultural and petrochemical engineering-
oriented industrial settings. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award aims to engineer an
extracellular matrix (ECM) protein to accelerate the proliferation of
cardiomyocytes. Once over 4 million functionally relevant chimeras are created
by a computer algorithm, screening and selection of those chimeras are
experimentally expensive. Thus, the new approach proposed in the CAREER award is
to utilize publicly available data to build machine learning models to screen
and select those chimeras, which will be built upon a Gaussian Process to derive
a posterior from a prior and observations. To avoid the overfitting problem of
machine learning with the relatively smaller number of publicly available data,
an additional machine learning model will be built with 1) protein folding
metrics and 2) intracellular protein-based assay. To assess the performance of
designer ECM proteins, an in vitro model of infarct (border zone) will be
fabricated with 3D bio-printing. To recapitulate complex features of the border
zone with minimal numbers of trials of 3D bio-printing, Bayesian Optimization
will be applied to balance the exploration of the overall search space and the
exploitation of the local search space to effectively achieve the optimal 3D
bio-printing and biomaterial parameters. To unambiguously identify the
proliferation of cardiomyocytes in the model border zone, genetically labeled
adult cardiomyocytes will be 3D bio-printed in the model border zone to assess
the increase of cardiomyocyte proliferation. This CAREER award also seeks to
support STEM education in the areas of biomaterials research. The outreach
program targets specifically local secondary school and undergraduate students
to attract them into future workforce in biomaterials areas with priorities to
female and underrepresented groups in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Biomaterials Program, Division of Materials
Research, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.