* 2047908
* CAREER: Powder Preparation and Compaction for Ceramic Binder Jet Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Chao Ma, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports fundamental
research that will generate knowledge related to ceramic binder jet additive
manufacturing, promoting the progress of science and resulting in beneficial
societal impacts. Advanced ceramic materials play a vital role in numerous
applications with strict requirements or under harsh conditions, such as those
in the biomedical, aerospace, chemical, and energy industries. Traditional
manufacturing methods for ceramic parts have severe geometric constraints, long
production time, and high cost. Binder jet additive manufacturing can overcome
these drawbacks. However, it is currently unable to produce dense ceramic parts,
significantly limiting its applications. This research aims to increase
understanding of how powder granule characteristics (density, structure, and
strength) and powder compaction affect resulting part density. In addition, this
CAREER plan includes a series of education activities to strengthen and
diversify the advanced manufacturing workforce, impacting K-12 teachers and
students, undergraduate and graduate students, and professionals in the
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to enable a new
density improvement approach for ceramic binder jet additive manufacturing,
using a tailored feedstock powder and an emerging powder bed formation method.
The feedstock powder consists of granules composed of numerous nanoparticles
that are weakly bonded together. In the powder bed formation method, compaction
is performed after spreading each layer of powder. It is hypothesized that the
required compaction pressure to achieve dense ceramic parts is affected by
granule characteristics in the following manners: (1) granules with a low
density require a lower pressure to fracture or plastically deform (a positive
effect), but have a lower initial packing density (a negative effect); (2)
granules with a porous structure can be more easily fractured or plastically
deformed, but have more initial intragranular pores; (3) granules with a low
strength can also be more easily fractured or deformed, but have a reduced
initial granule rearrangement. Experimental research will be conducted to
identify the tradeoffs associated with each granule characteristic and to
determine the conditions under which its positive or negative effect is
dominant. Afterward, numerical simulation at the granule and nanoparticle scales
will be performed to explain the experimental results and to provide physical
insights on underlying compaction mechanisms. This research will generate new
knowledge about compaction of multiple thin layers of granules that is critical
to binder jet additive manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.