* 2047907
* CAREER: Optimal Mechanism Design without Monetary Transfers
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Vasilis Gkatzelis, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 01/31/2026
* USD 340,725.00

One of the goals that lie at the core of computer science, as well as operations
research and economics, is the effective utilization of scarce resources. For
example, operating systems are designed to effectively utilize a computer's
memory and processing units, and network protocols are designed to effectively
utilize a networks' bandwidth. More broadly, a large fraction of the long
literature on algorithm design and optimization is motivated by resource-
allocation problems that arise in a wide variety of domains, ranging from
project management and business administration to government policy and market
design. Achieving effective resource-allocation outcomes is particularly
challenging in multiagent systems, where a set of self-interested agents compete
for shared resources. For example, in large computer networks there are multiple
users that compete for the network's shared computational resources, such as its
bandwidth, or access to its servers. Each agent's goal is to maximize its own
utility, and the goal of the designer is to achieve system-level efficiency
despite the agents' competing preferences. Without carefully designed resource-
allocation mechanisms, the available resources would be underutilized, and
massive amounts of social utility would be wasted; thus, it is imperative that
these mechanisms are designed to the highest standard. The focus of this project
is on the design of multiagent resource-allocation mechanisms that take into
consideration the preferences of the participating agents and seek to maximize
fairness and efficiency in the resulting outcomes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To
address the competing incentives of the participating agents, the field of
mechanism design in economics has provided very useful tools. By far the most
effective among them is the use of monetary payments: charging for the use of
the resources can ensure that only the agents who need them the most would be
interested in paying the price. However, the use of monetary payments is often
undesired or even infeasible, e.g., due ethical, legal, or practical
considerations, so the mechanism needs to eschew monetary transfers. However,
the vast majority of the literature on mechanism design has focused on the use
of monetary payments, so money-free mechanisms are not well-understood. This
project considers canonical domains of mechanism design without money from the
perspective of the designer, with the goal of developing a coherent theory
regarding what can and cannot be achieved in the absence of money. As a
substitute for monetary payments, money-free mechanisms can instead penalize the
agents by intentionally keeping some of the resources unallocated (a tool known
as "money-burning"). This way, the improved incentives come at a cost in social
utility, introducing novel trade-offs for the designer who needs to strike a
balance between incentives and effectiveness. The main questions that this
project focuses on are: 1) What incentives can the mechanism provide to the
participants in the absence of money, and what cost in social utility do these
improved incentives require? 2) From an algorithmic perspective what are the
best worst-case approximation guarantees that can be achieved given the
computational and informational constraints that these mechanisms may
face?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.