* 2047793
* CAREER: Robust Traffic Management for Connected Vehicle Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Xiaozheng He, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 04/30/2026
* USD 654,875.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will contribute to the
nation's economy and quality of life by enhancing the robustness of connected
vehicle systems (CVS) to ensure that traffic management works as expected in a
wide range of conditions, both foreseen and unforeseen. Connected vehicle
technologies provide unique opportunities for cooperative travel to improve
mobility and safety through innovative traffic management procedures. However,
these procedures introduce coupling effects between information and traffic that
could reduce traffic flow stability. These coupling effects are the result of
the feedback loops between information and traffic that are highly dynamic and
prone to disturbances transmitted from one system to the other. It is both
important and challenging to ensure traffic flows are robust in response to
these effects. This CAREER award supports research that will lead to new
paradigms for the design and operation of robust traffic management to foster
mobility, safety, and sustainability. The findings will directly benefit society
in terms of more effective use of both cyber and physical infrastructures,
leading to more sustainable and efficient transportation planning and operations
that fully consider dynamic supply-demand interactions. The award also supports
educational efforts contributing to transportation workforce by training the
professionals with the dynamic systems perspective in traffic engineering. The
project will disseminate research and educational outcomes to a wide audience,
including K-12 students, professionals, and the public using Virtual Reality-
based and simulation platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this
CAREER project is to develop a theoretical framework with solid scientific
foundations to model the information-traffic co-evolutionary process to address
the challenges created by CVS. The framework is built on a stochastic, coupled
dynamical system that can model connected vehicle traffic dynamics at the local
and network scales. The primary tool used in this project is the notion of non-
equilibrium flow robustness, which will advance the instability analysis and
attraction domain analysis of the coupled dynamical system. As the foundation,
the non-equilibrium flow analyses help the algorithmic development related to
detecting non-equilibrium flow transition, quantification and prediction of CVS
robustness, and design of adaptive control principles by leveraging the complex
network theory, stochastic optimal control, and variational principle. Research
findings will be disseminated through a wide range of channels and integrated
into advanced curricula to help cultivate the next generation of engineers and
scientists to meet the challenges of the Internet-of-Things
era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.