* 2047207
* CAREER: Elucidating the Role of Collective Cell-Matrix Interactions in the Mechanobiology of Airway Narrowing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Harikrishnan Parameswaran, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 602,650.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award aims to reveal how physical
forces enable the airway smooth muscle and the surrounding tissue to work
together to detect inhaled irritants and regulate the constriction of airways.
Everyday life exposes us to many inhaled irritants. These can cause our airways
to constrict, making it difficult for us to breathe. Although it is known that
airways constrict due to the force generated by the airway smooth muscle, how
the muscle detects the inhaled irritant and generates a proportionate force is
not well understood. The basic scientific knowledge gained in this work can lead
to new therapies. For example, therapies that target the airway's extracellular
components may offer lasting relief for the millions of people worldwide who
struggle with breathing difficulties. In parallel with the laboratory research,
this award will engage students and pique their curiosity about the world around
them. Specifically, high school students from underrepresented minority groups
will have opportunities to perform laboratory research, receive mentoring
support, and coaching for college admission. Online educational modules will
make innovations in teaching science and engineering accessible for K-12
educators in remote, rural areas. Together, this work will inspire a new
generation of bioengineers who are driven to understand the fundamental
mechanisms that maintain human health and create a better world through science
and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the mechanisms
that underlie a newly discovered phenomenon in the smooth muscle where cells can
work together to sense contractile stimuli as a collective. In collective
agonist sensing, smooth muscle cells communicate with each other, using their
force to modulate the frequency of intercellular calcium waves. By communicating
with each other, the ensemble can completely change how each cell perceives
contractile stimulus and the overall force it generates. The mechanisms that
underlie this collective behavior of the smooth muscle and its implications for
airway narrowing are currently unknown. The research goal of this is to
elucidate the mechanisms that regulate collective agonist sensing and to
understand the impact of the underlying mechanobiological interactions in
regulating airway caliber. Specifically, this will test a hypothesis that
collective agonist sensing by a multicellular smooth muscle cell ensemble relies
on its ability to dynamically change the connectivity among individual cells in
a force-dependent manner. To this end, we have set up the following aims: 1)
Test the hypothesis that mechanical signaling between smooth muscle cells
regulates agonist sensing in SMC ensembles. 2) Quantify the impact of deep
breaths on the force response of smooth muscle cell ensembles. 3) Establish the
role of mechanobiology in regulating airway narrowing in lung tissue. Upon
successful completion, we will provide the community with a detailed description
of a hitherto unknown control system that regulates airway
caliber.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.