* 2047623
* CAREER: Black-Box Learning of Web Application Authorization Policies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Amirreza Masoumzadeh, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2026
* USD 243,410.00

Web applications have become the de facto way to access services and
functionalities. It is vital to ensure that different users of web applications
are only allowed to access what they are supposed to, i.e., implementing correct
authorization. But, unfortunately, broken access control and authorization has
been constantly ranked as one of the top web application vulnerabilities. In
fact, many web applications cannot provide an accurate specification of their
enforced authorization policies due to challenges such as code complexity and
fast-paced development. Neither end users nor even developers of the
applications could reason about data protection in this environment. To address
this problem, this research project devises a novel framework for learning fine-
grained authorization policies from web applications without relying on access
to their source codes or understanding other internal complexities. The project
develops an integrated research and education program to train the next
generation of cybersecurity workforce at the intersection of security/privacy,
machine learning, and web technologies. Since web-based systems are pervasive in
our society, the developed framework and associated solutions will significantly
contribute to system safety and user privacy. Furthermore, due to their black-
box design, the developed techniques will be critical assets to investigate data
authorization practices of applications outside their development environments
by application adopters (e.g., companies deploying outsourced applications) and
third parties acting in the interest of end users (e.g., security/privacy
researchers and regulators investigating compliance with privacy laws and
expectations). The project engages a diverse body of students especially from
underrepresented groups in security and privacy research and exposes the broad
community to security and privacy topics through outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project develops a novel paradigm
for automated learning of web application authorization policies that
significantly improves ensuring the security and privacy of web applications. A
key characteristic of this research is to treat web applications as black boxes,
i.e., learning authorizations by interacting with and observing them as would
regular end users. The black-box approach allows abstracting away internal
complexities of web applications and focusing instead on what matters: learning
what policies are enforced on users as they access application data. The
research is carried out in three thrusts. First, a theoretical policy learning
framework will be devised for efficiently probing the authorization space of
applications as black boxes and constructing formal specifications of their
policies. Second, a methodology and associated techniques for learning
representation of data objects, relationships, and operations from black-box web
applications will be developed in order to realize practical deployment of the
theoretical framework in the web domain. Third, the project will develop
techniques for analysis and integration of the learned authorization policies to
improve the security and privacy of web applications. This paradigm will be
transformative for web security/privacy research and practice by providing
researchers, developers, and analysts an automated approach to learn the
specifications of authorization policies. In addition to enabling them to
understand the authorization behavior of web applications, it will revitalize
research in formal policy testing and verification techniques that rely on
concrete policy specifications. Furthermore, the general framework will be
applicable beyond web applications to other domains such as mobile app
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.