* 2047736
* CAREER: Durable Biomimetic Adhesives for Structural Engineering Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Jovan Tatar, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 05/31/2026
* USD 599,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program will provide a new,
nature-inspired and durable adhesive joints in concrete structures by mimicking
mussel adhesion. Adhesive joints are used in multiple engineering fields to
accelerate production, prolong product life, reduce stress concentrations, and
control maintenance costs. Structural engineering, however, relies on bulkier
and less economical mechanical joining methods as the existing adhesives are not
durable in wet environments. Inspired by mussels’ ability to establish and
maintain adhesion to mineral substrates underwater, this project will create a
moisture-resistant adhesive joining method for structural concrete. This
progress in adhesives technology will (1) improve resilience of existing
infrastructure by enabling innovative, durable repair and retrofitting methods
and (2) stimulate the advancement of disruptive construction techniques (e.g.,
additive manufacturing and prefabricated construction) for affordable housing
and next-generation civil infrastructure. The project integrates research in
biomimetic adhesion with an educational program to attract and retain highly
creative STEM talent, contributing to a workforce that can solve engineering
challenges of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives are to:
(1) elucidate chemical interactions responsible for mussels’ adhesion to
concrete; (2) investigate energy dissipation mechanisms of mussel adhesive pad
on concrete by establishing the functional relationships between mussel
substrate selection, structure of the mussel adhesive pad, and the adhesive bond
energy on model substrates; and, accordingly, (3) devise a novel biomimetic
approach of adhesive joint design. The new fundamental knowledge will be used to
create a prototype adhesive concrete joint that advances two new fabrication
procedures—a synthesis route for a moisture-resistant primer, and a method of
producing an adhesive with gradient stiffness. The education goal of this
project is to nurture a cadre of highly creative engineers and materials
scientists by broadening participation of neurodiverse students who innately
exhibit greater creativity than the neurotypical population. Correspondingly,
the project implements: (1) hands-on outreach activities that embody Universal
Design for Learning (UDL) principles for pre-college students; and (2) summer
research internships and personalized mentoring for high-school students and
first-year engineering students with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD). The project lays the basis for the PI to achieve his long-term career
goal of expanding the use of adhesive connections in structural engineering
while cultivating a neurodiverse engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.