* 2047663
* CAREER: MaLPhySiCS - Machine Learning-assisted Physics-based Simulation and Control of Soft robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Mohammad Khalid Jawed, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 724,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support research that
will formulate and experimentally validate numerical tools for modeling of soft
robots. Soft robots are typically designed and controlled through a painstaking
trial-and-error process involving several prototypes. This project seeks to
automate this design and control process using a real-time physics-engine. The
simulation addresses several key challenges in simulation of robots: (1) large
structural deformation, (2) nontrivial coupling with hydrodynamic forces, and
(3) preponderance of contact and collision. Model reduction is necessary to cast
a complex robot into the simulation framework. Machine learning (ML) provides an
exceptional set of tools to reduce complex structures into a model without
compromising accuracy. The fast simulation tool, based on physics and ML, will
be used to build a control framework for a bacteria-inspired soft
robot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is
formulation of fast and efficient physics-based simulation, assisted by machine
learning, for autonomous control of soft robots. Using this framework, a
macroscale bacteria-inspired robot will be designed and controlled. This robot
will use buckling in flagellum (thin flexible tail) to control its swimming
direction. This is expected to be the simplest autonomous soft robot with a
single scalar control input. Two key challenges to be tackled in the project
are: (1) computational efficiency so that the simulation can be used for
optimization, and (2) physical accuracy and robustness of the models so that
model-based control can be employed on the real robotic systems. Towards this
goal, machine learning-assisted modeling of complex systems in a discrete
differential geometry-based simulation framework is planned. Neural network-
based models for the structure of the robot and the hydrodynamics will be
developed. These models are expected to be as fast as simplified heuristic
models and as accurate as physics-based fine-grained models. This simulation
tool will be used to develop a model-based control framework for the bacteria-
inspired robot for untethered autonomous operation. This robot can help us gain
insight into bacterial locomotion, e.g., role of instability in bacterial
propulsion. From a robotics perspective, the robot has only one control input
with minuscule number of moving parts. The design of the robot makes it amenable
for miniaturization to sub-millimeter scale with potential biomedical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.