* 2047592
* CAREER: Smart Imaging and Metrology enabled by Liquid Crystals
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Rosario Porras-Aguilar, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2026
* USD 506,000.00

Imaging systems are used in a wide range of scientific and industrial
applications, from examining biological samples in medical labs to manufacturing
airplanes. There are two main reasons why an object is difficult to image
optically: 1) the object does not significantly scatter or absorb light and is
practically invisible, and/or 2) the object information is reduced by the
imaging systems performance and resolving power. The challenge in current
imaging technologies is the crucial need for smart and active systems that adapt
themselves to increase the visibility of objects or features of interest with
high specificity. This project addresses the requirements for a reconfigurable
imaging system that provides quantitative information with high specificity and
selectivity. This will enable faster and more accurate studies of biological and
industrial samples. For example, automated and more accurate diagnoses will
dramatically improve advances and outcomes in the fields of microbiology,
personalized medicine, pathology, visual optics, brain imaging, and ultra-
precision manufacturing industries. These applications can directly impact US
national security, productivity, economic growth, and the health of its
citizens. Improved quantitative information will provide more effective ways to
harness "big data" using artificial intelligence and machine learning
algorithms. The project includes hands-on research and mentoring experiences in
physics and photonics for high-school students and teaching strategies to foster
the curiosity and talent of undergraduates, especially those from groups
traditionally underrepresented in higher education. Specific outreach components
are designed to make STEM education more inclusive and diverse, especially
focusing on Hispanics and women including programs for Hispanic-serving high
schools in North Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:
&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER research project addresses the critical need for a
reconfigurable imaging system that provides the required image information with
quantitative attributes and high specificity by smart and adaptive selectivity
of spatial frequency content. The spatial frequency content of an image carries
information on the size, shape, and orientation of the object or features to be
analyzed. Selective enhancement, or isolation of key spatial frequencies, for
the object will include background noise from small-angle scatter, for example,
which reduces visibility. The goal of this project is to address these issues
and provide a new mathematical framework for wavefront, and hence spatial
frequency, shaping to enhance those spatial frequencies relevant to improved
imaging. This framework will provide new fundamental knowledge to advance
nonlinear imaging and smart adaptive methods based on nonlinear effects for
general imaging needs. The derived models will be validated in an optical system
and contribute to study objects with low visibility (transparent and small area
compared to the field of view). This research project will leverage smart
optical materials for adaptive use and wavefront shaping techniques to extend
the frontier of today's imaging systems. Research outcomes are expected to
overcome signal-to-noise ratio limitations, provide active selectivity of an
object's or it's feature's visibility, and thereby provide accurate 3D
measurements and advance the field of quantitative imaging. This project aligns
with the Ten Big Ideas from NSF by developing a method that can deliver
quantitative information and parameters to harness massive data, enable
automated analysis allowing collaboration between machines with humans, and
strengthen networks of underrepresented minorities in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.