* 2047138
* CAREER: Co-Adaptation and Trust in Worker-Robot Interactions: Scalable Adoption of Collaborative Robots in Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Reza Akhavian, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 856,232.00

Construction work is currently challenged by high injury rates, stagnant
productivity, labor shortages, and use of outdated workflows. In the future,
robotics may offer unprecedented opportunities to address these issues, but
robotics has yet to fully address the range of technical challenges that arise
from unstructured environments such as cluttered construction job sites and
impoverished trust among workers who may not accept robots as a collaborative
partners. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will advance
the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and to advance national
health, prosperity, and welfare by advancing a fundamental understanding of
adaptive technology for human activity and intent recognition and robot learning
algorithms that can promote worker safety during construction materials handling
scenarios. Human activity and intent recognition will be performed by directing
real-time signals from wearable and environmental sensors to advanced machine
learning and neural network algorithms. Worker safety during materials handling
will be promoted using a robot motion planner that optimizes, in part,
ergonomics of the material transfer from the robot to the human. Additionally,
the project team will develop a model for trust-building and a framework for
trust-calibration within worker-robot teams to ensure that construction workers
accurately assess how much to trust their robotic partners on the job site. The
project also includes an education and outreach component that builds STEM
education capacity for a diverse group of individuals including high school
students and their teachers, as well as undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This use-inspired CAREER project contributes to a
future in which collaborative robots (co-robots) learn from and assist
construction workers, thereby decreasing physical workload while promoting
ergonomic safety. Current robotics algorithms and applications fail to adapt to
the unstructured complexity of construction job sites, and do not fully address
the technical and behavioral challenges of the work, workers, and workplaces in
the industry. This project focuses on construction material handling, a common
and strenuous activity that can be facilitated using co-robots. This project
will: (1) create safe robot-assisted material handling workflows through a co-
adaptive robot learning system that responds to worker kinematics and muscle
activities collected by wearable sensors; and (2) develop a model for trust-
building and a framework for trust-calibration that aims to promote adoption of
worker-robot teaming in construction. The project promises to advance
fundamental knowledge in adaptive and reusable construction worker activity and
intent recognition and will generate novel datasets and models. It will promote
safety in robot-assisted materials handling tasks using a motion planner that
optimizes ergonomic safety. Intelligent worker-robot teaming will be fostered by
models of trust-building and trust calibration that can be used to guide worker-
robot co-adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.