* 2047614
* CAREER: Elucidating the Interplay Between Exciton Dynamics and Symmetry-Breaking Charge Transfer Through Multidimensional Visible and Mid-Infrared Spectroscopies
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Jessica M. Anna, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 05/31/2026
* USD 700,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Jessica Anna and her group at the
University of Pennsylvania are investigating some of the earliest, and most
important steps involved in the conversion of sunlight into energy. Solar energy
conversion often begins with the transfer of energy or charge between two or
more identical molecules that are packed together tightly. The close proximity
and identical structures of the molecules make it very difficult to directly
observe the first stages of the conversion process. In order to better
understand these early events and how they affect solar energy conversion
efficiency, Dr. Anna and her research team use sophisticated laser techniques to
study pairs of molecules that represent more complicated systems. The team
varies the relative distance and orientation of the two molecules in a well-
defined way that allows them to distinguish changes caused by subtle differences
in the way the two molecules interact with each other. The cutting-edge
measurements they make provide new insight to aid in the design and development
of new materials for solar energy conversion, including artificial
photosynthetic complexes, photocatalysts, and organic photovoltaic materials.
The project also involves educational and public outreach activities related to
the research, including the development of new teaching modules for integration
into graduate, undergraduate, and pre-college classrooms, as well as research
opportunities and paid internships for undergraduates, pre-college students, and
local area high school teachers. The teaching modules, research opportunities,
and paid internships are designed to increase the participation of students in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, including
underrepresented groups and first-generation college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on elucidating the interplay between
exciton dynamics and charge transfer in a new family of pi-extended metallo-
dipyrrin complexes. These systems have the potential to form excitonic states
that undergo symmetry-breaking charge transfer, and therefore allow a systematic
investigation of the interplay between energy- and charge-transfer processes.
Dr. Anna and her students use pump-probe and coherent multidimensional
spectroscopy in the visible and mid-IR spectral regions to study the different
dipyrrin complexes and obtain a full characterization of the excited-state
dynamics, structural rearrangement, and solvent reorganization involved in the
symmetry-breaking charge transfer process. The research team uses a mixed
spectral approach to probe the evolution of molecules in electronically excited
states having charge-transfer character, harnessing the sensitivity of
vibrational modes to the local electrostatic field. The team uses pump-probe
spectroscopy to characterize population transfer and determine the branching
ratios among different excited states in the dipyrrin complexes. The coherent
multidimensional spectroscopy measurements provide more detailed information on
the dynamics by alleviating spectral congestion, resolving vibrational modes in
the excited state, and elucidating solvation dynamics and other relaxation
processes. The comprehensive spectroscopic approach yields a deeper
understanding of the combined role of intramolecular structural rearrangement
and solvation dynamics in symmetry-breaking charge transfer processes that are
important for solar energy conversion and other
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.