* 2047292
* CAREER: Overcoming Obstacles, Building Community, and Broadening Participation: A Qualitative Analysis of the Experiences and Career Decisions of Black Men in Computing
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Curtis Cain, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 01/31/2026
* USD 275,767.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of early-career faculty
who have the potential to serve as academic role models in research and
education, to lead advances in the mission of their department or organization,
and to build a foundation for a lifetime of leadership in integrating education
and research. This CAREER project aims to examine and understand factors that
contribute to the education and career decisions of Black men in computing. This
understanding will inform enhancements to mentoring and other peer support
programs designed to increase the retention of individuals from underrepresented
groups in computing, informatics, and engineering (CIE) disciplines. The
ubiquity of computing and digital information is driving rapid change in the
world. Diversity is essential for the United States to maintain a globally
competitive CIE workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Qualitative methods will be used
in this project to examine relationships among individual and environmental
influences on Black men studying CIE and their support systems, interest levels,
satisfaction, and retention in university degree programs. Utilizing elements of
both the Individual Differences Theory of Gender and IT and the Social Cognitive
Career Theory, the research will explore the unique, individual characteristics
that influence and impact the educational and career decisions of Black men.
Increased understanding of these characteristics and their relationships will
advance awareness of barriers to retention and success for Black men in
computing. The integrated research and education plans include the development
of a new course and the establishment of the BLKGENIUS network to engage Black
men in computing and match them with role models and mentors in order to promote
retention and success. This award is funded by the Historically Black Colleges
and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), which provides awards to
strengthen STEM undergraduate education and research at
HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.