* 2047288
* CAREER: AF: Models and Algorithms for Beyond Worst-case Analysis of Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Aditya Bhaskara, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2026
* USD 335,715.00

Establishing theoretical guarantees on properties like correctness, convergence
rate, robustness, security, privacy, etc. is a central challenge in modern
machine learning (ML). Such guarantees are essential for the deployment of
machine-learning systems, especially in sensitive domains. While traditional
algorithm design strives to obtain guarantees for all instances (worst-case),
this is often impossible in ML due to the intrinsic complexity of the underlying
problems. This has led researchers to think beyond worst-case analysis, and to
study models under which formal guarantees can be obtained. The project aims to
make fundamental contributions to this area by considering new problem domains
such as the transfer of knowledge across tasks and the leveraging of predictions
about inputs in online models of learning. The project also includes activities
to help promote undergraduate and graduate research in algorithms design and ML.
It also includes outreach activities aimed at students from the local high
schools and community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
new models for going beyond worst-case analysis, with the research having the
following main thrusts: (a) designing algorithms for problems of finding latent
structure in data, with a focus on topics such as knowledge transfer and finding
structure in subsets of data, (b) leveraging "advice" or predictions about the
future in online algorithms and developing a theory about what kinds of advice
lead to improved performance metrics such as competitive ratio and regret, and
(c) developing a theoretical understanding of non-linear graph embeddings, akin
to the extensive theoretical work on random walks and spectral embedding. These
thrusts share the common theme of requiring the development of new analytical
and modeling frameworks, while being motivated by concrete learning
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.