* 2047331
* CAREER: Linking sensory neuron plasticity to adaptive injury-induced behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Robyn Crook, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/28/2026
* USD 626,369.00

Most animals, including humans, will experience sub-lethal injury at least once
in their lives. Injured animals can incur long-lasting costs that impact
survival, reproduction, and almost every other aspect of behavior, and which
often extend beyond the acute post-injury period. Long-lasting behavioral
changes that minimize injury costs are therefore likely to be advantageous and
widespread among diverse species. However, despite their obvious importance to
survival, the brain mechanisms that govern changes in behavior after injury are
poorly understood. The objective of this CAREER proposal is to reveal links
between memory-like changes in sensory neurons that detect injury (nociceptors),
and long-lasting enhancement of adaptive behaviors that compensate for injury.
One group of animals that have evolved particularly complex injury-induced
behaviors are cephalopod molluscs (octopus, squid, and cuttlefish), who rely on
changeable skin camouflage that is heavily impaired if the skin is injured.
Previous work in the investigatorâ€™s lab has shown long-lasting behavioral
changes in cephalopods that promote survival after injury. This project focuses
specifically on asking how these changes are produced by the nervous system, and
how these changes may be similar or different from those of other animals,
including mammals and humans. Broader impacts of the proposal include science
education outreach to pre-K children, research training of diverse student
populations, and improved knowledge of invertebrate animal
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Injury-induced plasticity underlies a range of
long-term behavioral changes, ranging from peripheral reflex hypersensitivity to
complex, emotionally-valenced cognitive processing. The PI has shown previously
that in cephalopods, activity-dependent nociceptive sensitization promotes
hypervigilance toward potential threats, and that this hypervigilance promotes
survival. The neural mechanisms driving long-term injury-induced plasticity in
defensive behaviors remain poorly understood, and whether nociceptive
sensitization also promotes fitness-protecting behavior in other contexts is
completely unknown. In this CAREER project, the principal investigator conducts
experiments to evaluate whether permanent changes to the intrinsic excitability
of nociceptors drives plasticity in higher-order neural circuits governing
attention and arousal. Next, the investigator examines whether these circuits
modulate not only defensive behavioral plasticity, but also fitness-protecting
plasticity in foraging, social, and reproductive contexts. Finally the
investigator determines if molecular mechanisms of plasticity driving diverse
injury-induced behaviors are shared among invertebrates and vertebrates. The
studies involve use of a combination of molecular, genetic, physiological and
behavioral techniques. This project provides training and educational
experiences for Pre-K children, as well as undergraduate and graduate students
from groups under-represented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.