* 2047910
* CAREER: Embracing Local Minima and Nonsmoothness in Nonconvex Statistical Estimation: From Structures to Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Yudong Chen, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Acton
* 08/31/2022
* USD 208,632.00

Optimization plays a crucial role in modern data analysis. Accurate modeling and
robust analysis of complex datasets often require solving a class of
optimization problems that are not smooth and may possess many low-quality
solutions. These problems are challenging to solve, and there is limited
understanding of the properties of solutions returned by standard algorithms.
Existing approaches typically steer away from such problems or restrict to a
small subset of them. This project aims to substantially broaden the class of
problems for which efficient algorithms exist, and for which performance
guarantees can be obtained. The project will develop new algorithms and
analytical tools that are applicable in a broad range of engineering and science
applications. Furthermore, the project will support an education plan that
centers around the goal of bridging the disciplines of optimization and
statistics at both undergraduate and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical approaches of this project are based on the general principles of
decoupling nonsmoothness and nonconvexity, and identifying the characteristic
structures of locally optimal solutions. The research program consists of two
main thrusts: (1) study a class of nonsmooth composite optimization problems and
develop a framework for quantifying the average-case conditioning of the
problems and the convergence rates of low-complexity algorithms; (2) consider a
class of problems with coupled components, characterize the hidden structures of
the local minima, and exploit these structural results to design and analyze
efficient algorithms in settings where existing results fail to apply. The
research in this project will cover a diverse set of important statistical and
machine learning problems. The techniques developed will provide a refined
analysis of the algorithmic performance for average-case problems in statistical
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.