* 2047140
* CAREER: In-Vivo Analysis of Active Mechanical Mechanisms Driving Animal Morphegenesis
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Sebastian Streichan, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2026
* USD 327,822.00

How embryos and organs get in shape remains a fundamental and open question.
Some of the most common birth defects are associated with irregular shaped
organs, underscoring how important form is for proper function. Research in the
last century revealed how biochemical processes regulate cell fate, setting the
stage for morphogenesis: the question of how genes instruct form. This project
will bring concepts from physics that lead the way to a predictive understanding
of how complex organs get their shape. The project will provide quantitative
understanding of tissue properties, forming the pillar for systematically
exploring novel control strategies that force tissue into a prescribed form. The
PI will create three dimensional videos of organismal development and
disseminate them through a planetarium-like setting to the public. It will also
be accessible to many primary and secondary schools, as well as
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this project is to study how
active thin sheets remodel to generate 3D form. High-resolution deep tissue
imaging in living embryos will be used to uncover active processes and their
interplay with bulk material in organ folding. The PI will introduce new
techniques such as MKID-FRET to study force analysis at the interface of
interacting tissue layers and use optogenetics to precisely manipulate cell
activity in space and time to investigate regulatory parameters that govern
cellular interplay in shaping tissues. Combined with genetic manipulations, the
experiments will be used to uncover the physical mechanisms of how 3D shape is
dynamically encoded by 2D gene expression patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.