* 2047697
* CAREER: Diagnosing the Undiagnosable: Using Enzyme Upregulation to Probe Cellular Behavior in Neuropathic Lysosomal Storage Disease
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Jessica Larsen, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2026
* USD 414,110.00

The objective of this project is to develop a method to non-invasively diagnose
a rare and fatal brain disease, GM1 gangliosidosis, using polymeric
nanoparticles called polymersomes. The development of this polymersome tool will
provide real-time information on the disease progression of the patient,
allowing for better clinical interventions. The work will identify the potential
of enzyme activities as biomarkers of GM1 disease progression in cellular and
animal models. The polymersomes will provide real-time fluorescent read outs in
the brains of mice, which correlate with these enzyme activity levels and
confirm disease progression. The research objectives of the CAREER project are
integrated with educational objectives to engage high school teachers in
research and increase their knowledge of the scientific process. Our CoME and
SEE SC program will integrate this research experience with guided development
of in-class modules that teachers will bring back to their students to increase
civic scientific literacy in South Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching career goal of the investigator is to understand the interactions of
polymers with the central nervous system. Towards this goal, this CAREER project
aims to create a nanoparticle system of stimuli-responsive polymers
(polymersomes) that alter their structure in response to pathological changes
associated with brain disease to improve diagnosis. Specifically, this proposal
focuses on elucidating homeostatic changes related to GM1 gangliosidosis, a
lysosomal storage disorder in drastic need of a diagnostic and monitoring tool.
Diagnosis and monitoring can be improved by understanding the relationship
between cellular changes and enzyme activity throughout disease progression,
validating enzyme activity as a biomarker of disease. Simultaneously, we develop
a biohybrid polymersome system, responding and degrading in the presence of
enzymes, to provide a diagnostic measure. Unlike current techniques, executed at
single time points only, this novel biohybrid system will enable the acquisition
of temporospatial information in situ in the brain. Finally, the modular nature
of this tool will permit small changes to create diagnostic opportunities
throughout the brain, laying a foundation for measuring in situ levels of many
macromolecules in patient brains. The research aims integrate with the
educational goal of increasing the scientific literacy and attitudes towards the
nature of science of citizens in the state of South Carolina. The project
activities aim to create scientific citizens that feel comfortable making
science-related policy decisions (civic scientific literacy). The proposed
program, CoME and SEE SC, provides high school teachers with professional
development, coupled with research, to increase their civic scientific literacy,
which will translate to students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by Engineering of Biomedical Systems (EBMS) and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.