* 2047083
* CAREER: Coherent Radiation Production in an Ion Channel Laser
* MPS,PHY
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2025
* Michael Litos, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 429,557.00

The research enabled by this CAREER award will advance the physics of X-ray
laser production by studying a method that utilizes interactions between an
electron beam and a plasma source. High-brightness X-ray laser light sources
represent the cutting edge of scientific imaging, capable of resolving ultra-
fast dynamics at the atomic scale, while also providing critical capabilities in
service of technological pursuits ranging from materials science to
pharmaceutical research. Large-scale X-ray laser facilities are housed at
national laboratories, such as the Linear Coherent Light Source at the SLAC
National Accelerator Laboratory. This project will pave the way toward a more
compact and flexible X-ray laser source that would be affordable to universities
and other institutions lacking the space and financial resources of a national
lab. In addition, this project will work to increase African American
representation in physics Ph.D. programs by providing a strong undergraduate
research experience to students recruited from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities in coordination with the NSF-funded Research Experience for
Undergraduates summer internship program run by the University of Colorado.
Finally, this project will establish a new annual summer school retreat for
graduate-level plasma physics students studying in Colorado to broaden the
students’ educational exposure to different sub-fields of plasma physics,
provide networking opportunities, and enhance their sense of community as plasma
physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the research is to measure and
model the generation of coherent radiation from the interaction between a
relativistic electron beam and a plasma via the ion channel laser (ICL)
mechanism. This will be achieved through experimental work carried out at the
Facility for Advanced Accelerator Experimental Tests-II (FACET-II) at the SLAC
National Accelerator Laboratory. The principal investigator’s research group is
a part of the FACET-II plasma accelerator research collaboration and will
leverage numerous synergies with that program to carry out the work. To date,
the ICL has been proposed theoretically, but not yet studied in experiment. This
project will measure the gain length and brightness of radiation that can be
achieved in two regimes that are experimentally accessible at FACET-II: 1) the
large oscillation amplitude regime at 800 nm wavelength, which can be seeded
with the aid of the FACET-II Ti:sapphire laser system, and 2) the small
oscillation amplitude regime at 1 nm wavelength to understand the ICL’s
capability of producing X-ray laser pulses. The ICL is accommodating to electron
beams originating from plasma-based accelerators due to a relatively loose
tolerance on the beam energy spread. Further, the polarization of the radiation
produced by the ICL can be changed in a relatively trivial manner on a shot-by-
shot basis by adjusting the initial transverse offset and angle of the electron
beam as it enters the plasma source. By leveraging these unique features of the
ICL, this research may lead to novel forms of compact, plasma-based X-ray laser
sources for broad use in academia, national labs, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.