* 2047420
* CAREER: Fair assessments: Examining Cultural Familiarity to Decrease Bias in Engineering Classroom Assessments
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Kerrie Douglas, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 02/28/2026
* USD 297,358.00

Test scores are used to inform who gets to pursue and stay in engineering
education at every juncture, pre-college through graduate school. The persistent
achievement discrepancies between students of Color and White undergraduate
engineering students are commonly blamed on students or their previous education
rather than acknowledging that the tests themselves or testing process could be
biased against test takers. Factors such as differing cultures, educational
access, and test taking strategies all contribute to the test taking experience
and can result in tests that are inherently easier or harder for different
groups of students. Very little is known about how biases contribute to the
problem of discrepancies in achievement between students of Color and their
White peers in engineering. The research on test fairness in engineering
education has been limited by the low representation of students of Color in
engineering. This CAREER project will apply an innovative research approach for
small sample sizes that will advance understanding about the role of cultural
familiarity within the context of concept inventories. By answering the research
questions, this CAREER project will build a firm foundation for a life-long
leadership position in research on fair assessment practices and educational
activities to train instructors in increasing the fairness of their classroom
tests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will inform the field of
engineering education by identifying how engineering education instructors and
researchers can increase the fairness of assessments. Through its integrated
research and education plans, the work will improve decision-making in
engineering education and achievement for students of Color. Because there are
so few students of Color in engineering, traditional approaches to studying
assessment bias cannot be used. This project will use an explanatory sequential
mixed-methods approach which integrates studies of item difficulty and
discrimination for each group of students separately and then will conduct
interviews to explain the quantitative findings and build theory. The new
approaches and methods developed will lead to significant strides in solving the
problem of unfair assessment in engineering education. The research questions
will investigate: To what extent do items in these three assessments demonstrate
adequate functioning for students of Color? To what extent do score
discrepancies remain once inadequate items are removed? What are patterns of
cultural familiarity and content of problematic items and items that show
acceptable functioning? How do students of Color experience testing in concept
inventories? In the education plan, findings will be applied to develop and
disseminate educational materials for three primary groups of learners: (1)
future engineering faculty, (2) current engineering faculty, and (3) minority-
and women-in-engineering program staff. The findings will benefit society
directly from the research outcomes, activities related to conducting the
research in this project, and educational activities. The first research
question provides important information concerning the extent to which
unfairness in assessments contributes to disparities in achievement. The second
and third research questions lead to principles for fair assessments that will
be widely shared with engineering instructors and future faculty (via a graduate
course and partnerships with national engineering education organizations);
these will improve fairness for thousands of students across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.