* 2047235
* CAREER:Omic Insights into Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* Neha Garg, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 04/30/2026
* USD 533,204.00

The CAREER award will examine the changing chemical and microbial make up of
coral reefs experiencing outbreaks of stony coral tissue loss disease (SCTLD).
Coral reefs support diverse ocean life and sustain economic growth in coastal
areas. Coral reefs are imperiled by disease outbreaks, climate change, and
anthropogenic activities. Specifically, SCTLD is spreading unabated in Florida
and the Caribbean and has infected over 20 coral species. Despite this spread,
the understanding of chemical changes that accompany the onset of disease, the
changes in bacterial inhabitants, and the disruption of the coral-algal
symbiosis, remains poorly known. The principal investigator will elucidate the
chemical changes that occur during SCTLD progression in corals using multi-omics
and data analytic strategies. The bacteria and algae that may be responsible for
these chemical changes will be identified. Knowledge gained from this research
will provide understanding of the chemical and organismal signatures that define
health or disease status of corals. To enhance the reach of this research,
teaching modules will be created for high school, undergraduate and graduate
students and K-12 teachers. Introduction of high school students to the effects
of climate change on coral reefs and role of STEM in understanding disease
mechanisms may enhance student participation in STEM fields and serve as a
strong scientific foundation for these students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Very
little is known about pathogenic mechanisms in marine environments. Unabated
spread of SCTLD provides a unique opportunity to understand pathogenesis in the
marine environment. The specific goal of this project is to decipher the role of
algal and microbial symbionts in the health of coral holobionts at the chemical
level via the implementation of multi-omic strategies including metabolomics of
field corals, cultured microbial and algal symbionts, and microbiome sequencing.
This research will provide fundamental insights into 1) natural product
metabolites that co-occur with pathogenic microbial consortia, 2) natural
products that are produced by the microbiome and the endosymbionts prior to
onset of disease and during recovery post-treatment, and 3) how changes in the
microbiome during disease are linked to changes in the chemical makeup of corals
across different species. The paired metabolomics and 16S amplicon sequencing
data generated in this proposal is the first step towards building future
efforts in integrating metagenomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and
metabolomics data to understand molecular markers underlying SCTLD and to
delineate biochemical pathways underlying coral host-microbe, host-algal
symbiont, and host-pathogen relationships. By identifying chemical signatures of
the disease state, this research may result in new strategies to mitigate
SCTLD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.