* 2047251
* CAREER: A roadmap to atomically ordered complex materials via control of entropic mixing
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Adam Hauser, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2026
* USD 309,087.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The ability to atomically order crystalline
materials is central to advancing technology. In the 1980s, 99% atomic ordering
in two-element materials was developed, wherein two elements alternate nearly
perfectly in their atomic site occupations. This enabled high-frequency
transistors, which led to the cell phone revolution and high-efficiency solar
panel technologies. Theoretical predictions tout revolutionary new material
properties in complex (3+ elements) materials that will make possible new
devices with broad application in information technology, solar cells, lighting,
microwave communications, thermoelectrics, and power electronics. However,
achieving the 99% atomic ordering required to realize those properties has
remained elusive. The goal of this project is to systematically gain an
understanding of the fundamental ordering mechanisms in complex materials. This
research integrates computational theory and experimental results to create a
set of criteria that can be used to design materials of sufficiently high atomic
ordering (99%) to realize their intrinsic properties. This research directly
integrates educational activities to impact underrepresented minorities, women,
and underserved rural communities in STEM fields, and ensure that undergraduate
education includes research experience. This mentor-based strategy focuses on
elevating science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) educators in
underrepresented communities in rural Alabama and Mississippi. K-12 educators
gain access to university faculty and specialists at the Alabama Science in
Motion program to plan classes and laboratory sessions, and through the Alabama
Math, Science and Technology Summer Institute receive training to qualify their
rural school district for program/equipment funding. Undergraduate summer
researchers are recruited from local Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, minority-serving institutions and the American Physical Society’s
Conferences for Undergraduate Women in Physics. Undergraduate students will also
work as research assistants during each school
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Imperfect atomic
ordering in complex materials is a pervasive issue in the condensed matter and
materials communities: A model that accounts for entropic mixing disorder is
required before complex materials can be applied widely. First principles
calculations can accurately predict the intrinsic (structural, electronics,
magnetic/magnetodynamic) material properties of an ordered system, but near-
perfect (&gt;99%) atomic ordering is needed to manifest those properties. At
present, it is a complex and computationally expensive task to determine if the
system can form with the required atomic ordering in the presence of thermal and
growth energies. The central hypothesis of this research is that high atomic
ordering can be predicted by incorporating existing metallurgical metrics that
indicate the level of entropic mixing. To test the hypothesis, computational
predictions of ordering and properties are produced for a range of three-element
L21-ordered Heusler alloys, chosen specifically due to decades-long frustration
in realizing predictions of high spin polarization due to atomic disorder.
Although applications often prefer highly ordered systems, materials with a
range of ordering levels are selected to refine a robust quantitative model and
provide a roadmap for material design. Thin films of each material system are
grown with low energetics by the Sputter Beam Epitaxy method invented by the
principal investigator, such that atomic ordering and material properties of
each system can be compared to predictions with minimal extrinsic contribution.
The results form a feedback loop between theory and experiment to establish and
refine a quantitative model of atomic ordering when three or more elements are
used. A quantitative predictive model for atomic ordering in complex alloys
broadly translates to the many other fields whose material systems are plagued
by entropic mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Electronic and Photonic Materials Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.