* 2047583
* CAREER: Understanding Atrial Arrhythmia Mechanisms with Patient-derived Engineered Tissues
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Kareen Coulombe, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2026
* USD 437,709.00

Atrial fibrillation (AFib) is the most common electrical conduction disorder in
the heart, yet the underlying cause of AFib is poorly understood, particularly
when a single gene is not responsible such as in Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW)
syndrome, a disorder in which an extra electrical pathway between the heart's
upper and lower chambers causes a rapid heartbeat. The goal of this CAREER
project is to develop patient-specific cellular engineered tissue models and
computer models to study the roles of arrhythmic triggers, including
biomechanical and emotional stress. The electrical and contractile properties of
cardiac tissues engineered using stem cells obtained from WPW patients and
healthy family members will be measured as the tissues are stretched and/or
exposed to physiological stimulants. The knowledge gained from experiments and
computer models will facilitate therapeutic development and improve patient
care, thus advancing national health. Through supporting outreach and education,
the project advances NSF’s mission to increase diversity and inclusion in STEM
by addressing a need for cultural change in the Providence community through
school science programs and art designed to engage and empower underrepresented
students, parents, teachers, and the public. Activities include launching an
“Engineering the Heart” 3rd grade module with teacher training and hands-on
curricula and developing a science art exhibit for parents and the public to
increase engagement in STEM education and encourage cultural change for equity
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators’s research focus is on improving
human heart health through developing novel technologies and platforms for
regenerating muscle, predicting toxicity, and understanding disease. Consistent
with this focus, the goal of this CAREER project is to understand how ion
currents and tissue geometry initiate and sustain arrhythmias in WPW like fast
heart rate and AFib. As the mechanisms underlying atrial arrhythmia are often
multi-factorial, driven by structural and electrophysiological remodeling in
atrial tissue, there is a significant need for developing experimental platforms
that can isolate arrhythmia mechanisms in order to dissect atrial arrhythmias
and enable therapeutic development. To address this need, novel human in vitro
and computational models will be developed to enable individual perturbations
and their combinations to elicit arrhythmic phenotypes in excitation and
contraction. Physiological function will be assessed in 3D engineered tissues
containing patient-derived human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived
atrial cardiomyocytes to address the hypothesis that mechanical stretch, a
correlate of high blood pressure, and emotional stress (activation of
β-adrenergic pathways or the “fight-or-flight” response) will increase
automaticity, frequency-dependent contractions, and conduction irregularities to
reveal reentry pathways. The research objectives are to (1) derive new patient
and control hiPSC lines and evaluate differentiated atrial cardiomyocytes for
atrial specificity and WPW phenotype, (2) use 3D engineered tissues to evaluate
excitation and contraction responses to atrial-specific ion channel modulators
and use our computational action potential model to understand hiPSC-atrial
cardiomyocyte ion currents in WPW, and (3) use 3D experimental and computational
macrotissues to assess how stretch and β-adrenergic stimulation modulate
arrhythmic phenotypes of excitation and contraction. This research project will
advance the capabilities in research to study and understand diverse arrhythmia
mechanisms with tailored engineered tissue to improve the diagnosis,
stratification, health, and quality of life for millions of patients with
AFib.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.