* 2047354
* CAREER: Distributionally Robust Learning, Control, and Benefits Analysis of Information Sharing for Connected and Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Fei Miao, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 05/31/2026
* USD 292,649.00

The rapid evolution of ubiquitous sensing, communication, and computation
technologies has contributed to the revolution of cyber-physical systems (CPS).
Learning-based methodologies are integrated to the control of physical systems
and demonstrating impressive performance in many CPS domains and connected and
autonomous vehicles (CAVs) system is one such example with the development of
vehicle-to-everything communication technologies. However, existing literature
still lacks understanding of the tridirectional relationship among
communication, learning, and control. The main challenges to be solved include
(1) how to model dynamic system state and state uncertainties with shared
information, (2) how to make robust learning and control decisions under model
uncertainties, (3) how to integrate learning and control to guarantee the safety
of networked CPS, and (4) how to quantify the benefits of
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these challenges, this CAREER
proposal aims to design integrated communication, learning, and control rules
that are robust to hybrid system model uncertainties for safe operation and
system efficiency of CAVs. The key intellectual merit is the design of
integrated distributionally robust multi-agent reinforcement learning (DRMARL)
and control framework with rigorous safety guarantees, considering hybrid system
state uncertainties predicted with shared information, and the development of
scientific foundation for analyzing and quantifying the benefits of
communication. The fundamental theory and algorithm principles will be validated
using simulators, small-scale testbeds, and full-scale CAVs field
demonstrations, to form a new framework for future connectivity, learning, and
control of CAVs and networked CPS. The technical contributions are as follows.
(1). With shared information, we will design a cooperative prediction algorithm
to improve hybrid system state and model uncertainty representations needed by
learning and control. (2). Given enhanced prediction, we will design an
integrated DRMARL and control framework with rigorous safety guarantee, and a
computationally tractable algorithm to calculate the hybrid system decision-
making policy. This integrates the strengths of both learning and control to
improve system safety and efficiency. (3). We will define formally and quantify
the value of communication given and propose a novel learn to communicate
approach, to utilize learning and control to improve the communication actions.
This project will also integrate an educational plan with the research goals by
developing a learning platform of ``ssCAVs'' as an education tool and new
interdisciplinary courses on “learning and control”, undertaking outreach to the
general public and K-12 students and teachers, and directly involving high-
school scholars, undergraduate and graduate students in research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the NSF CAREER
20-525 solicitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.