* 2047509
* CAREER: A platform for broadband terahertz spectroscopy of 2D materials and heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Joshua Island, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 02/28/2026
* USD 305,651.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Methods used in investigating properties of
nanoscale materials is fundamentally restricted by what is called the
diffraction limit. This limit constrains the size of a material under
investigation to roughly the wavelength of the radiation used to probe it. This
project uses terahertz radiation with wavelengths of hundreds of micrometers to
probe the emerging two-dimensional materials that have unique and unprecedented
properties including superconductivity and magnetism. By confining the terahertz
radiation to the surface of the small-scale materials being studied, this
technique circumvents the diffraction limit and offers new understanding about
the dynamic response and electronic properties of these fascinating materials.
The research also advances understanding of high frequency radiation
transmission on small-scale chips for applications in next generation high
frequency communications technology. The project heavily relies on undergraduate
and graduate student involvement and provides an outlet for these students to
learn cutting-edge experimental techniques. Several activities in this project
focus on recruitment and retention of underrepresented students for long term
careers in science. This project is jointly funded by the Division of Materials
Research (DMR) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Terahertz (THz) time
domain spectroscopy has led to a deeper understanding of the properties of
matter and has become an invaluable tool in the study of low energy physics and
dynamics in materials. The THz spectrum resides in a range of energies and
timescales which are particularly important in materials with strong
interactions. It would be highly advantageous to apply the technique to the
emerging class of correlated two-dimensional, van der Waals heterostructures to
characterize ground states and interactions which are currently not well
understood. This project designs and optimizes a platform for THz spectroscopy
of microscopic materials, at first focusing on 2D superconductors and magnets.
Using planar waveguides and optically pumped photoconductive switches, the
technique harnesses on-chip single cycle THz pulses to perform THz time domain
spectroscopy of these materials, ushering in spectral information of low energy
excitations and dynamics. The platform provides much needed insight on the
possible pairing mechanisms in unconventional 2D superconductors and the
relaxation dynamics of 2D magnets. It can also be readily applied to microscopic
materials beyond investigations here and has broad application in routes to
optimization of sub-diffraction THz spectroscopy and high frequency
communications. This project is jointly funded by the Division of Materials
Research (DMR) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.