* 2047072
* CAREER: Microfluidic development of dual-gel culture matrices for studying effects of interstitial flow on cellular behaviors
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Jing Fan, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2025
* USD 331,594.00

Non-technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and use
biomaterials to investigate the effects of interstitial flow on cell behavior.
The behavior of living cells in all organisms is influenced by a variety of
factors in their surrounding tissue environment. Examples of these factors
include the slow fluid flux outside cells, the confinement from neighbor cells
or other components, and the rigidity of the tissue. This program will design
and use new biomaterials to reveal the effects of environmental stimuli on
important cell characteristics. To understand the mechanisms underlying cellular
behavior, it is desired to employ an experimental model that provides a tissue-
mimetic environment and allows for independent control of relevant contributing
factors such as pore size. This remains a challenge for traditional biomaterial
cell culture models which have been made of a single hydrogel, such as collagen.
The proposed study will address this unmet challenge by developing a new and
sophisticated two component “dual gel” biomaterial using powerful microfluidics
research methods. A user-friendly computer program will also be developed and
shared with the science community to facilitate applications of such dual-gel
materials. The proposed biomaterials can be readily adapted to study various
cell types and thus potentially benefit a broad range of fundamental biomedical
research questions. Ultimately these new biomaterials could help researchers
understand questions like how tissue grows and how cancer cells spread.
Moreover, the educational program will provide research opportunities and
mentoring to students from high school to graduate levels on both research and
career development. The outreach activities include developing science workshops
and holiday lecture series for families to bring science and biotechnology to
the local community. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and use biomaterials to
investigate the effects of interstitial flow on cell behavior. Interstitial
flow, the slow flux of fluid occurring in the interstitial space of the
extracellular matrix (ECM), is linked to ECM permeability and provides direct
mechanical cues to the resident cells through shear and normal stress. Moreover,
interstitial flow couples with biomolecular diffusion to induce chemotactic
signals. This project seeks to investigate the mechanisms regulating cell
migration under interstitial flow by designing biomaterials to manipulate
interstitial fluid velocity and ECM permeability without affecting other
contributing factors, such as stiffness and physical confinement. Achieving this
independent control remains a daunting task in traditional hydrogel-based
culture models due to the inevitable correlation among various properties of a
hydrogel. The proposed research will overcome this challenge by developing
tissue-mimetic, dual-gel 3D cell culture matrices that enable independent
control of matrix properties, including stiffness, permeability, confining pore
size, cell-binding motifs, and interstitial fluid flow. Moreover, the project
will demonstrate the capability of the dual-gel matrix to co-culture multiple
cells with regulated spatial distribution and cell number ratio. The proposed
dual-gel culture models will be fabricated by a combination of two microfluidics
approaches. The project will also develop a GUI computer program in MATLAB for
numerical visualization of coupling between fluid flow and molecular diffusion
in dual-porosity materials. The educational outreach targets on providing
research opportunities and mentoring to students from high school to graduate
levels in both research and career development. The outreach program will also
develop science workshops and holiday lecture series for families to bring
science of soft matter, transport phenomena, and biotechnology to the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.