* 2047185
* CAREER: Grounding Nuclear Physics in the Standard Model for New Physics Searches
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Amy Nicholson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2026
* USD 424,997.00

While the Standard Model of particle physics stands as one of our most well-
tested physical theories, it is expected to break down under certain conditions,
and unexplained observational evidence and theoretical puzzles call for
understanding of physics beyond the Standard Model (BSM). Where and how this new
physics originates are some of the biggest outstanding problems of physics;
therefore testing the limits of the Standard Model is a primary goal of many
high-profile experimental programs in nuclear physics. Such low-energy nuclear
tests may be our only hope at discovery if the energy scale of new physics is
beyond the reach of accelerators. Quantitative theoretical calculations of these
processes are crucial for planning experiments, understanding their backgrounds,
and connecting results to various BSM models. This research involves
calculations supporting these high-impact nuclear experiments, utilizing some of
the largest supercomputing facilities worldwide. Such calculations lead to
advancements in high-performance computing, with repercussions for other
computational fields. New understanding of nuclear physics has close ties to
national security and energy research, and students in the PI's collaboration
have already begun careers in these sectors. The educational activities
furthermore aim to provide research opportunities for under-represented students
at the University of Costa Rica. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental theory
behind nuclear interactions is known to be Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). Lattice
QCD, a numerical formulation, is currently our only known technique for
performing QCD calculations relevant for nuclear systems such that theoretical
uncertainties are fully quantifiable and errors may be systematically removed.
This research will use lattice QCD to calculate single- and multi-hadron
observables necessary for understanding experimental searches for new physics
including: 1. Searches for neutrinoless double-beta decay, a proposed ultra-rare
process which, if observed, would shed light on the origin of the
matter/antimatter asymmetry of the Universe, as well as an understanding of the
nature of neutrino masses. 2. Measurements of parity violation in hadronic
systems, necessary for constraining the Standard Model, and being performed at
the Spallation Neutron Source at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. 3. Measurements
of the neutron lifetime, which currently display experimental tension
potentially pointing to new physics contributions. 4. Long baseline neutrino
experiments, such as the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE), which will
probe CP violation and the neutrino mass hierarchy. 5. General low-energy
fundamental symmetry tests involving nuclei as laboratories, to be understood
and connected to underlying BSM physics via theoretical understanding of nucleon
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.