* 2047913
* CAREER: Towards Privacy-Preserving Wireless Communication: Fundamental Limits and Coding Schemes
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Remi Chou, Wichita State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2026
* USD 348,678.00

Ever-growing cyber-attacks can lead to data breaches and exposure of private
user data held by third parties, including companies, government entities, or
medical institutions. A possible solution to such a risk is to implement
privacy-preserving protocols between users and third parties that prevent any
private information disclosure in the first place. For instance, a user could
prove to a third party that she holds a valid password without revealing the
password. While solutions for such privacy-preserving problems exist, such
solutions are poorly adapted to the open-access, noisy, bandwidth-limited, and
distributed nature of wireless networks. Resorting to privacy-preserving
protocols unadapted to wireless communication networks may result in
suboptimal/inefficient solutions or, even worse, compromise privacy. This
project addresses this challenge with a novel framework for privacy-preserving
communication specifically adapted to wireless networks. The anticipated
benefits are stronger privacy guarantees, improved data rates, and improved
scalability, compared to traditional approaches. The project integrates an
educational component in the broad field of cybersecurity under the form of i)
graduate student training, ii) project- and research-oriented undergraduate
student education, and iii) outreach to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to build a comprehensive framework that will enable the fundamental
understanding and design of privacy-preserving wireless communication protocols.
The construction of this framework is organized around three thrusts. In the
first thrust, to improve data rates and scalability, the project investigates
novel building blocks for privacy-preserving protocols that incorporate wireless
communication constraints and enable multiuser communication protocols. In the
second thrust, the project investigates solutions to make privacy-preserving
protocols robust to adversarial behaviors. For instance, legitimate protocol
users could exhibit malicious behaviors, or unauthorized network users could
launch wireless-specific attacks, such as eavesdropping, jamming, or man-in-the-
middle attacks. In the third thrust, the project explores the construction of
low-complexity wireless protocols with information-theoretic privacy guarantees
via novel coding techniques from coding theory, cryptography, and deep
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.