* 2047010
* CAREER: A Skill-Driven Cooperative Learning Framework for Cyber-Physical Autonomy
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Xiangnan Zhong, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 05/31/2026
* USD 321,693.00

This project investigates new reinforcement learning (RL) approaches for cyber-
physical autonomy to bridge the gap between current intelligent systems and
human-level intelligence. The nature of many cyber-physical systems (CPS) is
distributed, heterogeneous, and high-dimensional, making the hand-coded
functions and task-specific information hard to design in the learning scheme.
Large amount of training data is often required for achieving the desired
performance, however this limits the generalization to other tasks. Hence, this
project is to explore the new RL strategies to enable CPS with the capabilities
of autonomous learning and generalization to rapidly adapt in unknown situations
that were not assumed in the design phase. The results are expected to transform
how agents interact in high-dimensional and heterogeneous environment, and
therefore could potentially provide in-depth findings for exploring creativity
in frontier Artificial Intelligence techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to advance foundational knowledge and scientific
methodologies of reinforcement learning for generalization and scalability in
CPS. Motivated by the recent research in neurobiology and psychology, this
project will design a new skill-driven intelligent control approach for CPS that
can learn more expressive extended skills to autonomously and adaptively handle
unknown situations without further human intervention. The proposed approach
will also develop cooperative learning strategies to share with extended skills
to facilitate exploration and prevent agents from getting confused by the action
details. In addition, this project will develop self-motivated learning
structures to contribute towards the global objectives for team-wide success in
a distributed perspective. The developed methods and associated architectures
will provide critical insights and guidelines to foster autonomous learning and
generalization in CPS. The integration of research and education plans will
prepare the future workforce in the fields of CPS, artificial intelligence,
learning and control. The outreach activities will build connections between the
CPS research, and minority groups (women and Hispanic students), K-12, and
college students through various learning approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is in response to the NSF CAREER 20-525
solicitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.