* 2047940
* CAREER: Land-Use and Land-Cover Change Impact on Biodiversity and Indigenous Peoples' Livelihoods
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Anthony Cummings, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 05/31/2026
* USD 392,266.00

This CAREER award examines the drivers of fine-scale land-use and land-cover
change and the impacts of these changes on biodiversity, ecosystem services and
indigenous communities. Current methods to analyze biodiversity and ecosystem
services use costly remotely sensed data at the spatial resolution of cities and
urban centers that are not sufficient for analysis at a local scale. Working
with Indigenous communities, this project develops novel remote sensing methods
using Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) to collect data at finer spatial and
temporal resolutions that enable the analysis of local land change processes
while the changes are occurring. This project's use of co-production of
knowledge of land-use and land-cover change identifies the processes that
trigger land-use change and thereby makes a significant contribution to research
on scaling up methods that inform sustainable global economic processes. The
tightly integrated research and education plans coupled with a summer institute
broaden participation of underrepresented students and provides exceptional
training in STEM research methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As land change
scientists extend models for understanding the implications of change processes,
it is essential to know how, when, and where the impacts of global level
processes are manifested at local scales. To address these needs, this project
catalogs change occurring at the local level using geospatial information
technologies, including drones, and evaluates what forces drive change at the
local level. Evaluation of local change processes will be completed in five
different physical environments to determine whether and how policymakers
respond to global-level drivers of change. This research fills a gap in the
understanding of how local-level biodiversity, ecosystem services availability,
and indigenous peoples' livelihood practices are shaped by forces located far
from urban centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.