* 2047700
* CAREER: Posttranslational signaling pathways that encode for flexible behaviors
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Angela Mabb, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/28/2026
* USD 1,014,000.00

The ability to adjust our behaviors to changes in our environment is critical
for survival and independence. Behavioral adaptation engages specific cellular
and molecular pathways in the brain that in turn instruct neural activity
patterns. The goal of this project is to determine how the removal of proteins
in a specific region of the brain known as the hippocampus instructs neural
activity patterns to allow species to adapt to changes within their environment.
This knowledge will benefit society as it will determine how disruption of these
critical pathways may blunt adaptive behaviors, which have been found to be
defective in human neurological conditions that include neurodevelopmental,
neuropsychiatric, and neurodegenerative diseases. This project also integrates
research on behavioral adaptability with education and outreach activities that
target underrepresented STEM groups by creation of an intensive Course-Based
Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) summer program for engagement of
skillsets such as experimental design, scientific rigor/reproducibility and data
analysis, and through community outreach educational opportunities at regional
and local science fairs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Behavioral adaptation requires
the engagement of molecular signaling pathways at individual synapses that
subsequently shape neural ensembles. However, the signaling pathways that can
promote adaptive learning and memory processes in organisms and why a breakdown
of these pathways leads to deadly consequences (e.g., an inability to identify
the location of a new food source or escape from predators) is still poorly
understood. The goal of this proposal is to elucidate how posttranslational-
dependent protein removal drives changes in synaptic plasticity that update
neural representations of a changing spatial behavior. This project uses Mus
musculus as a model system to examine the role of protein ubiquitination on the
disengagement of a learned behavior and the formation of new ensemble patterns
in hippocampus. It also addresses how altering synaptic protein half-lives
modulate long-term potentiation thresholds with changing spatial contingencies.
This project addresses key limitations of capturing neural ensembles for
molecular and synaptic characterization during select phases of behaviors and
uses multi-disciplinary techniques that include modern molecular biology
approaches, Genetically Encoded Calcium Indicators, imaging of neural ensembles
with a microendoscope, electrophysiology, and advanced analytical skillsets.
Findings from our work will advance our understanding on the posttranslational
protein removal mechanisms that drive decision making processes and bring us a
step closer to resolving how brain representations remodel in response to
sensory experiences in changing environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.