* 2047827
* CAREER: Usable, Data-Driven Transparency and Access for Consumer Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Blase Ur, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 03/31/2026
* USD 320,218.00

Data collected about consumers underpins online personalization, yet raises
critical privacy concerns. Mitigating these concerns requires giving consumers
awareness and access to, data collected about them. To date, though, consumers
have been given limited insight through these mechanisms. Attempts to provide
awareness have centered on static disclosures of limited utility. Access rights
for collected data have mostly been ignored or manifested as meaningless
database exports. Unfortunately, consumers struggle to learn what has been
collected, by whom, and especially what this collection implies for their
privacy. This project aims to improve data transparency and access rights by
developing novel models, user interactions, and open-source privacy tools. These
techniques and tools will empower consumers to protect their privacy in a data-
driven world. Furthermore, the project will enhance education and outreach. The
investigator will develop a pilot program for engaging early-career students in
research, create a new privacy course for underprivileged high school students,
and both develop and exhibit artworks designed to provoke reflection on
individual privacy, by collaborating with the School of the Art Institute of
Chicago and the Chicago Museum of Science and Industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will center around the intellectual development of complementary tools
that give consumers data-driven insight into (i) the huge archives companies
give consumers who exercise data-access rights and (ii) the online third-party
tracking ecosystem. Several intellectual challenges stand in the way. First,
usable transparency about voluminous data requires automatic methods that
surface the information that matters most to consumers. The project will address
this challenge through formative user studies and the iterative development and
evaluation of a data-access tool. In addition, the project will develop new
techniques for identifying, integrating, and visualizing data archives. Second,
because the raw data collected about a consumer provides only partial
transparency, the project will develop new methods for communicating, in an
individualized manner, inferences possible from data. Third, as transparency is
powerless without recourse, the project will understand the types of recourse
users desire and develop tools that identify and mitigate privacy-tool-related
website breakage at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.