* 2047725
* CAREER: Expanding the Toolbox for Olefin Functionalization and Difunctionalization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Michael Young, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 648,553.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Michael Young of The University of Toledo is developing new ways to install new
molecular fragments at both carbon atoms of an alkene by using reaction
additives to control the regiochemistry. Alkenes are common feedstock chemicals
that are obtained from both petrochemical and bio-based sources. Despite the
many existing strategies that have been studied for selectively converting
alkene building blocks into value-added products, there are still challenges
associated with the formation of product mixtures and the need for wasteful
intermediate synthetical steps. Dr. Young and his research team are working to
control the reactions of alkenes with simple and abundant reaction additives
such as carbon dioxide. These studies have the potential to permit for more
efficient syntheses of valuable chemical building blocks for new
pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals, and next generation materials. Dr. Young will
also introduce the practice of solvent recycling to research students and into
teaching labs to emphasize the importance of sustainability. In addition, online
short courses on green chemistry principles are also being developed for
students and the local chemical industry
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Directing groups have played an essential role
in advancing the field of C-H functionalization and the development of transient
directing groups continues to improve the synthetic efficiency of this important
strategy for achieving selective reactivity. Dr. Michael Young and his students
are developing ways to use transient directing group tools for internal olefin
functionalization strategies. Specifically, the regioselective arylation of free
amine-tethered alkenes with aryl halides is being investigated by changing
reactions conditions. This approach is designed to both improve the selectivity
of internal alkene arylation reactions and facilitate product diversification.
In addition, 1,2-difunctionalization reactions of activated alkenes will be
studied to install C-C and C-O/C-N bonds in the same step. Mechanistic studies
are planned to guide optimization and synthetic application of this new
chemistry. These activities are expected to provide new approaches to the rapid
diversification of amine-containing compounds, which is beneficial for
developing compound libraries to support the pharmaceutical and agrochemical
industries. These activities will also provide an excellent training ground in
synthetic and organometallic chemistry for a diverse group of graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students, as well as a postdoctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.