* 2047905
* NSF CAREER: Enhancing the Optical Properties of Topological Dirac and Weyl Semimetals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Thomas Searles, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2026
* USD 222,730.00

Advances in materials science are instrumental to the success of each industrial
revolution of the modern world, including the current quantum revolution. To
achieve the technological advantages rooted in the basis of quantum mechanics,
the United States established the National Quantum Initiative which included
quantum materials and the formation of a “quantum-smart” workforce. In this
project, the Principal Investigator aims to address both requirements through an
integrated research and education plan centered around enhancing materials whose
physical properties are robust against deformation. Therefore, the project
addresses the specific need for experimental studies of materials with
technologies and applications in light controlled electronic and photonics
devices. Through measurements under the influence of large electric and magnetic
fields, the Principal Investigator and his team will assess the performance for
increased reliability, speed and durability leading to quantum-enabled
communications, computing, and sensing. Furthermore, the comprehensive education
plan broadly impacts the scientific community and integrates the research to
increase participation in high magnetic field science, especially from the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) physics and materials
science communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan merges nonlinear
optics and plasmonics to explore important scientific challenges such as doping
of topological semimetals, the influence of high magnetic fields on Dirac and
Weyl semimetals and the existence of Dirac and Weyl semimetals as naturally
occurring negative index materials in the technologically important infrared
regime. Nonlinear optical spectroscopy techniques in the infrared to terahertz
range will be used to study how the optical properties of topological semimetals
are enhanced by: reducing dimensionality (bulk vs. monolayer); patterning into
metasurfaces or hybrid metamaterials; and applying external fields (DC,
optical/THz or magnetic field). The Principal Investigator will also broadly
impact the scientific community through an integrated research and education
plan that: distributes, low-cost, long duration pulsed high magnetic field (up
to 10 T) apparatus to the HBCU Physics Community for increased participation in
High Magnetic Field science; integrates the apparatus into the physics curricula
at Howard and 4 partner HBCUs; and improves the physics identity of Black
undergraduate Physics students through workshops hosted at Howard and the
National Society of Black Physics Meeting. Further outreach to the scientific
community includes the creation of a YouTube and Slack channels specific to
development of low-cost pulsed magnetic field
apparatus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.