* 2047835
* CAREER: Physics and modeling of flame extinction in presence of evaporating droplets
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Xinyu Zhao, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2026
* USD 394,563.00

Fundamental understanding of flame extinction plays a central role in promoting
energy security, environmental sustainability, air-travel safety and opportune
fire suppression. Flame extinction has been extensively studied by the
international combustion community in the past few decades, however, the scope
of fundamental studies has mostly been limited to gaseous flames. Droplets, such
as fuel sprays in aeronautical combustors and water droplets in pollutant
reduction or fire suppression, are ubiquitous in practical combustion systems.
When interacting with an established gaseous flame, droplets introduce
additional mechanisms to extinguish a flame, through physical processes such as
vaporization, dilution, subsequent reactions, modulation of turbulence, and
radiative heat transfer. Therefore, the principal aim of this project is to
provide a fundamental understanding and a quantitative description of key
factors governing the flame extinction process in presence of droplets. The
project will also encompass significant educational activities, including a new
“Virtual Thermal Fluids Lab” course and a companion book that are enabled by the
research data. In conjunction with the research and educational activities, two
outreach programs will be implemented. First, an educational program for high
school teachers will use the research data as a unique avenue to enhance the
computational literacy of high school students. Second, researchers will work
with local museum curators to showcase artistic designs that are derived from
the research program and to attract underrepresented groups into STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to address the knowledge gap
pertaining to the mechanism through which heterogeneous heat, momentum, and mass
transfer impact the extinction limits for flames.&lt;br/&gt;Stochastic droplet-
laden turbulent flow introduces additional heat sinks/sources and nonuniform
reactivity to the delicate balance near the extinction limit. A canonical
counterflow configuration will be adopted to represent the fundamental processes
of flame-droplet interactions. An open-source computational framework will be
adopted, where numerical algorithms will be carefully designed to ensure
necessary coupling between various physical processes. The proposed numerical
models and solution algorithms will incorporate latest development from the
study of turbulent multiphase flows and extinction chemistry, paving the way for
more accurate in-depth computational studies. A methodology will be established
to combine information from three-dimensional direct numerical simulations with
one-dimensional modeled turbulent simulations to enable efficient and reliable
parametric analysis. Using the reduced-order models, scaling relations will be
established, which will provide a quantitative description of critical time and
length scales in such problems. Successful execution of this project will enable
robust reduced-order modeling in engineering applications, such as lean-blowoff
in aeronautical combustors and fire suppression using water
mists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.