* 2047823
* CAREER: Optomechanical Sensors Leveraging Quantum Noise
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Thomas Purdy, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 06/30/2026
* USD 182,701.00

Mechanical sensors with unprecedented sensitivity will provide a means to look
for extremely tiny forces that are undetectable by current methods. Such small
signals can arise from cosmological origins, such as certain hypothetical types
of dark matter which must exist in great abundance to hold our galaxy together
but cannot be seen directly with normal astronomical observation. Another source
as-of-yet undetected signals is from proposed effects which act to spoil exotic
quantum mechanical behaviors such as an object existing simultaneously in two
places at once. Observing or putting limits on the existence of either of these
signals will add to the fundamental understanding of the nature of our universe.
At much smaller scales, ultrasensitive mechanical detectors could feel the
magnetic forces from individual atoms and nuclei, performing nanoscale magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) for biologically important molecules or semiconductor
electronic devices that cannot be imaged via conventional techniques. As
mechanical sensors are devised with lower and lower noise, devices are running
up against fundamental quantum noise limits. This project will develop methods
to side-step these quantum limits and improve searches for small mechanical
signals representing new physical phenomena. To this end, ultralow noise
mechanical sensors with new optical probing techniques will be developed to
enhance measurement sensitivity in the face of quantum noise. This project will
also provide educational research training for undergraduate students, preparing
the next generation of scientists and engineers to tackle real-world problems.
Students will take a real open-ended research project in optical and mechanical
sensors from concept and design all the way through fabrication and testing in
rapid enough succession to allow for multiple iterations facilitated by modern
computer-aided design, simulation, and manufacturing
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding quantum noise limits in
optically probed mechanical systems goes back to the advent of quantum
mechanics, with Heisenberg’s microscope thought experiment illustrating a
fundamental trade-off between position sensitivity and backaction (i.e. random
momentum kicks from recoiling photons obscuring the motion of an object being
observed with light). Many methods to evade the deleterious effects of this
quantum backaction have been proposed, most of which require complex optical or
mechanical configurations with demanding constraints on classical noise, loss,
and stability. Here, the goal is to demonstrate a similar quantum advantage in a
much simpler and ubiquitous precision optical measurement technique – the
optical lever, measuring the angular deviation of light reflecting off a tilting
surface. Simple modifications to the standard setup yield an increase in the
quantum information from the measurement and a reduction in the sensitivity to
backaction-induced motion that would otherwise mask small signals. This
technique will be applied to ultralow mechanical dissipation, high-tension
vibrating string mechanical resonators that can be functionalized for sensing
strain, gravity, and magnetic fields beyond standard quantum limits. Further,
this string optomechanical sensor will be anchored to a macroscopic test mass
and the quantum limits of measuring strain induced by test mass motion will be
investigated. Measurements of this system will put meaningful constraints on
beyond-standard-model interactions including exotic quantum decoherence models
and ultralight scalar dark matter. In the longer term, the techniques developed
here will find applications in the quantum-enhanced detection of gravitational
waves, nanoscale force microscopy, and in mechanically mediated storage and
transduction of quantum states for quantum information
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.