* 2047001
* CAREER: Advancing the Role of Ontologies for Data Science in Biomedicine
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Licong Cui, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 320,112.00

An ontology is a formal representation of concepts (or classes), properties, and
relationships between concepts within a knowledge domain. Ontologies and
terminologies have played a vital role in biomedical research for coding,
managing, sharing, and exchange of vast amounts of heterogeneous biomedical data
that are being continuously generated, such as in Electronic Health Records
(EHRs). EHRs have been widely used in translational research to learn predictive
models for discovery and disease management across varying patient cohorts. The
very first step in such EHR-based applications often concerns patient cohort
identification. Cohort identification involves the specification of a collection
of eligibility criterion that needs to be transformed into a computable
representation using the EHRâ€™s semantic backbone (i.e., coding systems or
ontologies) before queries can run against the EHR database. However, there are
two critical barriers in performing effective cohort identification from large-
scale EHRs. The first one is data (or semantic) heterogeneity, caused by a mixed
utilization of coding systems. The second one is the quality of the semantic
backbone or ontology hierarchy, which is essential for translating patient
eligibility criteria to executable database queries. To address such challenges,
this project will develop new methods for ontology matching and for ontology
quality enhancement that directly impact data science practice in biomedicine,
such as patient cohort identification. In addition, this project will
incorporate the proposed computational aspects into data science-based courses
to train next generation data scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
consists of three research objectives. In Objective 1, the PI will develop new
graph neural network (GNN)-based learning methods for matching biomedical
ontologies by harnessing knowledge embedded in sources such as the Unified
Medical Language System. This will address the heterogeneity issue and achieve
semantic interoperability. In Objective 2, the PI will develop learning-based
methods for detecting quality defects in subclass relations. This will address
the quality issue and achieve continued enhancement of ontology hierarchies. In
Objective 3, the PI will develop an ontology-based COVID-19 query engine for
patient cohort identification, which is a real-world application of enhancing
semantic interoperability for supporting data-driven COVID-19 research. For
evaluation of the proposed methods, domain experts will be involved in
validation of the resulted matching concepts and detected quality issues. The PI
will communicate validated quality issues to the respective ontology owners for
correction in subsequent ontology versions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.