* 2047849
* CAREER: Pyramidal Intelligence for Ultra-low-power Wearable Massive-sensor Computers
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Qingxue Zhang, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 02/28/2026
* USD 301,506.00

The era of big data is prompting a large-scale deployment of on-body monitors
towards wearable massive-sensor computers. These massive sensors have promising
and broad prospects to greatly advance big data-driven precision health, through
comprehensively capturing behavioral, physiological or biological signals from
the human body. Nevertheless, because of the big data volume brought by massive
sensors, the system is very power-hungry and thus it is very pressing to
innovate an ultra-low-power architecture. Targeting this crucial challenge, this
project aims to develop new design methodologies, techniques and implementations
to achieve a generalizable ultra-low-power architecture for wearable massive-
sensor computers. Concretely, this project seeks to leverage novel deep learning
approaches to minimize the power consumption of the system. Firstly, the data
characteristics of sensor streams will be learned by deep learning to analyze,
evaluate, and measure the redundancy in the data, which will then be used to
activate just-enough sensors. The deep learning will learn the signal dynamics
to intelligently determine the sensor activation schemes. Besides, the data on
the activated sensors will be further analyzed and compressed to minimize the
power consumption. The signal fluctuations and patterns will be learned by
efficient deep learning models and then be encoded to sparsified
representations. Real-world experiments will also be conducted to evaluate and
validate the effectiveness of the proposed ultra-low-power architecture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a new ultra-low-power
architecture to enable energy-efficient wearable massive-sensor computers, and
thus greatly advance their real-world deployment. This new architecture will
dramatically boost the battery life, enhance the usability, and improve the
long-term data capturing capability of the wearable sensors. This is essential
for big data-driven precision health. The achieved human big data will
effectively contribute to the study of time-varying, nonlinear, and unknown
dynamics of the human body, and broadly benefit many areas like fitness and
lifestyle management, medical decision support, disease model establishment,
individualized treatment plan, and population-level big data mining. The
research findings from this project will be broadly disseminated to the
scientific communities, medical areas and other communities. The broad impact of
this proposal also stems from the educational program for students from K-12 to
undergraduate and graduate levels, through efforts like attracting
undergraduate, women and underrepresented students to research, training
students in real-world problem solving, and broader research training of high
school students and outreach to K-12. This systematic plan of integrating
education to research aims to train the next generation of professional STEM
researchers and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.