* 2047328
* CAREER: Molecular mechanisms of ribonucleoprotein assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Catherine Eichhorn, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 12/31/2025
* USD 615,037.00

Ribonucleic acid (RNA) is an essential biological molecule that performs diverse
roles in cellular processes. To carry out its function, RNA must first fold into
the correct structure and assemble with required cofactors such as proteins.
Despite having a central role in biology, a comprehensive understanding of how
RNA folds and binds to protein is lacking. To address these gaps in knowledge,
this project uses the 7SK ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex, a crucial regulator
of cell function, as a model system. In addition, this project will characterize
folding of synthetic RNAs that bind dyes to become fluorescent that, when tagged
onto biologically important RNAs, can be used to observe RNA in live cells.
Results arising from the project will provide fundamental insights into RNA
structure-function relationships for RNAs involved in biological processes and
produce general rules for RNP assembly. The project entwines education alongside
research to increase retention and diversity of the next generation of
scientists. This project will develop educational activities including
incorporating discovery-based chemical biology laboratory coursework into the
undergraduate curriculum. Hands-on workshops will be held in partnership with
established programs at the University of Nebraska â€“ Lincoln to engage the
public in RNA science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNPs are essential for cell
function, yet without comprehensive knowledge of RNA structure and RNP assembly
the molecular mechanisms directing cell function cannot be fully understood. The
7SK RNP, a major regulator of eukaryotic transcription, is an ideal model system
to advance limited knowledge of RNA-regulated cell function. A fundamental
understanding of 7SK RNP structure and assembly will advance understanding of
transcription regulation and assembly of other regulatory RNPs; however, there
are significant gaps in understanding how 7SK RNA folds and assembles into a
functional RNP. To overcome these gaps, this project employs multidisciplinary
approaches to determine 7SK RNA structural dynamics, characterize 7SK RNA-
protein interactions important for regulatory function; and integrate a
fluorescent RNA aptamer into 7SK RNA for live cell imaging in vivo. To achieve
these objectives, combined solution NMR spectroscopy, X-ray crystallography,
cellular approaches, binding assays, and fluorescence microscopy methods will be
used. This project will elucidate the molecular mechanisms of RNA folding and
RNP assembly using integrated biophysical and chemical biology approaches, in
concert with education activities to advance and support underrepresented
communities in STEM. This project is jointly supported by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.