* 2047289
* CAREER: Measuring and Modeling Non-canonical Wnt Signaling in Regulation of Cell State
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Taran Gujral, FRED HUTCHINSON CANCER CENTER
* Continuing Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 02/28/2026
* USD 729,843.00

This project aims to provide insights into cell-to-cell communication that play
a crucial role in forming tissues and organs and the organization of different
body parts during embryonic development. How cells communicate and govern these
fundamental biological processes are highly complex and dynamic, and their
behavior is very difficult to predict from knowledge of the individual parts.
Therefore, the question arises how we should analyze and understand such
complexity and which measurement technologies will prove most useful. Recently,
several high-throughput approaches for collecting large-scale datasets,
particularly those involving gene expression, have unlocked the door to data-
driven systems biology-based projects. However, studying many interactions, even
in a closely interconnected network, is powerful, but it is often hard to see
the forest for the trees. Most often, system biologists rely on mathematical and
computational models to analyze large-scale datasets and use these models to
make scientific breakthroughs. To inspire and train the next generation of
scientists in both experimental and computational approaches, this project will
provide an opportunity for undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds to
learn both cutting-edge cell biology-based experimentation and computational
methods for formulating, simplifying, and extracting critical information from
large-scale quantitative experimental data. A combination of hands-on training
and lesson plans on the concept of 'cellular decision-making' for high school
teachers will further promote data-driven biology among high school students.
The graduate students and postdoctoral fellows working on this project will
integrate experimental and mathematical modeling techniques that can be applied
to broad areas of biology. This quantitative research theme will be carried
forward by mentorship to high school students and through public engagement
activities with the local community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The epithelial-
mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a central mechanism for diversifying the cells
found in complex tissues. During EMT, epithelial cells adopt mesenchymal
properties by altering their morphology, cellular architecture, adhesion, and
migratory capacity. Several growth factors, including TGF-beta and Wnt, have
been shown to trigger the EMT in both embryonic development as well as normal
and transformed cells. However, a mechanistic and integrated understanding of
how these various factors cooperate to induce the EMT in epithelial cells or
transdifferentiation in fibroblast is still lacking. The goal of this project is
to develop an integrated understanding of how Wnt and TGF-beta pathways control
fundamental cell biological and developmental processes of EMT and cell
migration. The research project will reveal mechanistic insights into how Wnt
signaling drives EMT and promotes cell migration, and determine whether
cooperation between Wnt and TGF-beta signaling is necessary for EMT. The project
will also provide a biochemical portrait to determine how proteins in the Wnt
pathway interact and interconnect with TGF-beta signaling and determine how
these connections change as epithelial cells undergo
transdifferentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.