* 2047863
* CAREER: Atmospheric Electricity on Earth and Mars
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Jeremy Riousset, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 04/30/2023
* USD 325,542.00

Naturally occurring lightning in the Earth atmosphere releases tremendous amount
of energy in a very short time. Lightnings most commonly occur during
thunderstorms as electrostatic charges accumulate in clouds. Lightnings have
also been found to occur on Mars, believed to be created by dust storms. Though
not as common as on Earth because of low atmosphere pressure, such lightnings
can be a hazard to instruments on Mars with metal objects acting like a
lightning rod. The multiplication of robotic explorers at the surface of the
planet has increased the chances of such electric discharges, increasing risks
for instruments and an ever-more likely human-
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER research outlines a five-year
effort to study the physics and observability of electrical discharges in
atmospheric conditions representative of Earth and Mars. The investigators
suggest a comprehensive study combining theory and experiments centered on
discharges produced in air at pressures ranging from 6 to 1013 mbar, to examine
the differences between discharges started from a hot, cylindrical or spherical
electrode, and the electrification observed in the tribocharging of regoliths
and sand grains. The principal objective is to further our understanding of the
physics of electrical discharge in diverse environments. In particular, this
research seeks to resolve the following outstanding issues in planetary
electricity: (1) Can geometric factors adequately explain the difference between
theoretical and observed lightning initiation thresholds? (2) Can modeling help
assess the nature (glow, streamer, leader) of atmospheric breakdown occurring in
the form of Transient Luminous Events or putative Martian lightning? (3) Can
tribocharging lead to the initiation of such non-conventional
discharges?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan aims to: &lt;br/&gt;• produce
the formulation of a new, generalized model of electron avalanche initiated from
a hot cylindrical or spherical electrode,&lt;br/&gt;• create a 3-D fractal
models of extraterrestrial discharges and estimates of their electric charges
and dipole moments,&lt;br/&gt;• make quantitative measurements of the
electrification in a scaled Martian dust event,&lt;br/&gt;• disseminate of
academic research outside academia through Astronomy on Tap talks,
and&lt;br/&gt;• create a summer camp using LEGO Mindstorms to introduce middle-
schoolers to programing and space science through an innovative and engaging
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this project will directly impact
the design of future instruments for the detection of extraterrestrial
atmospheric electricity by identifying the most measurable changes due to non-
conventional lightning. It will also help to assess the risk of initiating
discharges from surface objects in particular in the framework of Martian
exploration. It will strengthen the relationship between academic research and
the local community, through the 5-day summer camp, public lectures, and talks
at informal venues. Through these tasks, the investigator will reach audiences
of all ages and levels and seek to inspire the next generation of scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.