* 2047625
* CAREER: Creating a Model of Programming Skill Development to Improve Undergraduate Computing Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Mahnas Mohammadi-Aragh, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 06/30/2026
* USD 607,899.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
computing and engineering education. The nation is driven by computer programs
that are vital to everyday living. National security depends on the ability to
withstand daily cyber-attacks. Economic security is connected to financial
institutions securely moving millions of dollars electronically. National
infrastructure depends on control systems that, for example, monitor air traffic
and control automobiles. Humans connect electronically through smart phones,
cell phone towers, and high-speed internet. The nation’s increasing dependence
on computer programs is reflected in the increasing number of projected new jobs
in computing occupations. However, the United States is not able to produce
enough computing professionals for its needs. Learning to program is a well-
known challenge and serves as a barrier to entry into the computing workforce.
The research and education plans for this project aim to transform computing
curricula and reduce programming as a workforce barrier. This project combines
knowledge of how students learn to program (computing and engineering education
findings) with how humans learn (cognitive science and education psychology
findings) to examine learning to program at the intersection of multiple
perspectives. To simultaneously focus on integrating research results into
practice, this project will produce a training academy for future programming
instructors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use theoretical frameworks
of writing, learning, and knowledge to chronologize how undergraduates pursuing
computing degrees develop programming skills. The research goal for this project
is to produce a longitudinal model of undergraduate programming skill
development based on direct learning measures and surveys of industry expert
practices. The education goal for the project is to create a community and
training academy for future computing educators to apply research findings in
classrooms. At the completion of this project, the computing and engineering
education communities will know: 1) how engineering students’ programming
skills, including thinking processes, visual organization strategies, and
approaches for solving programming problems, evolve from introductory
programming courses through degree attainment; 2) how writing, by exposing
cognitive processes, supports the development of skills necessary for success in
computing-required fields; and 3) how computing industry professionals’ views of
requisite programming skills differ from the skills of engineering students in
their final year of their degree program. Project oversight will be provided
through external evaluation and an advisory board of computing education
experts. This project has the potential to improve the education of the nation's
computer programmers and to increase the number of students who successfully
complete computer science degrees. The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
Program is a National Science Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that supports
early-career faculty who have the potential to serve as academic role models in
research and education. This CAREER project is supported by the Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education: Education and Human Resources
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.