* 2047828
* CAREER: Addressing Algorithmic Challenges in Computational Genomic Epidemiology
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Pavel Skums, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 03/31/2026
* USD 299,269.00

Fighting viral epidemics is one of the major challenges faced by the modern
globally connected world. Recent technological advances had a profound effect on
our answers to that challenge. They allow for rapid and cost-effective
sequencing (i.e., reading) of pathogen genomes and can generate enormous amounts
of data in almost real time. Genomic epidemiology is an interdisciplinary
research area that uses the large-scale analysis of viral genomes to understand
how viruses evolve and spread. The methods of genomic epidemiology are currently
becoming major instruments not only for research, but also for public-health
decision making of broad societal importance. However, its computational toolkit
is still developing, and this process faces many hard algorithmic challenges.
Some of the major problems are: (i) how to extract the whole spectrum of viral
genetic diversity, including newly emerging mutations and variants, from noisy
and fragmented sequencing data; (ii) how to use genomic data to investigate
outbreaks and reconstruct virus-transmission networks; and (iii) how to identify
highly pathogenic or transmissible viral variants. The algorithms for these
problems should be accurate, reproducible, interpretable and scalable with
respect to the levels of "big data" produced by modern sequencing platforms.
Development of such algorithms and study of the corresponding algorithmic
problems is exactly the goal of this project. Other major objectives are to help
to bring computational genomics into high-school and undergraduate classrooms,
to broaden participation in computational biology via advanced pedagogical
techniques, and to facilitate training of the next generation of
interdisciplinary researchers, who will simultaneously possess an expertise in
computer science, epidemiology, and molecular biology, and will be able to
develop innovative algorithms and apply them to real-life
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will undertake the systematic study
of fundamental computational problems of genomic epidemiology from the
theoretical computer-science perspective. The overarching objective is the
development of new methods based on cross-disciplinary convergence of techniques
from algorithmic graph theory, network theory and mathematical (and,
particularly, combinatorial) optimization. The first major specific scientific
goal is the development of methods for assessment of viral genetic diversity
using networks of statistically linked mutations and a graph-decomposition
approach. The second goal is the development of a family of combinatorial
algorithms for reconstruction of viral transmission networks using the fusion of
phylogenetics and a network-theory approach to social networks relevant to
infection dissemination. The final goal is the design of scalable computational
techniques for quantification of viral phenotypic diversity using combinatorial
and convex optimization. The investigator will closely collaborate with
biologists and epidemiologists to ensure biomedical relevance and applicability
of the developed algorithms. It is also expected that some of the new machinery
will be applicable to non-biomedical problems arising in graph theory and in
studies of complex networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.