* 2047721
* CAREER: Understanding the Variability, Predictability and Changes of Tropical Cyclone Genesis Frequency in the North Atlantic: From Basin to Sub-basin Scales
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Wei Mei, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 539,824.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;North Atlantic (NA) tropical
cyclones (TCs) cause devastating losses of life and property along our Eastern
Seaboard. Owing to the small number of TCs in observations, our knowledge of the
reasons behind the variations in TC genesis remains limited. This limitation has
resulted in our failure, at times, to reasonably forecast seasonal basin-wide TC
genesis frequency and in continuing challenges to predict seasonal TC genesis
frequency on sub-basin scales. As such, having an improved understanding and
better predictions of TC activity is societally beneficial. This project
utilizes an unprecedentedly large number of high-resolution model simulations to
explore NA TC genesis. These simulations greatly expand the input in data-sparse
regions and improve TC incidence, allowing us to examine the fundamental
processes that govern both basin-wide and sub-basin TC genesis frequency. The
project results will help overcome difficulties in seasonal forecasts of TC
tracks and landfall, given the enhanced information regarding the relation
between preferred TC tracks and TC genesis location. The research will be
integrated with activities to educate, train, and broaden the participation of
students from underrepresented groups in Atmosphere, Ocean and Climate Sciences
as well as to inform the broader community through public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to advance the knowledge of the variability,
predictability, and changes of both basin-wide and sub-basin TC genesis
frequency over NA under different climates. The research objectives are to: (1)
characterize the forced variability in TC genesis frequency that is driven by
sea surface temperatures (SSTs) and the internal variability that arises due to
the chaotic nature of the atmosphere, (2) assess the physical mechanisms
underlying these two types of variability, and determine their impacts on the
predictability of seasonal TC genesis frequency, (3) quantify the effects of
global warming on the climatology of and trend in TC genesis frequency since the
1970s, and (4) explore how SST warming combined with a sizable greenhouse gas
increase affects TC genesis frequency and evaluate the probabilistic changes in
TC genesis frequency in warmer climates. These objectives will be achieved via
dynamical diagnosis and statistical analysis of a very large ensemble of long-
term, high-resolution simulations that accurately reproduce observed TC
characteristics. This project will support the development of an
interdisciplinary course to stimulate the interest of undergraduates in
Atmosphere, Ocean and Climate Sciences. It will provide training for doctoral
students, and hands-on research projects for underrepresented undergraduates
from HBCUs and UNC Chapel Hill. The results will also be integrated into local
high-school curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.