* 2047045
* CAREER: Formation and Redox Chemistry of Metal Polysulfanido Complexes for Sulfur Transfer Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Emily Tsui, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2026
* USD 685,000.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp;
Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Emily Tsui of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Notre Dame is
studying a new class of transition metal sulfur complexes. The goal of this
research is to use these complexes for the development of new catalytic
reactions and as new ways to store energy or electricity. This project will
support the training of graduate and undergraduate students to prepare them to
become successful members of the scientific workforce. Additional educational
outreach materials are to be developed to improve the scientific engagement of
middle school students and their parents and teachers, particularly in the area
of renewable energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Tsui and her group are
studying the formation of metal polysulfanido complexes via the insertion of
elemental sulfur into first-row transition metal thiolate compounds. Synthetic,
spectroscopic, and electrochemical studies will be carried out on these
complexes to probe the relationship between polysulfanido formation and ligand
ring strain or substitution. Insights gleaned from these studies are then to be
used in the design of new catalysts for sulfur transfer reactions to unsaturated
organic substrates. Additionally, the Tsui team aims to develop new ways of
controlling the speciation of polysulfide ions upon sulfur reduction. There are
three specific aims of the research to be undertaken: (1) Elemental sulfur is to
be activated by metal thiolate chelate and nonchelated complexes; (2) The Tsui
research team aims to develop catalytic carbon-sulfur bond-forming reactions
mediated by metal polysulfanido complexes and (3) The Notre Dame team plans to
study the redox properties of metal polysulfanido
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.