* 2047919
* CAREER: Navigating the Environments of the Universe’s Fastest Transients
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Wen-fai Fong, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 622,669.00

Dr. Fong and her group will characterize the host galaxy properties of short
duration gamma-ray bursts (SGRBs) and fast radio bursts (FRBs). SGRBs originate
from neutron star mergers. The origin of FRBs is unknown, but they may be
generated by highly magnetized young neutron stars, called magnetars. A uniform
analysis of the host galaxy environments of these two populations will provide
key insights into the nature of these transient sources. Dr. Fong and her group
will lead the Thrive Program, which is a new educational partnership between
Northwestern University and Movement Consulting. Monthly workshops will be held
to develop the professional skills of female and under-represented minority
(f-URM) undergraduate students interested in STEM, and a Leadership Conference
will be offered to Chicago area f-URM graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will increase the catalog of host
galaxy properties by factors of 3 and 8 for SGRBs and FRBs, respectively. The
observational data, the derived galaxy properties and the associated models for
the approximately, 103 FRB and 65 SGRB host galaxies will be made publicly
available in tailored repositories and on GitHub. The Thrive Program is expected
to reach approximately, 150 undergraduates and 200 graduate students. The Thrive
program products will be made available online to promote scalability and
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.