* 2047640
* CAREER: Biochemical and Structural Mechanism of the WASH Regulatory Complex
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Baoyu Chen, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 01/31/2026
* USD 962,655.00

Like a city, the cell is filled with heavy traffic. Cellular traffic is made up
of tiny parcels called vesicles that contain molecules to be sent to their
correct destinations. Movement of traffic allows the cell to perform important
tasks, such as responding to the environment, absorbing nutrients, and
surviving. Larger membrane-enclosed structures called endosomes act as a “parcel
distribution center” to decide where the molecules are sent to. Endosomes are
coated with fibers made up of a protein called actin. Similar to muscles and
bones in the human body, actin fibers give endosomes proper shape and strength.
Without actin, the endosome collapses, and the traffic stalls. The overall goal
of this project is to understand how the cell produces actin fibers to support
the structure and function of endosomes. Results of this project will provide
fundamental knowledge about how endosomes form correct structures and direct
traffic properly. In parallel, the PI will integrate multiple new approaches to
improve the infrastructure of biochemical education and research, including
creating new virtual lab software to help undergraduate students study
biochemistry lab courses, establishing a bimonthly campus-wide biological
science forum to help graduate students and labs share research and collaborate,
and offering strong undergraduate research experiences both in the traditional
lab setting and in a new virtual group-discussion format.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
understand actin cytoskeletal regulation at endosomal membranes. Specifically
focused on a central regulator of endosomal actin named the WASH Regulatory
Complex (SHRC), the project aims to: 1) determine how the SHRC is activated by
various membrane ligands; 2) identify and characterize new membrane ligands,
and; 3) solve high-resolution structures of the SHRC in various activation
states. Successful completion of the project will fill a large gap in
understanding how actin structures are dynamically assembled at endosomal
membranes, how actin rearrangements regulate endosomal structure and function,
and how the cell may use similar principles to control actin dynamics at other
intracellular organelles and trafficking pathways. In addition, the project will
develop new proteomic tools, discover new molecules important to endosomal
trafficking, and identify new structural mechanisms, which together will provide
unprecedented opportunities for biologists to manipulate and study endosomal
trafficking in cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.