* 2047313
* CAREER - Winding up our crystal clocks: Experimental studies of element diffusion in igneous minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Thomas Shea, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2026
* USD 518,578.00

Volcanoes and their underlying magmatic plumbing systems (magma reservoirs,
conduits) operate over timescales that vary between seconds (an explosive
eruption) to several hundreds of thousands of years (progressive assembly of
large reservoirs). Volcanic unrest prior to eruptions, expressed by increasing
seismicity or ground deformation, tends to be directly correlated with
subsurface magmatic processes (magma ascent, mixing of different magmas,
formation of new pathways into the surrounding rock). Therefore, quantifying the
timescales over which these processes operate is at the heart of volcanology and
scenario-based hazards mitigation. Fortunately for scientists, magmas carry
mineral cargo to the surface that can be used as ‘crystal clocks’. Chemical
gradients preserved in minerals represent incomplete rehomogenization of the
mineral’s chemical components, and can be used to estimate the duration over
which the gradients formed through a technique called diffusion chronometry. The
rate at which chemical elements diffuse/move in those minerals at magmatic
temperatures needs to be first quantified through laboratory experiments for
this method to be effective. However, these rates currently suffer from problems
associated with simplified experimental setups and may not be directly
applicable to natural magmas. This project proposes to carry out new sets of lab
experiments at high temperature to better tune our crystal clocks, to aid in
quantification of magmatic timescales under high threat volcanoes.&lt;br/&gt;The
project also develops ‘Experiments in Geosciences’ as a common theme and
educational goal. High school and college undergraduate student interest in STEM
vocations has been shown to decline towards graduation. STEM careers are often
deemed difficult due to math, physics or chemistry requirements, and achievement
gaps tend to affect underrepresented minorities the hardest. Hawaii is one of
the most diverse places in the US, yet this diversity is not yet reflected in
undergraduate enrollment in Geosciences. Through series of integrated
educational and outreach activities involving the PI, a Native Hawaiian PhD
student, a MS student in Geoscience education, as well as several undergraduate
students and senior collaborators, this project seeks to reconnect high school
and undergraduate students to science and scientific research through hands-on
experimentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diffusion chronometry in minerals is a
powerful technique to extract magmatic timescales, based on the extent of
concentration gradients produced by element diffusion with time. The method can
theoretically be used to resolve any timescale, as long as suitable analytical
tools are available, and the element diffusion rate is well known. Diffusion
chronometry has experienced a surge in igneous applications over the last two
decades as diffusion coefficients have become available. These coefficients are
extracted from laboratory experiments involving solid couples, but natural
magmatic minerals are surrounded by melt. The few diffusivities derived from
melt-solid experiments appear significantly faster than their solid-solid
counterparts. This project aims to better understand diffusion in minerals
within magma. (i) Series of mineral-melt diffusion experiments will be carried
out in the lab using olivine and plagioclase to determine whether diffusivities
obtained are similar or higher than solid couples. Analytical work and TEM
imaging will aid in understanding the mechanisms underpinning any differences
observed. The experiments will also be used to extract melt-crystal partition
coefficients. (ii) A unique, 29 year-long natural experiment (a slowly cooled
lava lake) will be leveraged to test the diffusion chronometry technique.
Olivine within a series of drill core samples collected 1959-1988 will be
analyzed to study the compositional homogenization of elements within an olivine
population, and detailed elemental profiles used to test the diffusion
chronometry method with samples of known temperature histories. The overarching
theme of this project is experimentation, both for research and educational
purposes. A ‘scaled earth laboratory’ will be built during the project to allow
students to engage in the science reasoning process, from designing to
performing experiments, collecting and interpreting data, and making connections
with natural systems. This lab will be exploited for undergraduate experiences
at all levels and a new introductory course will be constructed with the help of
the graduate students involved. Mobile portions of the lab will be taken to high
schools, benefiting from an existing funded outreach effort (EPIK). We will
conduct ‘Science Saturdays’ events, where small groups of high schoolers and
their teachers are invited to tour the experimental and analytical facilities.
Emphasis will be put on providing a tiered mentoring structure, where the PI,
graduates, undergraduates all contribute to student advising. Everyone will get
training on how to conduct Place-based investigations, and sensitized to the
need to strengthen our institutions by increasing diversity and promoting
equitable access to STEM research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.