* 2047446
* CAREER: Photonic Integrated Guided-Wave-Driven Metasurfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Xingjie Ni, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 03/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Wiring light on a chip like electronic circuits, integrated photonics provides a
promising long-term solution for increasing demands for data transmission
bandwidth and energy efficiency of computing and communication systems. A
photonic integrated circuit (PIC) combining many light-controlling components
into a single chip, similar to complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS)
chips that have revolutionized the electronics industry, offers great advantages
in terms of speed, bandwidth, reliability, scalability, power consumption, and
etc. In order to fully exploit the benefits of PICs in free-space applications,
it is crucial to have an interface that can flexibly control light when it
converts between guided and free-space modes. However, conventional coupling
techniques such as edge couplers and surface gratings have limited
functionalities and lack of the capability to complete control over light.
Although arrays of gratings can achieve more advanced functions, such as off-
chip beam steering, focusing, and holographic image construction, they have
large footprints and suffer from loss due to the existence of high-order
diffractions. Therefore, there is a strong demand for a unified approach to
achieve complex free-space optical functions on PICs. The major goal of the
proposed program is to develop a hybrid architecture where metasurfaces –
ultrathin artificial surfaces which manipulate light by locally imposing abrupt
changes to optical properties through engineered sub-wavelength structures also
known as meta-atoms – are directly driven by guided waves to realize complex
free-space functions. The proposed program will include closely integrated
educational activities (such as developing a new course on nanophotonics)
designed to stimulate undergraduate and graduate students to pursue engineering
career by exposing them to the exciting development of nanophotonic devices
solving important societal problems in optical computing, communication, and
networking. Besides, nanophotonic cloud computing tools will be developed that
are free-to-run in web browsers without the need for powerful workstations that
will be especially beneficial for economically disadvantaged research
communities worldwide. Furthermore, outreach activities, such as organizing fun
exhibitions of optics effects, will also be provided to promote the interests
and participations of K-12 teachers and students in local schools and public
libraries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research
program is to combine two powerful, complimentary technologies – the integrated
photonics and the metasurface – together to develop a new architecture where
metasurfaces are directly driven by the guided waves in PICs for realizing
complex optical functions. The meta-atom building blocks with sizes much smaller
than the optical wavelength will be placed on top of photonic integrated
components. Through the metasurfaces consisting of such meta-atoms, the guided
light can be molded to any desired complex light fields in free space or in
PICs. The proposed research will establish a theory, design, material synthesis,
and device nanofabrication platform and provide a complete photonic integrated
route for complete light control. Tremendous benefits will be offered by the
proposed hybrid architecture: (1) metasurfaces that are driven directly by
guided waves in PICs; (2) light can be routed to different metasurfaces
performing multiple complex functions on a single waveguide; and (3) PICs are
now empowered with the ability to control light at the subwavelength scale. The
technology will pave new exciting ways for building multifunctional photonic
integrated devices with flexible access to free space and lead to a large
spectrum of novel applications particularly where the grand challenges of the
system size, weight, and power, performance are
concerned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.