* 2047191
* CAREER: Mechanisms enabling the flexible expression of visual concepts
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Judith Fan, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2026
* USD 407,077.00

Technologies for expressing ideas in visual form have been critically important
throughout human history. From ancient cave paintings to modern digital
graphics, such technologies lie at the heart of some of our most significant
inventions, including art, writing, and mathematics. Despite the importance of
such technologies, little is known about how the human mind is capable of using
them in such varied ways. Perhaps the most basic and versatile of these
technologies is drawing, which can be used to convey information about the
visual world at many levels of abstraction, ranging from realistic illustrations
to simplified diagrams. This project will harness large datasets and advanced
data analysis techniques to develop a rigorous understanding of the mental
processes involved when people use drawings to communicate visual concepts in
different ways. Results from this project will advance our understanding of why
people prefer to use certain kinds of images in some contexts and not others,
with implications for how to design effective visualizations for a variety of
applications, including STEM education and research. This project’s focus on the
problem of how abstract ideas can be communicated in clear and accessible ways
extends to its education plan. This plan encompasses two initiatives to develop
inclusive learning experiences that promote computational literacy among K-12
and undergraduate students that have historically faced systemic obstacles to
this training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aim 1 of this project seeks to resolve a
classic debate concerning whether drawings derive their meaning by resembling
objects in the world (i.e., are image-like) or by being composed of discrete
symbolic expressions (i.e., are language-like). The proposed experiments will
evaluate the hypothesis that drawings are neither purely image-like nor purely
language-like, but can vary strongly depending on what the illustrator can see,
what they know, and what information they wish to communicate. To test this
hypothesis, the proposed analyses will employ crowdsourcing and computer-vision
techniques to measure the degree to which different drawings preserve perceptual
information and/or are organized into discrete symbolic units. For example, some
drawings may contain rich visual details that resist summarization in words,
while other drawings may be entirely composed of simpler marks that can be
readily described using words. Aim 2 will investigate the process by which
people come up with new ways to visually communicate with each other over time.
The proposed experiments will evaluate the hypothesis that drawings that
initially resemble a concrete object tend to become increasingly abstract and
symbol-like when people repeatedly communicate about it, reflecting shared goals
and knowledge between communicators. The proposed analyses will measure
consistency and variability in the resulting drawings, providing quantitative
insight into the factors that affect the development of new symbolic systems for
communication. Aim 3 seeks to better align the scientific training undergraduate
psychology students receive to the reality of modern scientific practice in
psychology. Specifically, it will integrate teaching of open-science best
practices, exploratory data visualization, and model-based data analysis into
the introductory statistics curriculum in Psychology at University of California
San Diego, as well as collaborative final research projects to help students
synthesize what they have learned and hone their communication skills. Aim 4
strives to broaden access to general education about artificial intelligence
(AI) in historically underserved communities by partnering with local K-12
schools to develop learning experiences that illustrate the relevance of AI to
students’ everyday lives, as well as how AI intersects with other disciplines,
including the arts, psychology, medicine, and law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.