* 2047756
* CAREER: Higher-Order Interactions in Tensors and Isomorphism Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Joshua Grochow, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 02/28/2026
* USD 375,923.00

Big data is increasingly important in today's world - it not only has the
potential to solve critical problems in society, but can also exacerbate or
create new problems. Because of this, properly understanding large data sets is
a crucial endeavor. Big data sets today are often modeled by a large collection
of pairwise interactions - that is, the interactions between two entities, such
as people, firms, or molecules. However, such pairwise interactions can miss
important phenomena, such as a multi-firm trade deals, one chemical catalyzing
the reaction of several others, or a single patent using many technologies.
Fortunately, these "higher-order" interactions in big data sets can be
accurately modeled using the mathematics of tensors. Tensors are rapidly
becoming a fundamental data structure and key mathematical object for the 21st
century, much as linear algebra dominated science and engineering for the last
200 years. Tensors are central to a wide range of areas, from fundamental
physics to mechanical engineering, from quantum computing to neural networks and
deep learning. Within computer science, they arise in cryptography, algorithms
for key tasks such as multiplying matrices, and the deepest problems across
computer science and mathematics (whether brute-force search algorithms can
always be improved, the infamous P versus NP question). The goal of this project
is to gain a deeper understanding of the computational properties of tensors,
and to develop a foundational theory of the mathematics and algorithmics of
beyond-pairwise interactions. Because higher-order interactions arise in so many
different areas, in addition to research, this award supports multidisciplinary
workshops, as well as education and training at the undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing new
algorithmic techniques for analyzing and comparing tensors, as well as advancing
their fundamental mathematical theory. The investigator is using isomorphism
problems as a key testbed in this project, both as inspiration for theoretical
foundations and as a target application in and of itself. Isomorphism problems
ask when two given objects - be they data sets, topological spaces, algebraic
groups, or tensors - have the same structure, despite being presented
differently. The most useful properties for understanding tensors are those that
are the same for any two isomorphic tensors, so there is a rich interplay
between algorithmic techniques used to solve tensor isomorphism and foundational
mathematical results on tensors. The project is focusing on both tensor
isomorphism and group isomorphism; these two problems already have implications
for fields as diverse as material science, network analysis, and quantum
computing. The investigator is bringing to bear a range of mathematical
techniques, including group cohomology, algebraic geometry, and computational
complexity theory. The theory of higher-order interactions developed in this
project, with isomorphism problems as a testbed, will open up potential
applications in a wide variety of areas, from core computer science to complex
adaptive systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.