* 2047842
* CAREER: Rapid and Ultrasensitive Critical Care Testing at the Point of Need using Multiplexed Transient-State Digital Assays
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Ramses Martinez, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2026
* USD 409,155.00

The detection of multiple biomarkers with high sensitivity and selectivity is
essential to guide personalized treatment of diseases, such as respiratory
infections, immune reactions, or cancer. Unfortunately, current clinical testing
techniques require days to weeks to be completed, impeding treatment. This
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports research investigating
the mechanisms behind a novel antigen detection approach that leverages millions
of rotating nanorobots. These platforms will enhance testing capabilities and
enable the rapid development of life-saving personalized treatments, supporting
NSF’s mission of advancing the national health. This CAREER project supports a
new educational program called “Revolutionizing Healthcare Diagnostics”, which
utilizes easy-to-use computer aided design software and 3D printing to introduce
underrepresented students to the design and manufacture of cost-effective
medical tools and diagnostic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
CAREER award is to develop a new kind of ultrasensitive portable immunoassay,
called Transient State Digital Assays (TSDAs), which combine magnetically
controlled rotating nanorobots and nanogap-enhanced Raman scattering nanoprobes
to enable near-the-patient concurrent quantification of circulating blood
cytokine biomarkers with the combination of high speed, sensitivity, accuracy,
and multiplexity. A solid theoretical foundation for TSDAs will be established
through the development of a multiphysics model accounting swirl flows, mass
transport, binding kinetics, and single-molecule digital signal transduction.
The experimental validation of this model will unveil the fundamental mechanisms
and key parameters behind the nanoswirl-based transient-state biorecognition.
This fundamental knowledge will allow the development of optimization guidelines
for the TSDA biosensing of multiple analytes in different sample media,
significantly improving the speed and sensitivity of existing microarray assays.
The implementation of TSDA in microarray chips compatible with fast and portable
laser scanning optics will achieve unprecedented high assay speeds, low limits
of detection (LOD=0.05-1pg/mL), large dynamic ranges, and multiplexity (up to 24
biomarkers) in the same portable platform. The optimal control of the nanorobots
during TSDA using a compact magnetic actuation system will result in assay
reaction times as short as 1 min, which is more than 100 times shorter than
those of conventional ELISA kits. The educational program complementing this
research will support STEM engagement in schools, provide research opportunities
to underrepresented groups, and train students in state-of-the-art nanorobotics,
biology, and diagnostics techniques, enhancing future engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.