* 2047152
* Promoting Accurate Information on Social Media
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Adam Berinsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 06/30/2024
* USD 881,188.00

This research takes on the twin challenges of understanding what determines
whether people accept or reject misleading information, and what can be done to
correct such misinformation â€“ or, better yet, prevent its dissemination in the
first place. The PIs integrate political science and cognitive science to
understand the conditions that influence the formation and revision of false
beliefs, and how to foster the spread of accurate information. The insights that
the PIs generate will help to advance theories around belief updating by
reconciling apparently contradictory results regarding the role of political
knowledge and sophistication from political science and cognitive science. The
PIs' work advances emerging theories concerning motivations for online sharing.
In addition to these intellectual benefits, the work will also directly inform
efforts to encourage people to be more responsible and informed citizens,
especially online. Reducing belief in, and sharing of, inaccurate information
benefits democratic societies by helping citizens make decisions that reflect
their preferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs identify the cognitive basis of
belief in misleading information. Prior research typically emphasizes one of two
factors: political knowledge or cognitive style. However, by examining these two
concepts in isolation, previous scholars have been unable to disentangle the
independent influence of each factor. Across a series of proposed correlation
and experimental survey studies, the PIs juxtapose political knowledge and
cognitive style, in order to understand whether, and in what ways, these two
factors independently shape belief in and responses to inaccurate information.
Based on the results of this first strand of work, the PIs develop a set of
behavioral interventions to encourage people to become more responsible
citizens. While previous approaches to correcting misleading information have
primarily involved the provision of specific pieces of factual information, such
as fact-checking messages, They instead favor two alternative sets of
strategies: (1) improving the quality of content that individuals encounter
online, and (2) inducing individuals to pay greater attention to accuracy when
evaluating this content. The PIs evaluate the effectiveness of such approaches
using survey experiments and social media field
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.