* 2047743
* CAREER: Investigating Nanosheets of Thermosensitive Polymer Grafted Nanoparticles: Integrated Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Sanket Deshmukh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2026
* USD 293,419.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical
research, and education aimed to advance understanding of nanomaterials and how
they self-assemble. Different nanomaterials with various structures, properties,
and functions have been developed by employing self-assembly approaches that
spontaneously organize atoms or molecules into ordered structures. A new class
of emerging nanomaterials are sheets made of highly ordered metallic
nanoparticle arrays separated by attached organic molecular chains. Spacing
between these nanoparticles largely determines their functional properties such
as optical, catalytic, and electronic. Mechanical properties such as strength
and flexibility often determine whether a nanosheet can be used in an
application, such as an optoelectronic or biomedical device. Currently, the
ability to design 2D nanosheets with desired spacing between nanoparticles and
mechanical properties remains an open challenge. The PI aims to use simulation
to develop design rules for controlling the spacing between the nanoparticles,
and the mechanical properties of 2D nanosheets. The insights obtained from this
research are aimed to help guide experimental efforts to engineer 2D nanosheets
that possess desired functional and mechanical properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes an integrated education and outreach
plan that leverages results and software tools generated in the course of the
research. The plan is intended to improve student training and enhance
diversity. The educational activities will focus on integrating machine learning
methods and data science concepts into the undergraduate and graduate
curriculum. In addition, an online three-week course will be developed; it will
focus on applications of artificial intelligence in science and engineering for
working professionals from industry as the target audience. The research team
will develop virtual reality software, which will be used to stimulate the
interest of middle- and high-school students in pursuing careers in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical research,
and education on two-dimensional (2D) monolayered nanosheets of functionalized
nanoparticles, which are composed of highly ordered, hexagonally packed
inorganic nanoparticle arrays separated by grafted organic ligands. These
nanosheets have emerged as a fundamentally new class of nanomaterials. The
nanoparticle packing and mechanical properties of these nanosheets are important
in determining their suitability for applications ranging from optoelectronics
to biomedical fields. Packing controls functionality, for example optical, and
catalytic properties of the nanosheets. However, due to a lack of a direct
molecular-level characterization technique to study the structure of these
nanosheets and lack of availability of accurate computational models, our
ability to design 2D nanosheets with required nanoparticle packing and
mechanical properties is limited. The PI aims to establish a fundamental
molecular-level understanding of the nanoparticle packing and mechanical
properties of 2D nanosheets of thermosensitive polymer functionalized
nanoparticles using multi-scale simulation models. A machine learning
accelerated optimization framework will be used to develop transferable and
compatible coarse-grained models of thermosensitive polymers, metals, and
solvents. These models will be employed to perform hypothesis-driven
calculations aimed to address fundamental questions about the effect of polymer
characteristics, nanoparticle design parameters, and metal type on the
nanoparticle packing and mechanical properties of the nanosheets obtained
through self-assembly of polymer grafted nanoparticles. The successful
completion of this research would establish design rules for multifunctional
nanosheets with desired nanoparticle packing and mechanical properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated education plan is directly tied to these
research activities. The PI intends to incorporate artificial intelligence into
the undergraduate and graduate curriculum by introducing machine learning
methods to engineering students. The PI will develop an online three-week course
with focus on applications of artificial intelligence in science and engineering
for working professionals from industry as the target audience. As a part of
integrated outreach activities, the research team will develop a "4-D
Nanosimulator", which creates an interactive virtual reality environment that
can be used to enter the world of atoms through simulation trajectories. This
software will be used to engage middle- and high-school students and stimulate
their interest in pursuing careers in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.