* 2047460
* CAREER:Understanding Interfaces in Sulfide-based All-Solid-State Na Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Hui Wang, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2026
* USD 425,336.00

Sodium-ion batteries offer an economic advantage over Li-ion batteries, as they
can achieve similar performance using naturally abundant sodium (Na).
Additionally, solid-state Na batteries (SSNBs) that use solid Na-ion conductors
instead of liquid electrolytes improve device safety and are applicable to mid-
and large-scale energy storage systems such as electric vehicles and utility
grids. In this project, sulfide solid electrolytes (SEs) will be investigated
for their superior ionic conductivity. However, for sulfide-based SSNBs, high
interfacial resistance remains a challenge to maximizing performance and
commercialization. This research project will systematically investigate
structural changes at the two main interfaces in sulfide-based SSNBs to
fundamentally understand the sodium ion transport across those interfaces. The
investigators aim to address critical interface issues preventing high battery
performance. This research will be integrated with outreach and education
efforts such as creating Women Engineering Network program and a collaboration
with Kentucky Science Center. These initiatives will encourage more students
from underrepresented minority groups such as K-12 Girls to enroll in the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) majors, as well as
increase the public’s scientific awareness on electrochemical energy storage and
its role in using clean energy sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal
of this project is to fundamentally understand the origins of interfacial
resistance at both Na anode/sulfide SEs and cathode/sulfide SEs interfaces. The
investigators will use this fundamental knowledge to engineer sulfide SEs with
reduced resistance across interface and achieve advanced SSNBs with high energy
density and stability. The first objective is to investigate the compatibility
of halide doped sulfide solid electrolyte with electrodes (both Na anode and
cathodes) to elucidate the halide doping effects on interface resistance. The
second objective aims to understand Na-ion transport mechanisms in sulfide-
polymer composite solid electrolytes (CSEs) as well as across the interfaces of
CSE/electrodes in Na symmetric cells and SSNBs. The third objective focuses on
study the cycling performance of sulfide based SSNBs that use metal-sulfide
cathodes with different levels of volume change, aiming to determine the volume
expansion /contraction effects on the interface resistance in SSNBs during their
repeated charge/discharge cycling process. The fundamental knowledge obtained
from this project will give insights into engineering interface design to reduce
the interfacial resistance, overcome an important roadblock to achieve advanced
solid-state Na batteries with high capacities and long
lifetimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.