* 2047344
* CAREER: Bidirectional links between social experiences and the immune system
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Keely Muscatell, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2026
* USD 731,958.00

Decades of research has demonstrated important connections between the mind and
the body. Indeed, social experiences cause numerous changes in physiology, and
physiological changes influence cognition and behavior. Most research in this
area has focused on the cardiovascular, endocrine, and nervous systems. This
project focuses on the immune system – a powerful physiological system with
connections to social life that are less often the focus of research.
Understanding interactions between the immune system and social experiences may
hold the key to understanding the impacts of racial discrimination, social
stress, social connection, and social aggression on health, well-being, and
productivity. Specifically, the current research considers the ways in which
both negative and positive social experiences are interconnected with the immune
system. Relating to negative social experiences, the project examines whether a
simulated experience of racial discrimination leads to increases in inflammation
and reductions in immune system functioning among Black Americans. The research
also examines whether a naturally-occurring challenge to the immune system, the
flu vaccine, causes an increase in social defeat behavior in aggressive social
interactions. With regard to positive social experiences, the research explores
the potential buffering effect of support-giving on the negative immune-related
impacts of stress, as well as how an immune challenge influences behavior in
interactions with both close others and strangers. More broadly, the project
contributes new and refined methods for measuring and manipulating the immune
system, contributing to the broader scientific community involved in research on
connections between social experiences and the immune
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to integrate theory
and methods from experimental social psychology and psychoneuroimmunology to
advance the burgeoning field of “social psychoneuroimmunology”. Three
experimental studies test four key hypotheses that build on foundational
research in animals and a small but critical empirical literature in humans. The
studies examine the bi-directional connections between the immune system and
both negative and positive social experiences. The negative experiences upon
which the research focuses include race-related stress and social defeat. The
positive social experiences include providing social support to a loved one and
interacting with a close-other. The project also seeks to refine and advance
methods for measuring and manipulating the immune system. As an alternative to
methods that depend on collection of blood samples and intensive immune
challenges, this project develops the viability of simpler assessments (based on
dried blood spots, histamine skin pricks, and commonly-administered vaccines)
that offer greater potential for widespread utilization. The new techniques will
be made accessible to other researchers, expanding opportunities for further
advances in the field. The project addresses some of the most pressing questions
facing society today, including how race-related stress impacts the immune
system to influence health, well-being, and education outcomes for diverse
Americans, and how the fundamental human need of connecting with others
influences and is influenced by the immune system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.