* 2047308
* CAREER: Revealing the Fundamental Mechanisms Behind the Dislocation-Induced Electronic States in III-V Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Tyler Grassman, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2026
* USD 361,030.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In nearly any material, from the steel in bridge
girders to the silicon in computer chips, it is the imperfections, or defects,
that dictate critical aspects of its properties; sometimes these defects are
intentional and helpful, sometimes they are unintended and harmful. Similarly,
for nearly every type of defect, the specific reason for these effects can be
traced down to a basic set of questions: What atomic species are involved? And
how are they bonded to each other? If one can answer these questions, then one
can better figure out how to either harness or mitigate defects. In the world of
electronics, the growing need for new materials and technologies with higher
performance, broader range of useful functions, and better reliability often
drives scientists and engineers away from the limited palette of traditional
materials and towards various combinations of different materials, which
frequently possess fundamental dissimilarities. However, this approach can lead
to the formation of detrimental defects. For the kinds of semiconductors that
are used to create many vital technologies, including LEDs, lasers, solar cells,
infrared sensors, high-power/speed transistors, and more, the atomic-scale
nature of many defects remain a mystery. Therefore, this project seeks to
identify the atomic structures of important defects and understand how they
degrade the parent materialsâ€™ electronic and optical properties. Knowing this,
researchers can figure out how to get around the challenges caused by defects,
and perhaps even find new, beneficial uses for them. To further broaden the
overall impact of this project, the principal investigator is working to combine
this new science with existing knowledge to develop fresh and exciting course
curricula, while the entire research team will share their expertise by creating
highly accessible experimental methods training videos. Furthermore, the team is
engaging with the local community through inclusive outreach events to help
participants, children and adults alike, discover the connections between
fundamental semiconductor materials properties, like those under investigation
in this project, and the operation of the vast range of devices that they use
throughout their day-to-day lives, igniting and encouraging the imaginations and
interests of the new generations of diverse individuals that will not only
contribute to fields of science and engineering, but will serve as positive
influences to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Dislocations within III-V semiconductors commonly arise as a
result of dissimilar (e.g. lattice/symmetry mismatched) materials integration,
and lead to detrimental sub-bandgap electronic defect levels that severely limit
the usefulness of such materials systems. However, the fundamental, atomic-scale
structure of III-V dislocations (especially the core), and thus the specific
source of said defect levels, largely remains a mystery. The goal of this
project is to fill this critical knowledge gap by testing the hypothesis that
the characteristic defect levels resident at III-V dislocations can be directly
attributed to specific, atomic-scale structural features. Employing a novel,
correlative characterization framework of optoelectronic and structural
spectroscopies and microscopies, with resolutions spanning from the macroscale
to the atomic, the researchers are identifying the specific elemental species
and bonding configurations that result in detrimental electronic defect levels.
By combining this analysis with well-controlled sample epitaxy, they will
further determine how these defect structures, and their associated properties,
are impacted by the alloy composition, bandgap, and doping of the host material.
Ultimately, this research is helping to build and support a true bottom-up
compound semiconductor materials and process design approach, with defect
mitigation as an achievable target, that is particularly valuable in
applications where dissimilar integration is needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.