* 2047214
* CAREER: Imaging Light-Matter Interactions in Quantum Materials with Nanoscale Quantum Sensors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Brian Zhou, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2026
* USD 335,296.00

The conversion of light into electricity, known as photocurrent, is the basis
for devices such as photodetectors and solar cells. Applications for these
devices include imaging, optical communication, and renewable energy. Enhancing
their performance relies on understanding new mechanisms to efficiently generate
these photocurrents and how these currents travel within the material. The team
will spatially image the flow of photocurrents inside materials and determine
how nanoscale variations affect its generation and transport. These measurements
will be made by a noninvasive sensor that uses the quantum properties of an
atomic-scale defect in diamond. The sensor will be placed near the material
samples to sense weak magnetic fields generated by such photocurrents. The
principal investigator will create hands-on demonstrations and videos to
stimulate curiosity in quantum phenomena. These activities will foster intrinsic
motivations for students, including from under-represented groups, to pursue
education and careers in science and technology. Coursework will emphasize
interdisciplinary concepts in quantum information science that encompass
materials research, computer science, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrical measurements based on scanning a
focused laser beam, known as scanning photocurrent microscopy, provide powerful
real-space views of photocurrent generation; however, the actual path travelled
by the photocarriers in the interior of the material is concealed. This missing
viewpoint is important to clarify the distinction between bulk and boundary, as
well as to understand how local electric, magnetic, and structural variations
affect the scattering and relaxation of photocarriers. To address this
challenge, this project develops spatially-resolved magnetometry using the
electronic spin of the nitrogen-vacancy center in diamond. Based on confocal
microscopy, the technique readily integrates photoexcitation and optical readout
of the sensor spin to map stray magnetic fields from photocurrent flow. These
magnetic field maps are used to extract the amplitude and direction of
photocurrent flow in two-dimensional materials and thin bulk samples. High
sensitivity is achieved by synchronizing pulsed photoexcitation with coherent
manipulation of the quantum sensor spin, while high spatial resolution is
achieved by scanning a diamond-based atomic force microscope probe. The
fundamental understanding of topology, symmetry, and valley polarization pursued
here impacts the development of photodetectors, novel information processing
devices, and higher efficiency photovoltaics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.