* 2047391
* CAREER: Discovering Rhomboid Dynamics and Function in Membrane Protein Homeostasis
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Sonya Neal, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 03/31/2026
* USD 526,942.00

The complex biochemical processes occurring in biological membranes are
fascinating and essential for life. Most of these processes are carried out by
proteins embedded in the membranes surrounding the cells and organelles inside;
these proteins comprise one third of total proteins in plants and animals.
Unfortunately, misfolding of membrane proteins is a common occurrence, either
due to chemical and UV damage, aging, or genetic mutations. To survive the
constant, ongoing threat of protein misfolding, organisms are equipped with
quality-control systems that detect and degrade these molecules. Despite intense
study on these pathways, the quality-control mechanisms for removing misfolded
membrane proteins have remained surprisingly elusive for over two decades. This
project seeks to advance our knowledge of the critical and widely conserved
process of the quality-control system(s) that maintains functional and folded
membrane proteins. To attain this scientific goal, this project includes a
significant component of URM education, outreach, and training to community
college students. Efforts of this project focuses on: 1) providing an iBiology
Spotlight lecture to expose community college students to hands-on research,
role models and careers in science; 2) incorporating and developing Course-based
Research Experience modules at Miramar Community College in coordination with
instructors; and 3) direct involvement of research projects in the Neal
laboratory at UCSD. Fulfillment of this research and educational plan will build
and sustain interest in science, in particular for persistently underrepresented
STEM students currently learning at community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Endoplasmic Reticulum-Associated Degradation
(ERAD) describes a set of conserved degradation pathways that remove misfolded
proteins from the ER. Retrotranslocation is a universal feature of all ERAD
pathways, entailing complete removal of misfolded substrates to the cytosol for
degradation. For integral membrane substrates, this involves complete extraction
of the protein, including all transmembrane spans, from the ER membrane. Despite
its commonality in ERAD, retrotranslocation of integral membrane substrates has
remained a mystery. This project builds on Dr. Neal’s discovery of a yeast
rhomboid pseudoprotease Dfm1, which is a dedicated protein export factor for
removing deleterious membrane proteins from the ER. The underlying hypothesis of
this project is that Dfm1 and related rhomboid superfamily proteins are central
mediators for removing aberrant membrane substrates, and loss of their function
leads to profound cellular stress. Accordingly, the primary objectives to
investigate this hypothesis are: &lt;br/&gt; 1) To understand the mechanism
associated with Dfm1-mediated retrotranslocation function. This objective will
employ genetic, biochemical and biophysical approaches using a tractable model
system, S. cerevisiae, for deep characterization of Dfm1’s retrotranslocation
function. &lt;br/&gt; 2) Explore a newly identified stress response pathway
associated with loss of Dfm1 function. This objective will use functional
genomics, biochemical, and genetic approaches to define an entirely new sensing
system for membrane proteins. &lt;br/&gt; 3) Extend acquired understanding of
yeast Dfm1 function to higher eukaryotes. This objective will determine the
extent by which Dfm1’s molecular actions and functions are conserved in the
related rhomboid proteins in human cells. Overall, results emerging from this
work will reveal novel mechanisms for safeguarding the membrane
proteome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.