* 2047325
* CAREER: Robust Coherence and High Sensitivity in Metal-Ion Nuclear-Spin Qubits
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Joseph Zadrozny, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2026
* USD 734,988.00

In this CAREER grant, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism
B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Joseph Zadrozny of the Department
of Chemistry at Colorado State University aims to develop new classes of
molecules with environmentally sensitive quantum properties. Such fundamental
research lies at the core of efforts to establish new systems for quantum
sensing and/or quantum computing. The goal of the research is to understand how
to amplify environmental detection by the quantum states of metal-ion magnetic
nuclei, which would be essential for the development of next-generation quantum
bits or magnetic resonance imaging sensors. The project lies at the interface of
coordination chemistry, physics, and quantum information science and will thus
educate scientists at all levels in these areas. Outreach activities with a
local science museum and through a STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics) kit are planned as new ways to expose students at an early stage to
the exciting but complex quantum world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantum states
of nuclear spins in metal complexes are generally long-lived owing to weak
environmental sensitivity. Understanding how to amplify this sensitivity may
lead to systems that are highly environmentally sensitive yet with long-lived
quantum states, which is a fundamental challenge. In this project, Dr.Joseph
Zadrozny and his team will study hybrid electronic/nuclear spin systems in order
to understand how to control environmental sensitivity. Three specific classes
of hybrid electron/nuclear complexes will be prepared to answer the following
questions: 1) Can spin-crossovers be harnessed to amplify the environmental
sensing by metal-ion nuclear spins? 2) Can valence tautomerizations be used to
effect environmental detection capabilities by a metal-ion nuclear spin? 3) What
are the design principles for a radical satellite to best amplify the response
of metal-ion spin dynamics to changes in local
chemistry?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.