* 2047687
* CAREER:Understanding Coastal Resilience: Implications of an Expanding White Zone in the Florida Everglades
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Sparkle Malone, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 616,857.00

Many coastal wetlands are at risk due to sea level rise and increasing salinity
levels. In the Florida Everglades, changes in freshwater supply and sea level
rise are influencing the health of freshwater ecosystems. Since freshwater
species are not well adapted to high salinity levels, a zone of low productivity
often occurs at the intersection of salt- and fresh-water bodies. Even though
these low productivity zones commonly occur in coastal areas, we do not
understand how the size and location of these zones on the larger landscape will
influence the capacity for coastal regions to maintain the productivity rates
that allow them to keep up with sea level rise. To understand how Everglades
wetlands are changing along the coast, it is necessary to determine how salt
stress leads to a rapid loss of accumulated carbon (C) and the amount of time it
takes for salt tolerant species to move into the affected zone, increasing
productivity. This project incorporates measurements at the species level to
determine how changes in salinity affect rates of photosynthesis, and how
species-specific responses to increased salinity impact vegetation cover
throughout entire marsh ecosystems. In addition to the traditional avenues for
sharing research findings, this project includes a collaboration to develop an
interactive website that features educational elements as well as resources
designed to help coastal residents, educators, and elected officials become more
familiar with and involved in coastal research. This project will also support a
diversity and bias awareness workshop for biologists and produce a museum
exhibit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand how Everglades wetlands are
changing, it is necessary to determine how complex stressors, driven by shifting
hydrological regimes, either accelerate C storage or cause a rapid loss of
accumulated C. This project involves characterizing species-level physiological
responses to changing salinity and hydrologic conditions, remote sensing to
detect the size and location of the low productivity zone, and eddy covariance
to measure the productivity rates of entire ecosystems. This research aims to
establish links between wetland ecosystem structure and C dynamics, and the
degree to which hydrology influences wetland feedbacks to already increasing
atmospheric CO2. The data produced from this project will improve wetland data-
model comparisons by measuring how CO2 and CH4 emissions fluctuate in response
to the seasonal effects of inundation and changes in salinity. This project will
also produce a documentary film to raise awareness of the important changes
happening to coastal ecosystems and empower residents, students, and politicians
to join in our effort to develop resilient ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.