* 2047867
* CAREER:The Uncanny Valley in Socially Appropriate Haptic Interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Heather Culbertson, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 03/31/2026
* USD 322,559.00

Social touch is a natural mode of communication between humans that can help
maintain relationships, communicates emotions, and directly reflects physical
and psychological closeness between individuals. The importance of social touch
is becoming more evident as the time humans spend communicating through
computers in videoconferencing, email, and text messaging increases. Social
distancing guidelines required by the recent pandemic has exacerbated this
issue, leading many individuals to suffer the negative effects of a lack of
human touch. Without the depth and subtlety of in-person communication, remote
communication causes increased feelings of loneliness and social isolation,
which can have a significant impact on mental and physical health. Although
prior work has created haptic devices for displaying virtual social touch,
limited work has explored the acceptability of these virtual touch sensations or
the role they play in virtual social interactions. The hypothesis of this
research is that, as in the appearance of robots, there exist haptic sensations
that produce a sensation of disgust or revulsion in the user due to a mismatch
between the user's expectation (human social touch) and reality (touch from the
device), creating a haptic “uncanny valley”. The goal of this research is to
explore and define the uncanny valley for haptic interactions, specifically as
it relates to defining appropriate and comfortable virtual social
touch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will seek to uncover instances of
virtual touch that produce feelings of disgust or revulsion in users due to a
mismatch between the user's expectation and reality. Through a series of human
subject studies, this work will define the parameters of the haptic uncanny
valley for social touch in a set of three scenarios: (1) touch through haptic
devices; (2) touch and visual representation with virtual reality; (3) touch and
physical embodiment with a humanoid robot. The project will evaluate actuators,
materials, control patterns, visual input, and physical embodiment for their
role in the comfort of the user. By determining the existence of and parameters
for the uncanny valley for social touch, this project will inform the design of
future social touch systems in haptics, robotics, and virtual reality. The
outcomes of this research will create design guidelines for haptics, Human-
Computer Interaction (HCI), and Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) designers creating
physical social systems, allowing them to avoid designs that lie in the uncanny
valley to create interactions that are pleasant, immersive, and socially
appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.