* 2047856
* CAREER: Deep representation learning for exploration and inference in biomedical data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Smita Krishnaswamy, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2026
* USD 231,987.00

Biological systems are inherently complex. Increasingly sophisticated
technologies are&lt;br/&gt;being used in biomedical science in order to make
sense of this complexity and to understand the&lt;br/&gt;underlying factors that
cause disease. These technologies generate vast amounts of data in
many&lt;br/&gt;different forms, from changes in how genes and proteins are
expressed in individual cells over time,&lt;br/&gt;to detailed clinical imaging
data on large patient populations and whole genome sequencing
studies&lt;br/&gt;across hundreds of thousands of people. These newly developed
datatypes could help uncover&lt;br/&gt;important mechanisms and pathways that
underpin health and disease. However, there is a large&lt;br/&gt;gap between the
information contained in these datasets and the ability to extract
meaningful&lt;br/&gt;insights. Here the PI proposes to address this by
developing new machine learning approaches based&lt;br/&gt;on mathematical
foundations that will allow us to make sense of these complex datasets. The PI
will develop deep representation learning techniques that focus on gaining
overall insight into the&lt;br/&gt;structures, dynamics, interactions, and
predictive features of the data, and will allow &lt;br/&gt;specific hypotheses
regarding the underlying regulatory mechanisms that drive disease in
different&lt;br/&gt;contexts to derived. The proposal will also involve training
a postdoc, graduate student, and mentorship of local high school students. In
addition, it will enable the development of an online workshop
to&lt;br/&gt;widely disseminate knowledge of unsupervised data analysis to a
diverse array of participants from&lt;br/&gt;across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to advance biomedical data
analysis via three main thrusts. The first thrust is focused on forming deep
multiscale representations of the data based on data geometry, graph signal
processing, and topological concepts, in combination with powerful, deep
learning systems. Such representations will allow for exploration of structure
and meaningful, predictive abstractions of the data in a scalable fashion. Our
second thrust is focused on integrating multiple modalities of data and
organizing multitudes of related datasets using optimal transport and generative
models to gain insight into entire cohorts of patients or perturbation
conditions. Our third thrust is focused on learning high dimensional stochastic
dynamics of the data using neural SDE (stochastic differential equation) and
graph ODE (ordinary differential equation) networks to gain insight into
underlying gene regulatory networks. We apply our approaches in the context of
several specific biomedical challenges. Achieving these aims will enable
integration and exploration of a large volume of data for explaining underlying
regulatory mechanisms and dynamic phenotypic changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.