* 2047903
* CAREER: An Integrated Research and Education Program to Investigate Hypoxia and Matrix Remodeling During Stem Cell Differentiation and Lymphatic Morphogenesis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Donny Hanjaya-Putra, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2026
* USD 434,685.00

As an essential part of the circulatory system, the lymphatic vasculatures
regulate stability of tissue fluid, adsorption of dietary fat, and trafficking
of immune cells. Despite their important role in health and diseases such as
cancer, Alzheimer's disease, obesity, and chronic wounds, little is known about
the molecular mechanisms regulating lymphatic vessel formation. By designing
biomaterials to control stem cell differentiation, this CAREER project seeks to
determine the roles of oxygen signaling and environmental cues in regulating
lymphatic vessel formation during early development. Ultimately, the proposed
research promises to uncover the mechanism underlying lymphatic growth. In
addition, the integrated education and outreach programs aim to promote learning
at all levels by focusing on early engagement of students in service learning to
inspire their interests in STEM fields. This project supports education and
broadening participation by: (1) stimulating interests in stem cell research
through a science exhibit; (2) introducing middle school students to the
emerging field of biomaterials using hands-on modules; and (3) educating high
school teachers and students through NSF’s Research Experience for Teachers
(RET) on contemporary topics in bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator’s long-term research goal is to use engineering principles to make
breakthroughs in stem cell differentiation and lymphatic vessel morphogenesis,
while integrating research with education and training of engineers for the
future workforce. Toward this goal, this CAREER project aims to integrate
research and education programs dedicated to the transdisciplinary investigation
of functional interactions between hypoxia-signaling pathways and matrix-driven
cues that are essential for stem cell differentiation into lymphatic endothelial
cells (LECs) and eventually their morphogenesis to form lymphatic vasculatures.
Specifically, the three fundamental questions to be addressed are: (1) How do
changes in oxygen concentrations during the early separation process between the
blood and lymphatic networks affect the fate of vascular progenitor cells into
LECs? (2) How are matrix types (e.g., hyaluronic acid, collagen) and properties
(e.g., stiffness, mesh size, degradation) altered during lymphatic morphogenesis
and network assembly in vitro? and (3) What functional interactions occur
between hypoxia and matrix-driven cues during lymphatic network assembly? To
answer these important questions, the proposed research will utilize a
transdisciplinary approach that covers many fields from polymer science to stem
cell and lymphatic biology. Collectively, this project will develop fundamental
knowledge that can aid in stimulating lymphatic vessel growth, enabling
effective and robust cell-based therapies, as well as in vitro models for
diseases and drug development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.