* 2047213
* CAREER: Universal SiC-Based Power Converters for Renewable Energy Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Mahshid Amirabadi, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Power converters are vital to renewable energy systems and key components in
enabling the integration of renewable energy sources into the utility grid.
However, high failure rates, large volume and weight, and the high cost of power
converters can often restrict the grid penetration of clean energy. Wide-bandgap
semiconductor devices, including those made of silicon carbide, are a promising
solution for improving power converters, but their merits cannot be fully
realized with current converter topologies. The goal of this CAREER plan is to
create high power density and ultra-reliable converters by combining wide-
bandgap devices with new universal converter topologies that have an ability to
eliminate less reliable components commonly used in power converters, such as
electrolytic capacitors, as well as bulky components like low frequency
transformers. These improvements will contribute to the long-term research goal
of the PI, which is to realize ultra-high-performance renewable energy systems.
The PIâ€™s long-term educational goals are to increase diversity in engineering
and train the next generation of engineers who are aware of the major challenges
in the power electronics field and well-prepared for addressing the future
energy needs of the United States. There is an obvious need for a more diverse
workforce in the energy fields. This project will create an opportunity for
several graduate and undergraduate students, including students from
underrepresented groups, to learn about wide-bandgap-based power converters and
their applications in renewable energy systems. The proposed research is
relevant to a wide range of applications, but, for the scope of this work, the
PI and her team will focus on renewable energy systems and microgrid
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silicon carbide devices offer significant
advantages at the device level, including dramatically higher switching
frequency. Despite significant device-level advantages, simply substituting
silicon carbide semiconductors for their silicon counterparts will not result in
significant improvements to a converter. For instance, in power converters that
involve transferring the power from a source to a load with unequal
instantaneous values of power, such as single-phase inverters, the size of
passive components is not reduced by increasing the switching frequency and use
of silicon carbide devices. These converters typically employ large electrolytic
capacitors, which have high failure rates. A primary component of this proposal
is that it includes a total elimination of low reliability electrolytic
capacitors as well as low frequency transformers in all power converters. This
will be achieved by creating novel, single-stage multi-port silicon carbide-
based converter topologies that accomplish power conversion between any type of
source and load, including dc, single-phase ac or multi-phase ac, in one stage,
thereby eliminating the need for cascaded converters and decoupling capacitors.
These topologies are inspired by isolated dc-dc converters, which can use high
frequency transformers instead of low frequency transformers and will be
complemented with the use of soft-switching techniques. The input side and
output side switches cannot be controlled independently in these converters. The
main challenge is the complex control of these converters, especially when the
link current/voltage ripple values are large. Therefore, conventional modulation
techniques cannot be used. In this project modified modulation techniques will
be developed for these converters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.