* 2047115
* CAREER: Biosynthesis of lipid monolayer membranes in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Lon Chubiz, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 02/28/2026
* USD 759,888.00

Cell membranes define the physical boundary between life and the environment.
This project will substantially increase our understanding of monolayer cell
membranes, which are variations in membrane structure that may help microbes
survive in stressful environments. Uncovering the biological role of monolayer
membranes, and the biochemistry required to produce them, will reveal some of
the mechanisms microbes use to inhabit diverse and in some cases harsh
environments. Improved understanding of monolayer membranes will also open new
avenues in engineering microbes for biotechnology. Local high school students
and undergraduates will participate in the research. Collaborations between
researchers, participating students, and high school teachers will result in a
high school teaching module focused on environmental microbiology. An additional
outcome of this project will be the creation of an interactive regional soil
database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will define the environmental
constraints and biochemical mechanisms that govern production of membrane-
spanning lipids and monolayer cell membranes in the Acidobacteria. Functional
roles for lipid monolayers and membrane-spanning lipids remain elusive.
Membrane-spanning lipids are hypothesized to provide increased tolerance to
elevated temperatures and low pH, as they are often associated with
extremophilic lifestyles. However, their presence in numerous mesophilic
prokaryotes, such as soil-dwelling bacterial species, has muddled this
conclusion. This project will directly explore the connections between monolayer
membranes, bacterial cell physiology, and biosynthesis of membrane-spanning
lipids (branched dialkylglycerol tetraester and tetraether lipids) using
tractable Acidobacteria model systems. One objective is to generate an
environment to phenotype map for membrane-spanning lipid production. Another
objective will be to identify and characterize biochemical processes involved in
membrane-spanning lipid biosynthesis. Both objectives will utilize lipidomic,
transcriptomic, and comparative genomic approaches to identify key regulatory
and enzymatic pathways involved in producing branched dialkylglycerol tetraester
and tetraether lipids. An additional component will be introducing membrane-
spanning lipid biosynthetic capabilities to other bacterial species.
Collectively, these objectives will deepen our understanding of the relationship
between lipid structure, membrane function, and cell physiology in
prokaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.