* 2047707
* CAREER: Mechanical Sensors for Exploring the Dark Sector
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Swati Singh, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

Observations across multiple astronomical scales point to the existence of
unknown particles called dark matter, which constitutes the majority of the mass
of galaxies, and an unknown uniform field known as dark energy that is
responsible for the accelerated expansion of the universe. The coupling of
normal matter with dark matter or energy often manifests itself as a mechanical
effect: displacement, recoil kicks, or acceleration. Accurately monitoring
mechanical motion could give us unprecedented access to these minuscule signals.
This CAREER proposal explores the viability of mechanical devices operating in
either the classical or quantum regime as sensors for dark matter and dark
energy. This work will lay the groundwork for the development of future
detectors of astrophysical signals using precision measurement systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program involves using analytical and
computational techniques for quantifying various noise mechanisms in the
development of mechanical devices as sensors for dark matter and dark energy. In
particular, a fiber-based approach to develop a broadband scalar dark matter
sensor, a helium-based detector of light dark matter, and a membrane-based
detector for screened interactions due to dark energy will be explored. As part
of a broader theoretical effort, the spectrum of an ultralight dark matter
signal and methods to enable efficient detection of a narrow band dark matter
signal will be explored. By investigating the potential of various workhorse
technologies as dark matter and dark energy sensors, the proposed program will
inspire pushing state-of-the-art devices. By helping put experimental bounds on
various couplings between the dark sector and normal matter, the proposed
program will also stimulate high energy theory research into new models of dark
matter and dark energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.