* 2047961
* CAREER: Models and Algorithms for Strategic Conservation Planning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Jorge Sefair, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 02/28/2023
* USD 511,057.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award will contribute to
the national health, prosperity, and welfare by improving decision-making in
conservation planning through new theory, models, algorithms, and visual
analytics tools for landscape and conservation ecology. Biodiversity has been
declining at rapid rates during the last several decades due to habitat loss,
landscape deterioration, environmental change, and human-related activities that
directly and indirectly affect natural habitats. In addition to its economic and
cultural value, biodiversity plays an important role in keeping an environment’s
ecosystem in balance. Disrupting such processes can reduce the provision of
natural resources such as food and water, which in turn yields a direct threat
to human health. Protecting natural areas is fundamental to preserving
biodiversity and to mitigate the effects of ongoing environmental change. This
award will contribute quantitative methods to support informed decisions on
conservation design and effective land use to support species sustainability.
These methods integrate realistic ecological features, specific spatial
properties of the selected reserves (e.g., connectivity), population dynamics
within the spatial assets, and the impact of current and future threats. The
educational plan will improve the skills and diversity of future generations of
engineers via technical training and engagement in transdisciplinary research.
The outreach activities aim to increase the students’ awareness of current
biodiversity and conservation challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports fundamental research on the design of portfolios of land or marine
patches to support species sustainability. These design problems result in very
large mixed-integer linear programs whose solutions require innovative
formulations and new large-scale optimization methods. The new models and
specialized algorithms will allow decision-makers to solve a variety of
realistic large-scale corridor and reserve design problems that include patch-
specific conservation decisions under spatial, operational, ecological, and
biological requirements. These models will feature realistic objectives faced by
practitioners, such as maximization of the protected area or the number of
species covered and minimization of the conservation cost. The design models
will embed stochastic processes to capture the species’ spatiotemporal movement
across the landscape and to assess the effectiveness of conservation plans,
including extinction risks, mortality, and ecosystem disturbances. New bi-level
and stochastic optimization models and algorithms will support the design of
robust conservation areas, i.e., areas that provide acceptable levels of
ecological benefits even under future extreme and adverse events affecting the
landscape. A visual analytics tool will integrate the developed tools,
facilitating the discussion of optimal conservation plans with practitioners,
advocates, and experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.