* 2047991
* CAREER: Removing the Human Element: Securing Deployed Cryptographic Systems through the use of Cryptographic Automation
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* Christina Garman, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2026
* USD 197,699.00

Cryptography has shown itself to be invaluable in everyday life, especially as
more and more devices and interactions are moving to the online world. Whether
it is browsing the web, making a purchase, or sending a message to a friend,
cryptography is everywhere. Despite the fact that users (often unknowingly) rely
on the security of systems that use cryptography, recent years have seen a
number of serious vulnerabilities in the cryptographic pieces of systems, some
with large consequences. These have been caused by various problems, including
poor designs, difficulty of implementation, and use (or misuse) of (in)secure
primitives. There is a common denominator in all of these problems: the human
element. Many of the errors that are found when analyzing these insecure systems
could have been prevented if both designers and software engineers had better
tools to help them navigate the complex cryptographic space. Cryptographic
automation is a relatively new and promising area that is designed to help solve
many of these issues and make developing secure systems far easier and less
error-prone, even for a non-expert. This project focuses on removing the human
element from the deployment and analysis of cryptographic systems. Through the
use of cryptographic automation and the development of tools, the project's aim
is to make it easier to design and securely deploy new and complex cryptographic
systems while preventing insecurities from occurring in such systems.
Additionally, the project contains an education plan designed to help make
cryptography more accessible to a broader audience. The creation of the Midwest
Women in Computer Security Workshop, as well as the project's goal to not just
develop but also disseminate tools, will allow more students of all ages, and
more software engineers, to explore cryptography and computer security, instead
of being intimidated or afraid of it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three
main thrusts. The core of the project centers around the first thrust of
building tools to aid in the deployment of complex cryptography. This will
principally focus on automating the end-to-end development of zero-knowledge
proof code, from expressing the proof statement to realizing the implementation,
with additional applications to anonymous credentials. The second thrust focuses
on automating the discovery of cryptographic vulnerabilities in applications
that use zkSNARKs, a popular zero-knowledge proof instantiation. This thrust
will leverage fuzzing to help both programmers and end users detect
inconsistencies and errors in existing, already deployed zkSNARK circuits and
applications. The third thrust works to automate the discovery and
identification of modern cryptographic algorithms and techniques in both
traditional as well as heavily obfuscated binaries, through a novel combination
of various dynamic analysis and machine-learning based approaches. If
successful, the combination of these three thrusts will, for expert and non-
expert developers alike, make it both easier to discover the use of cryptography
and potentially vulnerable algorithms in existing systems as well as design and
securely deploy new and complex cryptographic systems while preventing these
insecurities from happening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.