* 2047677
* CAREER: Modeling Uncertainties for Geometry Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Qixing Huang, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2026
* USD 297,470.00

Advances in acquisition devices have enabled the generation of rich 3D data that
captures physical objects/scenes at a full spectrum of scales ranging from
molecules to urban environments. Coupled with such 3D information is impressive
progress in geometry processing aiming to reconstruct, analyze, and model 3D
geometries. As 3D sensors become more affordable and ubiquitous, applications of
geometry processing algorithms are expanding from traditional domains such as
computer-aided design and architecture to integrative modules of interactive and
autonomous systems in the life sciences, self-driving cars, and national
defense. For these new applications, the currently dominant approach where
geometry processing algorithms generate a single output (e.g., one reconstructed
mesh) is not sufficient, because essential information such as the accuracy of
the output, other plausible solutions, and data uncertainty in data-driven
approaches is not conveyed. Such information is indispensable for critical
decision making, such as whether a 3D reconstruction is accurate enough for
surgery planning or bridge damage inspection, and if not where to add additional
inputs to improve the reconstruction quality. This project will establish a
unified and transformative framework to model and quantify uncertainties of
geometry processing algorithms, and will develop new algorithms that possess
uncertainty outputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide the first
systematic study of uncertainty quantification for geometry processing. To this
end, the project will establish an uncertainty quantification (UQ) framework
that seamlessly integrates tools in probability theory, statistics, and deep
generative models with core data representations and algorithms in geometry
processing. Building upon a careful examination of the connection between the
output and various uncertainty sources (input, algorithm, and data), the
framework will incorporate a unified mixture model for encoding uncertainties
via four thrusts, starting from algebraic approximations for modeling the local
shape of a distribution to sampling and variational inference for characterizing
mixture components. On the application side, the work will examine how
uncertainties evolve in the geometry processing pipeline, starting from sensor
uncertainty in scan registration and surface reconstruction to stochastic
algorithms for structure detection to data uncertainty in data-driven geometry
editing. On the algorithm side, the research will develop a unified framework
that outputs mixture models to approximate the output distribution derived from
different uncertainty sources. Evaluation of project outcomes will focus on
three industrial disciplines: digital dental care, autonomous driving, and
digital archaeology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.