* 2047193
* CAREER: Weak and Strong Correlations in Topological Semimetals
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Pavan Hosur, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2026
* USD 354,999.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research, and education on topological semimetals and the way
electrons organize themselves in these materials. Most solids can be thought of
as being either insulators or conductors - often metals. A closer examination,
however, reveals rich sub-categories including semiconductors such as silicon,
that are insulators at the absolute zero of temperature but show substantial
conduction at room temperature, and semimetals such as bismuth, that are
formally metals at zero temperature but at higher temperatures have several
orders-of-magnitude lower conductivities than metals like
copper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past decade, the influx of ideas from
mathematics in the area of topology into solid-state physics has spawned a new
family of semimetals, namely, topological semimetals, of which graphene and Weyl
semimetals are the most famous examples. These materials are "true" semimetals,
in the sense that their properties at all temperatures are intermediate between
those of metals and of insulators. Topological semimetals are fascinating
materials: on one hand, they enable access to the physics related to the
fundamental particles that make up matter through table-top experiments, while
on the other hand, they tend to have conduction properties which make them
attractive platforms for electronic device technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the PI and his team will theoretically investigate various
fundamental aspects of topological semimetals, such as the tendency of electrons
confined to their surfaces to organize themselves in states in which the
electrons are ordered in some way, like magnetism or the cooperative state of
superconductivity in which electrons move without any resistance. The range of
the investigation reaches to electronic properties related to how electrons move
in single atomic layer and two-layer structures of graphene. These aspects of
graphene are challenging to study using existing techniques because standard
analytical theoretical descriptions begin to break down while computational
approaches are too limited or become prohibitively costly. Thus, the team of
researchers will develop a new numerical algorithm tailored for investigating
physics in this regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will integrate the above
research with concerted activities that harness technology for surmounting
hurdles in education and outreach in the post-COVID era. Specifically, they will
design mobile games that teach undergraduate physics content, build an "analogy
inventory" to improve communication between physics and other STEM fields,
organize a virtual conference on topological semimetals and develop innovative
pedagogical strategies suitable for online and social distancing-compliant
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research, and education on
topological semimetals. Topological semimetals (TSMs) are a cornerstone of
topological condensed matter and, thanks to their gapless spectrum, present
unique challenges and opportunities compared to their gapped counterparts such
as topological insulators. The PI will explore, craft innovative tools for and
tackle pressing theoretical issues in TSMs to unearth exotic phenomena in both
weakly and strongly correlated regimes. This CAREER project is organized in 4
thrusts. Thrust 1 is focused on three-dimensional TSMs, adopting a clever
surface-centric approach to reveal qualitatively new weak-correlation physics
rooted in the interpolating-dimensional nature of the surface states and their
inseparability from the bulk. This includes the quantum effects of weak
disorder, spontaneous magnetization, and superconductivity, and also includes
robust Majorana wires in mixed real-and-momentum space. Thrust 2 develops the
primary tool for Thrust 3, namely, an innovative algorithm that is tailored for
probing finite temperature properties of generic, non-integrable systems using
the eigenstate thermalization hypothesis. Thrust 3 focuses on the strongly
correlated regime of graphene-based systems. In particular, it inspects the
microscopic processes that drive hydrodynamic transport in graphene and the
finite temperature phases, including possible pseudogap and strange metal
phases, in twisted bilayer graphene. Thrust 4 complements the research through
concerted activities for surmounting hurdles in education and outreach in the
post-COVID era using technology. Specifically, the PI and his team will design
mobile games that teach undergraduate physics content, build an “analogy
inventory” to improve communication between physics and other STEM fields,
organize a virtual conference on TSM-research and develop innovative teaching
strategies suitable for online and social distancing-compliant
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed to transform our
collective understanding of TSMs by tackling fundamental issues in the field
that arise from rapid experimental progress. For instance, Thrust 1 will clarify
puzzles in magneto-transport experiments on TSMs, determine whether weak
disorder can localize the surface states, provide theoretical support to surface
superconductivity seen in TSMs and unveil scenarios where the surface
spontaneously orders before the bulk does even though the latter has a higher
dimensionality. It will also reveal a new class of non-local Majorana fermions
and examine their potential for storing quantum information. The algorithm
developed in Thrust 2 is a new approach to strongly correlated systems that
could be useful for studying finite temperature equilibrium physics in unsolved
regimes plagued by the Monte-Carlo sign-problem such as frustrated spin models
and fermionic systems lacking quasiparticles. It transforms the eigenstate
thermalization hypothesis from a useful qualitative conjecture to the basis for
practical calculation. Thrust 3 will help dissect transport data in experimental
graphene samples, which are increasingly approaching the quality needed for the
electrons to exhibit hydrodynamic transport. It will also help map out the
potentially rich and largely unexplored finite temperature phase diagram of
twisted bilayer graphene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.