* 2047629
* Mechanism and Regulation of non-canonical translation initiation
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Gabriele Fuchs, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 02/29/2024
* USD 616,160.00

Ribosomes are molecular machines that synthesize proteins. During protein
synthesis, ribosomes decode a messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) sequence into a
corresponding protein sequence. Cellular mRNA originates from the DNA in a
cell’s chromosomes. Ribosomes do not bind to mRNA at random; instead there is a
highly-regulated process to ensure that ribosomes bind to the code in a
particular place so that the mRNA code is translated correctly into protein.
Although there is a standard pathway by which this initiation occurs for most
cellular mRNAs, there are alternative pathways that occur in cells under certain
conditions such as stress. It is also important to understand these alternative
pathways because many viruses exploit them. This project investigates one
alternative protein biosynthesis pathway known as internal initiation. Internal
initiation requires the RACK1 protein to bind to the ribosome and this project
will investigate the reasons this protein is required. The mRNA that is
translated by alternative pathways also has structural features that are
required for internal initiation. The proposed work will screen sequences
representing thousands of cellular mRNAs to identify RNA structures that are
able to bind ribosomes containing RACK1 and allow internal translation
initiation. Together these approaches will greatly enhance our understanding of
the components and mechanism of protein biosynthesis mediated by internal
initiation. This research program is complemented by an educational living and
learning program that encourages diverse groups of undergraduate students to
pursue a career in science, technology, engineering, or mathematics. Biology
students first years in this program live, eat, and study together and meet
weekly to talk about their transition to college, finding opportunities to do
research with science faculty early in their undergraduate careers, and
strategies for succeeding in science majors and careers. This research program
will help shape the next generation of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internal ribosomal entry sites (IRES) are RNA structures
that bypass the requirement for the m7G cap of the mRNA to facilitate
translation. Although viral IRESs have been studied intensively, cellular IRES
sequences are less well-understood. To investigate the mechanism of cellular
IRES-mediated translation, the interaction of the ribosomal protein RACK1 with
the initiation factors eIF3D and DAP5 will be examined, and RNAs commonly
regulated by these factors will be identified. In a complementary approach, RNA
sequences initiating on a circular RNA construct following selection will be
identified by high-throughput sequencing and validated in a luciferase reporter
translation assay. These data will test the hypothesis that cellular IRES
sequences may not be restricted to the 5ʹ untranslated region, but may be more
widely found within the human genome. Together, these experiments expand our
knowledge on the process of protein biosynthesis and lay the foundation to
perform future mechanistic studies on protein biosynthesis at the single
molecule level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.