* 2047488
* CAREER: Network Resilience: Theories, Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Jianxi Gao, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2026
* USD 459,495.00

Networks are collections of interdependent and dynamic components that make up
many crucial systems of various scales, such as the social systems, food supply
chains, and the neural networks in our brain. However, these networks can be
highly vulnerable to failures. A small disturbance may bring the whole network
across a tipping point and shift it abruptly and irreversibly to an undesired
state, resulting in large catastrophic collapses. Examples are mass extinctions
in ecological networks, cascading failures in power grids, and social convention
changes in human and animal networks. Resilience is the ability of networked
systems to adjust their activity to retain basic functionality and avoid large
shifts in the face of internal disturbances and environmental changes. The cost
of resilience loss sometimes is unaffordable: The outbreak of the COVID-19
pandemic has caused over two million deaths worldwide as of January 25, 2021,
and continues to kill increasingly more people and shut down increasingly more
economic activities. This award aims to develop a universal theoretical and
practical foundation for the resilience of complex networked systems, for
systems from different fields, such as biology, ecology, transportation, and
many more. This award will design fast and accurate algorithms to predict a
system's resilience even when only partial information is known, offering ways
to prevent the collapse of ecological, biological, or economic systems and guide
the design of technological systems resilient to both internal failures and
environmental changes. Students, including K-12, will be engaged in learning
about networks and resilience in multiple ways, ranging from research
opportunities to lectures and a cyber-attack game design, where the defender
aims to create a resilient network with limited recourses to withstand the
attacker's strategic damages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims
of the project are divided into three thrusts. The first thrust creates a
unified theory that captures a universal resilience behavior of different
systems by relaxing some assumptions and recognizing different types of
interactions between the dynamical components and among interacting systems. The
second thrust designs fast and accurate algorithms for predicting systems'
resilience with incomplete information on the topology or dynamics. The last
thrust develops mathematical tools for resilience enhancement through topology
adaptation and state-based control to characterize their readiness during the
operation trajectory and throughout the recovery process, enabling sustainable,
recoverable, and resilient system design. These three research thrusts will be
validated by a comprehensive evaluation of the progress, including computer
simulations and real-world experiments. This research effort will produce the
foundation for network resilience that allows prediction and controlling it with
sufficient generality to apply it to many areas where resilience to adverse
perturbations is of paramount concern. This CAREER project enables a paradigm
shift in how network resilience is currently understood, yielding transformative
ideas to enhance how networked systems can best be built and managed (human-made
systems) or self-organized and adapted (natural systems) to enhance their
resilience to internal failures and external environmental
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.