* 2047719
* CAREER: Orchestrating Edge Infrastructures and Mobile Devices under Uncertainty to Provision Edge AI as a Service
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Lei Jiao, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2026
* USD 314,827.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is often trained by data first, and then used to
perform inference upon data which may have never been seen. Today's AI services
are mostly trained in remote data centers and accessed via the Internet.
However, increasingly, as large volumes of training data are generated by end
users and inference tasks are also performed on premises, AI needs to be moved
to the network edge in closer proximity to users. The objective of this project
is to address this emerging paradigm shift by orchestrating the distributed
computing and networking infrastructures and provisioning AI as a service from
the network edge to serve large numbers of users at different
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will define the optimization
problems, design the control algorithms, and develop the deployable
implementations for operating AI as a service across cloud-edge networks and
mobile devices. Centered on system dynamics and uncertainty, the project
consists of multiple research thrusts. First, the project will optimize the
training and the inference of AI through making smart decisions on participant
selection, model placement, aggregation control, and request dispatching, and
will produce time-based algorithms running in an online manner with provable
performance guarantees. Second, the project will investigate the interactions
among different parties in the AI service ecosystem from an economics
perspective, and will devise incentive mechanisms towards superior resource
utilization and optimal social welfare with desired economic properties. Third,
the project will conduct a combination of simulations, measurements, and
implementations with real-world data traces and realistic experimental settings
to comprehensively evaluate and validate the models, algorithms, and
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will impact the industry by providing
telecom carriers, network operators, and service providers with a critical set
of techniques to enable them to provision and operate dedicated or value-added
edge-AI services upon distributed infrastructures. Further, the project will
devise novel theories and algorithms based on the mathematics of optimization,
control, learning, and mechanism design, and could be of independent interest
and have extended applications to problems in other related fields that also
face dynamic and uncertain inputs. Finally, besides contributing to
undergraduate and graduate course materials, the project will execute the
education plan that focuses on facilitating K-12 education via training teachers
and also equipping students with AI knowledge and experiences in an ethical
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deliverables of this project, which include but
are not limited to papers, data, and codes, will be made publicly available at
the following website: https://github.com/ai-at-edge. This website will be
updated in time for the duration of this project and maintained online
thereafter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.