* 2047052
* CAREER: The genetic mechanisms of sex-ratio meiotic drive and resistance
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Robert Unckless, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 01/31/2026
* USD 630,000.00

It is widely recognized that parasites are a major burden for their hosts, but
many people don’t recognize that much of the parasite burden comes from within
the host’s own genome. This proposal aims to understand the genetic basis of one
such intragenomic parasite. Intragenomic parasites are associated with general
biological processes such as the creation of new species and the chromosomal
makeup of the genome as well as human health issues like infertility. Recently,
researchers have worked to adopt genomic parasites to control pest populations
such as mosquitoes. Thus, understanding the genetic basis of these parasites may
inform a) our understanding of basic biological processes, b) issues related to
infertility, and c) applications of intragenomic parasites for biocontrol
measures. Part of the project will involve providing research opportunities to
recent transfer students in an attempt to improve retention and satisfaction of
this historically vulnerable population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
specifically examines sex-ratio meiotic drive, a phenomenon where males carrying
a specific gene or mutation on the X chromosome produce female-biased sex ratios
because the paternal X chromosome is somehow able to interfere with the
development of Y-bearing sperm. The approach is to use gene expression, cytology
and genomic techniques followed by genome editing to develop and test hypotheses
about the genes involved in sex-ratio meiotic drive. The second part of the
project will dissect the genetic basis of Y-linked resistance to sex-ratio
meiotic drive using similar techniques. The third goal of the proposal is to
understand how these intragenomic parasites might cause natural selection to
actually favor improper segregation of chromosomes during meiosis leading to
gametes missing sex chromosomes. This award was co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
Evolutionary Processes Cluster in the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.