* 2047094
* CAREER: Robust Matching Algorithms for Causal Inference in Large Observational Studies
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* MD NOOR E ALAM, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2026
* USD 500,239.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will advance the
national health, prosperity, and economic welfare by utilizing the power of big
data to infer causality in large-scale observational studies. In many
situations, particularly in the public health domain, it may be difficult or
prohibitively expensive to design controlled studies to evaluate effective
public policies. As large-scale data collection increases, the design of methods
to infer causality between treatment and outcome by partitioning observations
into appropriate sets has become an attractive alternative. Current methods
underlying causal inference suffer from several fundamental challenges that may
lead to sub-optimal policy selection. This project will develop tractable
computational approaches to facilitate better policy decision making. As an
important use case, the project will evaluate policies for improving treatment
quality of Opioid Use Disorder (OUD) using large-scale U.S. healthcare data. The
integrated education and research plan will attract and involve a diverse
student body, from high school through graduate school, in research and
practice. Through active engagement with partnering organizations, including
community colleges and an HBCU, the project will provide opportunities for
members of underrepresented groups in engineering to address pressing societal
needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a modern optimization perspective, this
project will advance existing methods for causal inference by developing a
theoretical and computational framework that encompasses both inference and
matching to identify causality from an observational study. The research
objectives are to (1) establish a robust causal inference framework with
matching methods to reduce uncertainty, (2) ensure covariate balance in high
dimensional space, (3) develop optimal covariate balance techniques to reduce
bias and model dependency by ensuring desired distributional properties, and (4)
evaluate and advance U.S. healthcare policies based on this framework. To this
end, a rigorous optimization framework will be employed to explicitly account
for uncertainties in causal inference, maintain neighborhood structures of high
dimensional data in low dimensions with matching requirements, and ensure
optimal distributional properties of observational data. Efficient exact
solution algorithms will be developed exploiting problem structure. Scalability
will be addressed through algorithmic schemes with desirable convergence
properties and data structure-based decomposition methods. These algorithms are
expected to be useful to a wide variety of optimization problems such as
quadratic assignment, convex-nonlinear feasibility, and binary
feasibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.