* 2047324
* CAREER: Drought and metacommunity stability in riverine networks
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Albert RUHI VIDAL, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2026
* USD 738,840.00

The frequency, duration, and severity of droughts is increasing in many regions
of the world. Drought can negatively impact riverine ecosystems—particularly if
streams that generally flow year-round become intermittent. Climatic droughts
can isolate entire portions of the river network, and synchronize fluctuations
in abundance of aquatic organisms across large spatial scales. How these
isolation and synchronization processes may endanger aquatic species directly,
or indirectly by modifying species interactions, remains largely unknown. Here I
propose to address this gap by combining long-term monitoring and field
experiments in an intermittent river network in Pinnacles National Park, with
large-scale modeling of stream biodiversity and hydrology data. This CAREER
integrates research and education goals, and will provide students from
underrepresented backgrounds with hands-on experience on stream sensor
instrumentation, biodiversity sampling, and analysis of time-series data. It
will also create an Ecological Drought Collaboratory spanning academic,
government, and museum institutions researching drought-related
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite much research on freshwater biodiversity
responses to drought, it remains difficult to predict responses at high levels
of biological organization (food webs and metacommunities). This is largely
because biotic interactions can dampen or amplify impacts of abiotic stress on
each species. Moreover, drought may erode the capacity of organisms to disperse
and recolonize from other sources (resilience strategists), or to persist
locally and bounce back after drying events (resistance strategists). Through a
combination of approaches that span spatio-temporal scales and disciplines
(metacommunity ecology, stream hydrology, time-series analysis), the
investigator will determine the net contribution of drought to metacommunity
stability. The specific goals of this project are: (i) understanding the
controls of metacommunity stability in streams, with a focus on the relatively
understudied mechanisms of drought-driven dispersal limitation and synchrony;
(ii) determining to what extent recent climatic droughts, in isolation or in
conjunction with human activities, synchronized flow regimes within and across
river networks; and (iii) forecasting the vulnerability of U.S. stream
invertebrates and fishes to future droughts, considering not only local biotic
and abiotic change (temperature and flow) but also network-level shifts in
habitat portfolio and connectivity. This work will fill a critical gap in our
mechanistic understanding of metacommunity dynamics in dendritic networks, and
will help better quantify risk of freshwater biodiversity loss under
increasingly-variable climates. Integrated educational objectives targeting
undergraduate and graduate students, conservation practitioners, and the public
will promote understanding of how biodiversity persists in river networks. This
increased understanding should improve conservation outcomes via robust design
of environmental flows and habitat restoration
actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.