* 2047598
* CAREER: Scalable approaches for systems virology
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Karthik Anantharaman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2026
* USD 405,513.00

Viruses are the most abundant biological entities on Earth and are keystone
components of environments and microbiomes whose contributions have mostly been
overlooked. Understanding viruses is critical to the study and applications of
microbiomes in diverse fields such as agriculture, medicine, biotechnology,
ecosystem science, oceanography and biogeochemistry. In spite of this recognized
importance, computational tools for studying viruses are lacking compared to
similar tools for other microbes like bacteria. To that end, the goals of this
project are to develop new machine learning-based approaches for the study of
viruses and their ecology. The project has the potential to transform the study
of microbiomes and the field of viral ecology by maximizing information gained
from viruses and elucidating their roles in nature. The current SARS-CoV-2
epidemic is projected to vastly increase student interest in STEM and
specifically, virology in the coming years. In parallel, there is an increasing
demand for a workforce adept in bioinformatics and data science approaches in
biology. The project aims to advance the development of a talented, educated,
and skilled workforce and increase participation of underrepresented minorities
and first-generation college students in STEM. The project will also increase
literacy of virology and data science across K-12 and undergraduate education
through teacher-training workshops &amp; course-based undergraduate research
experiences (CUREs) at the interface of bioinformatics, data science, and
virology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop algorithms and
bioinformatic tools to enable the study of uncultivated viruses from mixed
communities with little to no biases (bacterial/archaeal/eukaryotic, DNA/RNA,
lytic/lysogenic). The goals of the project are to develop new genome and protein
databases and machine learning approaches to identify viruses; network-based
frameworks for reference-free prediction of viral hosts; and network and
statistical approaches for determination of viral taxonomy and estimates of
genome completion. These methods will be validated using simulated and real-
world metagenomics and metatranscriptomics data and formalized through the
development and release of open access databases and software. The approaches
will be applied to study viral ecology of deep-sea hydrothermal ecosystems, and
the role of viral infections in impacting nutrient cycling in the oceans.
Additionally, the project will also enable investigation of fundamental
questions in viral ecology governing the roles of viruses in diverse microbiomes
and environments such as soils, human health, freshwater, and marine systems.
Two CUREs will be developed in virus cultivation and bioinformatics,
respectively, using novel interactive education approaches including blended
learning, and are expected to reach in excess of 1000 students. A teacher-
training workshop “Viruses in nature” will be conducted to train K-12 biology
teachers (especially from rural and underrepresented communities). The workshop
will develop lesson plans, and hands-on laboratory activities that integrate
concepts of virology and bioinformatics into teaching units on biology. For more
information visit:
https://github.com/AnantharamanLab/NSF_CAREER.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.