* 2047268
* CAREER: Physics Regularized Machine Learning Theory: Modeling Stochastic Traffic Flow Patterns for Smart Mobility Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Xianfeng Yang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 544,149.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support fundamental
research in modeling stochastic traffic flows for smart mobility systems, based
on the fusion of classical transportation models and learning techniques. With
the goals of mitigating traffic congestions, improving transportation safety,
and reducing vehicle emissions, many smart mobility applications require
accurate, reliable, and timely traffic information as input. To meet such needs,
this project will lay the foundation of machine learning and traffic flow theory
to yield better estimations and predictions of mobility patterns. The method
uses transportation domain knowledge to regularize the training process of
machine learning. The results will significantly enhance the effectiveness and
robustness of those smart mobility applications at both small and large scales.
The research activities can be closely integrated with a set of education and
outreach activities that include (i) developing a virtual computing lab to
facilitate student educations, researcher engagement, government employee
training, and industry collaboration, (ii) modernizing the transportation
curriculum with research outcomes, (iii) broadening the participation of k-12
students in the annual summer “Transportation Camps” and underrepresented
students in the Artificial Intelligence club of a minority-serving institution.
Those activities will help transportation students better recognize the
importance of engineering knowledge in the era of smart mobility
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to contribute
fundamental theories and a set of markedly improved algorithms to traffic flow
modeling. Leveraging the concept of physics regularized machine learning, the
research could encode both continuous and discretized traffic flow models into
Gaussian process for training regularization. This new model can efficiently
resolve the common data sparsity and noise issues and facilitate various smart
mobility applications. To accommodate streaming data, this project will also
develop a novel physics regularized streaming learning framework that can
efficiently improve the model performances in real-time. When dealing with big
data, this project can further synergize data of different resolutions,
fidelities, and sources to enable sparse Gaussian process and Bayesian committee
machine for fast learning. This foundational research can enormously promote
machine learning applications in smart mobility systems and contribute to
formulating sustainable, scalable, and robust traffic flow models. This project
will bridge the gap between classical transportation methods and data-driven
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.