* 2047684
* CAREER: Discovering hidden drivers of rhizosphere symbiosis and parasitism
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Amanda Brown, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 05/31/2026
* USD 300,003.00

Public Abstract – Proposal IOS-2047684&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER:
Hidden drivers of parasitism and symbiosis in the
rhizosphere&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on plant-parasitic
nematodes, tiny worms that feed on plants, causing an estimated 25% of crop
yield loss globally and costing $100 billion annually. Naturally occurring
bacteria have been discovered living within these worms that may drive their
survival and direct their devastating impacts on plants. These bacteria, present
in some of the most damaging nematodes, are related to bacteria currently used
to control mosquito-borne diseases, suggesting they may hold promise for
agricultural control strategies that reduce the use of toxic chemicals to
control nematodes. This project uses global sampling, DNA and RNA sequencing,
computer software development, and novel experiments to uncover the function of
these widespread bacteria and bridge traditionally separated fields of plant
pathology, nematology, and microbiology to overcome significant roadblocks to
understanding rhizosphere ecology. This project also examines how stressors such
as climate change and land use affect the interactions between these bacteria,
nematodes, and plants. This project will have societal and educational impacts
through integrating research activities performed by an interdisciplinary
science program in bioinformatics at the hosting Hispanic Serving Institution
with national research-outreach programs centered on citizen science and
rhizosphere biomodelling, and a local peer-mentoring program in genomics for
high school students targeting traditionally underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant-parasitic nematodes (PPNs) are ubiquitous in
soils, causing significant losses to agricultural crops and impacts on plants
across terrestrial ecosystems. Recent work shows these nematodes host bacterial
endosymbionts, including Wolbachia and Cardinium, which are well-known in
insects to play a critical role in driving their host’s biology as either
reproductive parasites or mutualists. Yet, the role of these endosymbionts in
PPNs is unknown. This CAREER project seeks to uncover the dynamics driving the
tripartite interactions between these endosymbionts, PPNs, and plants. Research
activities will (1) determine the ecological and evolutionary forces acting on
PPN endosymbionts globally across natural populations through shotgun
metagenomics, population genomics, database mining, and bioinformatics; (2)
directly test endosymbiont impacts on host nematode fitness, phenotype, and
plant parasitism through symbiont-clearing experiments on root-cultures, plants,
and transparent soils, using host-symbiont gene expression analysis; and (3)
investigate the dual effects of PPN endosymbionts and stressors such as climate
and land use change using computational models and transplanted plant
communities under temperature stress. These experiments will test the hypothesis
that PPN endosymbionts drive the tripartite dynamics through controlling host
reproduction or providing iron/heme or lipids and explore molecular targets for
biocontrol. The project integrates research, education, and outreach objectives
by developing and incorporating Citizen Science-based sampling, an undergraduate
Bioinformatics Challenge program, and a summer high school Genomics Scholar
program to engage and train underrepresented groups in this research. Outcomes
are expected to form a new foundational understanding of these rhizosphere
interactions, generate bioinformatics software, and improve training in multi-
omics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.