* 2047306
* CAREER: Enabling grid-aware aggregation and real-time control of distributed energy resources in electric power distribution systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Mads Almassalkhi, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This NSF CAREER project aims to advance the field of power systems to enable a
reliable, affordable, and clean energy future by leveraging flexibility from
millions of heterogeneous, connected distributed energy resources (DERs), such
as controllable loads, energy storage, and distributed generation. The project
will bring transformative change to distribution system operations by creating a
novel cooperative paradigm for grid and DER management. The intellectual merits
of the project include advancing fundamental understanding of and theory for
optimizing and controlling electric power distribution systems, including novel
algorithms that formally certify a range of admissible DER controllers. The
broader impacts of the project include casting power systems as a climate-change
mitigation technology and developing an online DER+Grid simulation platform that
enhances the power engineering curriculum at University of Vermont and the
university's approach to an inclusive STEM education. This will attract diverse
people and empower them to tackle climate challenges. A new interdisciplinary
course for non-STEM students will be developed to build valuable coding skills
within the framework of gamification and a clean energy future to allow students
to critically assess challenges and opportunities. Through these games, the PI
intends to build an online portal that raises public awareness of and enables
meaningful participation in power systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's power
distribution system operations are top-down and rely on conservative margins
that limit deployments and coordination of DERs and precludes independent
aggregators. To overcome barriers posed by the asymmetry of information and
control between the distribution system operator (DSO) and DER aggregators, the
PI proposes two research objectives: 1) Study scalable optimization algorithms
that enable the DSO to dynamically maximize the capacity of distribution feeders
to host flexible demand and DERs, while accounting for the nonlinear AC physics,
practical network topologies and assets, and uncertain power injections; and 2)
Develop control algorithms that enable DER aggregators to participate in
valuable grid services while certifying that control actions are network-
admissible. The algorithms will be based on convex inner approximations, which
promote scalability for large feeders. All proposed work will be validated using
data from utilities and aggregators within a real-time DER+Grid simulation
platform that represents a gateway for undergraduates to actively contribute to
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.