* 2047024
* CAREER: Developing noble gases as tracers of metamorphic dehydration
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Andrew Smye, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2026
* USD 381,603.00

The habitability of Earth is controlled by the distribution of volatile elements
(e.g. water, carbon dioxide) between surface (atmosphere + hydrosphere) and
interior reservoirs (mantle + core). Metamorphism during burial and heating of
oceanic plates at subduction zones regulates the supply of water into the
Earthâ€™s mantle, critically affecting how the mantle flows. However, the specific
pathways and fluxes by which water is transported beyond arc volcanoes are
uncertain. While direct tracing of subducted water is made difficult by its
small number of isotopes, the noble gases are elementally- and isotopically-
rich, are fractionated by physical processes and are ideal tracers for the
movement of metamorphic fluids. Application of the noble gases as tracers of the
deep water cycle requires development of a linkage between noble gas composition
and the magnitudes of water loss during subduction. This project will result in
a systematic characterisation of the distribution and composition of noble gas
isotopes in ancient samples of subducted oceanic crust, establishing the
framework for noble gases to be used as tracers of metamorphic fluids. The
integrated research and education program proposed here will result in: 1)
quantification of the key physical processes that control subduction-processing
of volatiles; 2) career-enhancement for an early career scientist and a graduate
student, and 3) broadened participation and enhanced diversity in petrological
research via a series of formative research institutes targeting applicants from
minority-serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earth's upper mantle
contains an indelible elemental abundance pattern of heavy noble gases (Ar, Kr,
Xe) that is strikingly similar to seawater. Because this is a unique composition
in the solar system, the only credible explanation is that a non-disrupted,
seawater-like noble gas signature survives the subduction process, generally
thought to exclude more than 95% of input volatiles. Given that the noble gases
are between 100 and 100,000 times more soluble in fluids than crustal minerals,
even minor amounts of phase separation during release and transport of
metamorphic fluids will fractionate the noble gas composition of subducting
rock. How, then, do noble gases escape removal and significant fractionation
during subduction? And, can the noble gases be used to quantitatively trace the
subduction of water? This project will address these questions through the
integration of noble gas compositions, mineralogically-bound H2O contents and
thermodynamic estimates of pressure and temperature from exhumed subduction-
related rocks. The proposed research will systematically test the overarching
hypothesis that noble gas composition is principally controlled by the extent of
metamorphic dehydration during subduction. At the core of the educational
component of this CAREER program is the development and implementation of a
series of summer institutes dedicated to enhancing diversity in petrological
research. This program will result in the petrological training of a cohort of
undergraduates, many of whom will come from minority-serving institutions.
Petrological and geochemical datasets collected as part of the proposed research
program will be used to nurture interest, and increase comprehension of
undergraduate students, from a diverse array of institutions and backgrounds, in
metamorphic petrology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.