* 2047465
* CAREER: Investigations of Educational Technology to Safeguard Children’s Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Marshini Chetty, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2026
* USD 391,283.00

Schools have increasingly adopted educational technologies to support learning,
monitor student engagement, and track and predict academic performance. These
educational technologies may negatively impact schoolchildren if student data
are used to create records that lead to unfair discrimination or unconsented use
by commercial entities. Many educational technologies used or sponsored by
schools are not well regulated. To safeguard children’s privacy, this project
investigates the data that educational technologies are gathering on
schoolchildren, how and why those data are being used, and by whom they are
used. The investigations examine educational technologies under remote, hybrid,
and in-person learning conditions. This project will lead to better
understanding by parents, children, and teachers of the impact of educational
technologies on children’s privacy and how to curb undesirable data collection
and better maintain online privacy. This project is creating after-school
learning activities for middle school girls, summer programs for college
readiness, and parent-focused seminars on the topic of online privacy. It is
also creating privacy-related educational resources for college students and
providing empirical evidence to inform the regulation of educational
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the privacy effects of
educational technologies on children in grades 3–7. The studies are being
carried out in two of the largest public school districts in the US, Chicago and
Houston. The investigations include qualitative data collection of parents’ and
children’s experiences with educational technologies, and qualitative studies of
teachers’ views on educational technologies and data collection practices. The
project will inform a taxonomy of the most commonly used educational
technologies in the largest US school districts and their impact on
schoolchildren’s privacy. The project also includes co-design and evaluation of
ways to help parents, children, and teachers better manage educational
technologies’ data collection for safeguarding schoolchildren’s
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.