* 2047317
* CAREER: Human-Centric Automation in the Built Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Michael Kane, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2026
* USD 822,063.00

Buildings, electric grids, and other aspects of the built environment are
becoming increasingly automated to satisfy both complex societal objectives and
individuals’ needs. As one example, utility demand response programs currently
increase building cooling temperature setpoints to reduce peak summer energy
loads, but this can lead to uncomfortable and frustrated occupants who override
those setpoints to maintain comfort. Such overrides increase strain on the
electric grid and induce financial losses resulting from the failure to deliver
promised energy management. The objective of this Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) project is to enable the design of automation in
the built environment that models human physiological and behavioral responses
to changing environmental temperature conditions to satisfy competing objectives
of energy management and occupant comfort. This project will use laboratory-
based human subject studies and field studies involving 100 consumer households
to develop methods and models for understanding how human thermal comfort and
behavior (thermal setpoint control overrides) adapt to dynamic thermal
environments. The goal is to develop an adaptive controller that incorporates a
dynamic model of occupant comfort, which will allow temporary comfort deviations
that nevertheless avoid setpoint overrides. The project will advance the NSF
mission to promote the progress of science and to advance national health,
prosperity, and welfare by advancing a fundamental understanding of the complex
dynamics that arise through the joint optimization of building heating and air
conditioning system energy consumption and occupant comfort. A synergistic
education program with an urban vocational high school will translate research
findings into an applied curriculum. The goal of which is to train the next
generation of building technicians and engineers to be effective and equitable
in the operation of building automation systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this CAREER project is to investigate human thermal comfort and interactions
with the smart thermostat devices to mitigate conflict between energy management
systems and building occupants by designing automated controls that avoid user
overrides. This project’s research plan follows an iterative design procedure
involving human psychophysiological testing, behavior modeling, and control
system design. Laboratory studies of human behavior in response to environmental
thermal transients will guide streamlined field experiments to be performed in
100 homes in partnership with a leading smart-thermostat manufacturer. A model
of human psychophysiological behavior dynamics will be developed based on the
resulting experimental data. Machine learning techniques will be used to improve
estimator performance. Emergent behaviors arising from the interaction of users
and a variety of existing and novel robust- and optimal-controllers will be
evaluated through simulations and field tests. Consideration will be given to
issues of equity across populations and environmental contexts. The development
of occupant-behavior models and environmental controller design will be
integrated into learning exercises in which future engineers and technicians
explore human-centric automation in the built
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.