* 2047015
* CAREER: Multi-chrome metasurfaces for dynamic structural color and naked eye diagnostics
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Judson Ryckman, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 03/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

High sensitivity, fast, and accurate sensors and medical diagnostics offer
positive impacts on societal well-being, national health, and aid decision
making with economic consequences. However, modern scientific instrumentation
and sensing technologies are often bulky, expensive, slow, and/or cumbersome to
operate; and may be unavailable in disadvantaged, remote, or under-developed
communities where access to laboratory grade diagnostics is sparse. Colorimetric
sensors on the other hand offer a promising solution to these problems, as they
can be analyzed with high resolution by digital cameras or the naked eye.
However, the performance of colorimetric sensors is so far typically inferior to
the bulky/expensive alternatives as it can be difficult to convert small sensor
variations into a large color response. This research introduces and
investigates a means to address and overcome this problem through optimization
of the sensor design, coordinated with the design of the light source. This
research opens the door to new types of high-performance colorimetric sensors,
which may be competitive with and/or offer greater functionality than the
bulky/expensive alternatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural coloration faces
fundamental limits which presently prevent the realization of strong dynamic
color responses arising from small variations in spectral properties. As such,
dynamic coloration and colorimetric sensing devices currently rely heavily on
niche physical/chemical effects which must amplify spectral changes to yield
their colorimetric response. Colorimetric sensors built on such approaches are
not generalizable and ultimately fail to rival the performance of laboratory
grade benchtop equipment which is often bulky, slow, and costly/complex to
operate. The proposed research presents a transformative and general technique
for color transduction and sensing which can overcome these challenges. The
ultimate goal of this research is to break the present performance limits of
dynamic structural color devices and to investigate a new class of structural
color based diagnostics, readable by the naked eye, which can rival or even
exceed the performance of benchtop alternatives. Objectives of this project
include: (1) Establish the theoretical framework for our high-level approach,
‘hyperchromatic structural color’ (HSC), while mapping out and investigating the
limits of dynamic color transduction and how to maximize perceived color
variations in response to targeted stimuli; (2) Study the design of metasurfaces
optimized for multi-chrome laser illuminants and tailored colorimetric
trajectories; and fabricate, characterize, and analyze their performance while
addressing integration and nanomanufacturing challenges; (3) Experimentally
characterize the colorimetric sensing performance of the newly developed multi-
chrome metasurfaces and advance the field of naked eye diagnostics; and (4)
Implement an educational plan aimed at addressing an observed educational gap in
high-school and undergraduate level optics and photonics in an effort to: (a)
increase STEM exposure to local high-schoolers, (b) promote both STEM and
graduate level education opportunities to underrepresented groups and
minorities, and (c) bridge the gap between undergraduate education and
industrial opportunities in optics and opto-electronic industries. The
investigation of dynamic structural color using multi-chrome laser illuminants
is compelling because it fundamentally offers access to the highest colorimetric
sensitivities, and hence no alternative approach (i.e. broadband or
monochromatic illumination) can principally produce stronger color variations in
response to a given spectral perturbation. Our focus on studying multi-chrome
metasurfaces and the integration of responsive nanomaterials will advance our
understanding of: multi-resonant and moiré photonic systems, the design and
optimization of moderate to low index metasurfaces and biosensors, how to nano-
manufacture scalably chip-scale optics derived from unconventional media, and
how to tailor spectral properties from arrays and pixelated
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.