* 2047732
* CAREER: Engineering Interacting Photons in Superconducting-Circuit Lattices
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Alicia Kollar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 05/31/2026
* USD 508,584.00

Photons are particles of light which exist all across the electromagnetic
spectrum, from radio and microwaves to visible and ultra-violet light. By making
use of superconductors, which carry current without generating heat when cooled
to very low temperatures, it is possible to make microwave circuits where,
unlike in most room-temperature devices, the photons live for very long times
and stay confined in small regions in space. Since these photons stay put
instead of flying away, they become more like conventional particles such as
electrons, and the full might and diversity of microwave engineering can be used
to control how they see and interact with the world. By controlling how these
photons interact with each other and the world around them, this project will
probe the fundamental building blocks of the materials around us and learn about
how the environment in which a particle lives affects its properties. The
project will also build upon the recently-initiated Virtual AMO Seminar, of
which the PI is a board member, to develop an auxiliary small-group program
series aimed at engaging non-physicists and undergraduate students in online
research seminars in a meaningful way and facilitating communication in the
ever-broadening quantum workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among this projectâ€™s
specific research goals is to harness arrays of superconducting microwave
resonators to produce microwave metamaterials in which photon-photon
interactions can be mediated by superconducting qubits. Building on previous
theoretical work showing that these metamaterials can access unconventional band
structures, such as lattices with gapped flat bands and also much more general
mathematical objects such as tree-like and hyperbolic graphs, the PI will
implement unconventional microwave lattices and incorporate qubits to mediate
interactions. Investigation will begin with one-dimensional lattices and move
toward higher-dimensional structures during the course of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.