* 2047017
* CAREER: Deciphering the nanoparticle-lymphatic vessel interface for modulating immunity
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2025
* Katharina Maisel, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 12/31/2025
* USD 370,469.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI’s lab’s long-term research
goal is to design nanoparticles to transport drugs across and study biological
barrier-nanoparticle interfaces to improve therapeutic outcomes, particularly
those modulating the immune response. This CAREER proposal will be the first
stepping-stone toward achieving the long-term research goal. Therapeutic
treatments targeting the immune system range from classic vaccines to allergen
immunotherapy to cancer immunotherapies. Targeting lymph nodes directly has been
shown to significantly enhance efficacy of immunotherapies, both for vaccination
and immunotherapies. This is often done via direct injection into the lymph
nodes, but using the natural transport function of lymphatic vessels, by
employing small nanoparticles, is a promising, less invasive alternative. In
this proposal, the PI will address the gaps in knowledge on how material
properties like shape and surface chemistry as well as fluid flow within tissues
affect nanoparticle transport by lymphatic vessels. The results from the
proposed studies will provide a set of design criteria for developing vaccines
and immunotherapies that non-invasively target lymph nodes, which will also
enhance acceptability and translatability of such therapeutics. Furthermore,
lymphatic transport targeting nanoparticle therapeutics could significantly
enhance efficacy of immunotherapies and vaccines, by e.g. providing longer
protection against pathogens or enhancing response to cancer immunotherapy, all
while reducing side effects and required doses. The proposed research will be
integrated into a transformative education and outreach program to teach
critical thinking and interpretation of data and promote inclusion and retention
of underrepresented groups, particularly women, in engineering. Toward the first
goal, the PI will design in-class laboratory exercises that are supplemented
with real-world data from the research objectives to illustrate complexities of
biological systems. Diversity in engineering is still far below that of the
general population and research has shown that diversity in teams and
researchers increases creativity, achievement, and outside-the-box thinking. The
PI has developed a 3-pronged approach that builds upon two main principles
identified to aid in retention and recruitment of diverse groups in STEM:
mentorship and inclusive leadership. For this CAREER award, the PI will build
generational and peer mentorship programs, increase dissemination of mentorship
training programs, design diversity education modules to educate the next and
current generation of scientists on promoting inclusive environments, and
finally, build early-stage interventions by partnering with rural elementary
schools to recruit women and underrepresented groups into STEM careers. The
long-term outcome is to strengthen the participation of diverse groups in STEM
through exposure and educational opportunities and tools to maintain and
encourage diversity in teams and research at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI’s
lab’s long-term research goal is to design nanoparticles to study biological
barrier-nanoparticle interfaces to improve therapeutic outcomes. This CAREER
award will be the first stepping-stone to achieve the long-term research goal by
investigating the nanoparticle interface with lymphatic vessels (‘lymphatics’).
Lymphatics have crucial transport roles, shuttling antigens and particulates
from peripheral tissues to the draining lymph nodes (dLNs), where the adaptive
immune response is shaped. Reaching the dLNs has been shown to particularly
amplify the effectiveness of immunotherapies and vaccines and can be achieved by
targeting lymphatics using small particulates between 10 – 200 nm. But many
questions remain unanswered: how do material properties, like shape and surface
characteristics, affect transendothelial transport of nanoparticles and the
mechanisms involved in this transport? In this CAREER award, the PI will 1)
investigate the effects of nanoparticle properties such as shape and surface
chemistry on their transport by lymphatics, 2) determine how interstitial flow
modulates transport of these different nanoparticle formulations, 3) assess
nanoparticle protein corona formation and stability in lymph fluid, and 4)
elucidate the cellular mechanisms used by lymphatics to transport nanoparticles
with different material properties. The PI’s long-term educational goal is to
develop experiential learning experiences and build educational tools to recruit
and retain underrepresented groups in engineering. The first educational goal
will be to design in-class laboratory exercises that are supplemented with real-
world data from the research objectives to illustrate complexities of biological
systems. Research has shown that diversity in teams and researchers increases
creativity, achievement, and outside-the-box thinking. The PI has developed a
3-pronged approach that builds upon two main principles identified to aid in
retention and recruitment of diverse groups in STEM: mentorship and inclusive
leadership. The PI will 1) build generational and peer mentorship programs, 2)
increase dissemination of mentorship training programs, 3) design diversity
education modules to educate the next and current generation of scientists on
promoting inclusive environments, and 4) build early-stage interventions by
partnering with rural elementary schools to recruit women and underrepresented
groups into STEM careers. The proposed research will lead to crucial advances in
fundamental understanding of how nanoparticle properties 1) modulate transport
by lymphatics, particularly in the context of interstitial fluid flow, and 2)
affect cellular mechanisms used by lymphatics to transport nanoparticles across
the vessel wall. This fundamental understanding will provide rational material-
based design criteria for nanoparticle platforms that can be used as probes to
study lymphatic transport physiology and to deliver immunotherapies and
vaccines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.