* 2047357
* CAREER: Entanglement Engineering in Dissipation-Driven Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Archana Kamal, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2026
* USD 313,283.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum information processing (QIP)
has rapidly emerged as a compelling research direction, driven by the prospect
of quantum computers capable of performing calculations that are too large for
any current or conceivable future classical (non-quantum) supercomputer. The
Achilles heel of QIP has been dissipation, the friction that both generates heat
and destroys the long-lived quantum correlations among quantum bits ("qubits")
necessary for QIP, so far limiting quantum information systems in both size and
complexity. Such correlations among qubits are called "entanglement," and a goal
of this research is to produce any desired entangled state of qubits, which
becomes the starting point for a quantum computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
powerful approach to address this general problem is quantum reservoir
engineering: the idea is to turn the tables on dissipation and use it as a
resource for steering a quantum system, such that the dissipation-driven
dynamics naturally relax the system to the state of interest. This CAREER
project supports basic research into developing a novel reservoir engineering
framework and leverages it for entanglement generation in noisy quantum systems.
From a practical standpoint, this will help identify critical milestones for
establishing reservoir engineering as a standard paradigm for scalable and
robust entanglement generation, which has applications in all areas of quantum
information science, including quantum computing, sensing and communication. In
addition, the proposed research will enable fundamental advances in the physics
of quantum systems coupled to a noisy environment by developing theoretical
tools to rigorously explore the validity of standard dissipative models in the
presence of noise that varies, and is correlated, in
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education and training aspect in this project
will assume a multi-pronged approach that will expose graduate and undergraduate
students to a wide variety of analytical and computational techniques in quantum
information and quantum optics. Aided and informed by close connections with
experimental realizations of solid-state qubits, the aim will be to provide the
trainees a holistic view of the polyglot field of QIP and address the strategic
national need to create a "quantum-smart" workforce. The training aspect will be
integrated with broad educational and outreach goals via new and continuing
curriculum and course development initiatives, public talks, and promoting open
access venues for communicating research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum reservoir engineering is an attractive
approach for correcting errors and realizing stable quantum coherences
autonomously. The basic idea is to tailor the dissipative environment of the
target systems so that this engineered dissipation relaxes the system to and
sustains it in a desired target state. While versatile, existing schemes for
dissipative state preparation rely exclusively on time-independent dissipative
dynamics, which can leave the protocols susceptible to unwanted spurious
dissipation. The PI's broad vision is that this project will enable a
transformative new class of dissipative state preparation protocols with
dramatically improved speed, fidelity and robustness to errors. To this end, the
research will broadly focus on two directions: (i) study of dynamics driven by
time-dependent dissipation, and (ii) study of dynamics driven by correlated
dissipation. These theoretical studies will involve developing a comprehensive
analytical and numerical framework with some of the first explorations of the
validity of open quantum systems descriptions, especially in a context where
non-trivial dissipation is a useful resource. For instance, the outcomes of this
project will address fundamental questions pertaining to implications of
adiabaticity and non-Markovianity for reservoir engineering and provide useful
pointers for quantum error correction and error mitigation in the presence of
correlated noise. This has transformative potential not only for the
entanglement stabilization protocols envisioned here but also for any platform
involving dynamic control of quantum systems. The PI maintains an active
collaboration with experimental groups who will test the ideas on Josephson-
junction-based superconducting platforms. Thus this research will complement and
advance the rapidly growing experimental capabilities in quantum control of low-
dimensional open systems in the near-term. Further, it will help strengthen
interdisciplinary connections between disparate fields of quantum
information/quantum optics, optimal control and strongly-interacting field
theories, all of which focus on far-from-equilibrium quantum
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.