* 2047492
* CAREER:CAS: Mechanistic Investigation of Photoredox Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* John Swierk, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2026
* USD 630,000.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms-B Program of the Chemistry Division, John Swierk of the Department of
Chemistry at Binghamton University (SUNY) is investigating the kinetics and
mechanisms of photoredox reactions. These reactions utilize light to generate
new and difficult-to-access chemical bonds that are relevant in the synthesis of
pharmaceuticals and other small molecules. The goal of this research is to
provide a solid mechanistic foundation for photoredox reactions that are
successful but poorly understood. Results from this project have the potential
to lead to faster reaction rates and product yields, as well as enable the
development of new reactions. This work lies at the interface of organic,
physical, and inorganic chemistry and will support the interdisciplinary
training of scientists at all levels. Community college students will be
integrated into the research program as trainees as part of broader outreach
activities focused on facilitating successful transitions of STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) students from two-year to four-year
universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photoredox reactions rely on the generation
and control of short-lived radical intermediates. While successful, the
underlying reaction steps and kinetics of photoredox reactions are poorly
characterized. The proposed work seeks to identify the key kinetic descriptors
at a molecular level that control selectivity via different pathways (e.g.,
persistent radical effect, radical chain mechanism). These molecular level
insights are then to be connected with information about reaction outcomes, such
as product yield and quantum efficiency. In addition, the proposed work also
seeks to understand how ionic media can be used to tune the rate of unproductive
electron transfer pathways. Studies of photoredox reactions in deep eutectic
solvents (DES) represent a new direction for both fields and the information
gleaned from these studies may allow for the development of functional,
rationally designed solvents that can enhance product selectivity and reaction
rates. Fundamental investigations into electron and hydrogen atom transfer in
DES are important with the goal of supporting the development of new photoredox
methods. More broadly, investigations into the stability of long-lived radicals,
H-atom transfer catalysts, radical chain mechanisms, and electron transfer have
the potential to expand the impact of this proposed work beyond photoredox
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.