* 2047346
* CAREER: The Inclusive Global Leadership Initiative
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Marie Berry, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 05/31/2026
* USD 229,149.00

Women have played essential roles in social movements throughout history, though
they have often been written out of history books. In recent years, women have
been at the helm of many people-led movements for social change across the
globe, including movements to oust dictators, challenge violence against women,
and promote human rights. Despite the popular understanding of the importance of
women’s leadership in these recent movements, there is a lack of micro-level
data on how and why individual women engage in such movements, and to what
extent their participation matters for movement success. This CAREER project
encompasses a groundbreaking research and educational program on women’s
engagement in social movements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two core
components: (1) cutting edge research aimed at better understanding how
strategies that prioritize the inclusion of women, ethnic and racial minorities,
and other marginalized groups are associated with the success of social
movements; and (2) education and training programs that seek to disseminate
evidence-based research to graduate students, broader academic and policy
communities, and movement activists across the globe. The unique strength of the
Inclusive Global Leadership Initiative lies in the synergy between its different
stakeholders—including activists, students, researchers, policymakers, and the
general public. The research component focuses on gathering micro-level data
from women-identified activists in 10 recent movements across the globe to
produce a book, dataset, and training manual. Their stories will help us
understand why women join social movements, how they participate (including the
tactics, strategies, and gendered repertoires of contention they deploy), and
whether their participation matters for the movement’s success or failure. Then,
an innovative curricular program in Social Justice at the University of Denver
will enable the dissemination of this information to both traditional students
and movement activists, as well as create a structure for frontline activists to
directly contribute to research findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.