* 2047880
* CAREER: Antiferroelectric Negative Capacitance Transistors for Ultra-low Power Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Asif Khan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal Number: 2047880&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Asif I
Khan&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Antiferroelectric Negative Capacitance Transistors
for Ultra-low Power Computing&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Georgia Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The society is
experiencing an unprecedented growth of its digital footprint—be it in the form
of uploading a photo on Facebook or live-streaming a teaching module to a
massive global audience in YouTube or commandeering a revolution via Twitter.
This convenience of modern computing, however, comes with a steep cost in terms
of energy use and environmental impact: today, the global information
infrastructure, i.e., data centers, emit as much greenhouse gases as that of the
state of Nevada or a country such as Netherlands or Malaysia and constitute
around 1% of world-wide electricity demand. According to scientific estimates,
this fraction may balloon up to 20% in the next 15-20 years. At the core of this
predicament lies the fact that our cutting-edge digital hardware has long been
overdue for a prime upgrade in terms of their energy efficiencies—at the level
of its most fundamental, building blocks: the transistors. The proposed research
aims to explore an energy-efficient transistor concept - negative capacitance
field-effect transistor, which will be made using a new class of nanometer-scale
materials, called the antiferroelectric oxides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The project aims at addressing the generational, global
challenge of energy efficiency of information processing electronics by
exploring an energy-efficient transistor concept, namely the negative
capacitance field-effect transistor (NCFET). The main claim of innovation is the
use of a new class of nanometer-scale materials, called the antiferroelectric
oxides, to enable this transistor technology. The underlying hypothesis is that
owing to a unique physical phenomenon in antiferroelectrics: the electric field-
induced non-polar-to-polar phase transition, antiferroelectric NCFETs can lead
to a reduction of the energy in transistors below the fundamental, thermodynamic
limit, much more than that is allowable in their conventional counterparts:
ferroelectric based NCFETs. Tightly integrated with these research activities is
a 5-year plan to pilot sustainable, all-level educational curricula that is
scalable to the state and the national levels for creating a steady pipeline of
domestic semiconductor workforce. Proposed pre-college activities include
increasing awareness and excitement for semiconductor related topics in high-
school classrooms through hands-on, outreach activities and teacher training via
partnership with local schools. For higher-level education, the project will
undertake formal and scholarly studies to understand the efficacy of different
pedagogical techniques, such as online, remote and hybrid mode of teaching, in
the new socio-economic realities of the post-pandemic world for undergraduate
and graduate semiconductor courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.