* 2047762
* CAREER: Unlocking the potential of natural polymers for efficient removal of emerging contaminants from drinking water.
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Maria Peresin, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 03/31/2026
* USD 467,020.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Dr. Maria Soledad
Peresin aims to unlock the potential of certain components of plant or animal
biomass to design biomaterials by advancing the fundamental understanding of
naturally occurring systems to address critical issues of societal concern, such
as the removal of emerging contaminants from drinking water.&lt;br/&gt;Polymers
are natural or man-made chemicals that are composed of building blocks of
smaller repeating molecules, as one would picture individual Legos® within a
larger structure. Natural polymers, such as cellulose (from wood, soybean hulls,
cotton, etc.), chitosan (from the outer shell of shellfish) and alginates (from
algae) are sustainable and renewable resources that are an essential component
of a circular economy, aimed at minimizing waste. Combining properties of
different natural polymers is a way to develop a new generation of products that
may replace traditional, non-renewable fossil fuel-based
materials.&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on understanding, developing and
using renewable, natural polymers to design efficient and sustainable
adsorbents, which are highly porous structures for the removal of contaminants.
Dr. Peresin proposes an extensive study of a variety of polymer systems to
maximize their potential adsorption capacity for removing contaminants from
water bodies in different environmental conditions. Adsorption capacity of the
polymers’ assemblies and their performance will be assessed using three model
emerging aquatic contaminants, tetracycline (an antibiotic), ibuprofen (an
analgesic) and sulfamethoxazole (an antibiotic). &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Peresin will use
this research program as a platform for education with an impactful contribution
to improving science literacy in the State of Alabama while contributing to
local, national and global efforts to provide a sustainable method for cleaning
drinking water. Younger generations have an increased environmental concern and
awareness of the need to decrease our impact on the planet. Through her research
and mentorship, Dr. Peresin hopes to advance career opportunities within the
forest industry for environmentally conscience students with the development of
novel processes and new products that contribute to the sustainable use of
resources and economic benefit of society. This project is jointly funded by the
Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research, and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goals of this CAREER plan are 1) to uncover the principles that
underlie the structure-property relationship between naturally occurring
polysaccharides (PS) interactions, surface properties and their assembly for the
design of macroscale adsorbents, 2) to use this platform to educate students on
interfacial phenomena involved in cleaning water using natural resources, and 3)
to contribute to global efforts to provide clean drinking water to society.
Natural polymers are renewable resources, essential for the circular economy.
Combining their properties is critical for developing the new generation of
functional materials on lieu of traditional fossil-based materials. However,
several challenges remain in order to deploy these materials, such as cost,
performance and scale. The long-term research goal of this CAREER is to advance
the knowledge that will enable the rational design of PS structures based on
natural polymers for effective removal of emerging contaminants from drinking
water. &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal will provide a fundamental framework for
elucidating the fine interplay between the composition, surface functionality,
and the supramolecular structure of natural polymers, specifically PS such as
cellulose and chitin, and their effect on interfacial interactions with emerging
contaminants. Polymers self-assembly and their interfacial behavior have been
extensively studied, however, more work is needed for understanding the
correlation between the surface properties of natural PS assembly and their
impact on the interfacial adsorption phenomena. During this five year CAREER
award, the following hypotheses will be addressed: 1) PS interactions can be
controlled by changing environmental conditions and macromolecules intrinsic
properties, 2) entropic and enthalpic contributions to binding energy of PS
assemblies will affect their swelling and adsorption capacity, 3) interfacial
interactions resulting from the macromolecule assembly will determine the
surface energy and chemistry of the PS structures, with a direct impact on the
total sorption capacity. The majority of the work will be performed on cellulose
and chitin (and their derivatives) as they are ideal for this project due to
their abundancy, robust chemical structural, surface area and versatile surface
functionality. To test the hypothesis the PI will use a combinatory approach
that involves PS assemblies and adsorption studies on 2D model surfaces. These
findings then will be translated to a 3D hydrogel system, produced through a
bottom-up self-assembly approach. Adsorption capacity and performance will be
assessed using three model of emerging contaminants namely, tetracycline (an
antibiotic), ibuprofen (an analgesic) and 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (an
herbicide). These hypotheses will be tested with the following specific
objectives 1) elucidate the nature of the PS interactions during their self-
assembly; 2) understand the role of composition and surface functionality on PS
assemblies swelling and supramolecular structure, 3) examine different routes
for self-assembly of PS in 3D structures and 4) unveil the effects of
supramolecular structure, composition and surface on the overall adsorption
capacity of the PS assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.