* 2047761
* CAREER: Ubiquitous and Time-Critical Federated Learning with Cooperative Mobile Edge Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Yanmin Gong, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2026
* USD 301,068.00

Federated learning (FL) enables Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices at the network
edge to collaboratively learn a shared prediction model while keeping all
personal data on the device. However, the current cloud-based FL fails to meet
the latency requirements of delay-sensitive IoT applications due to the long-
distance transmission between IoT devices and the cloud. This project aims to
enable ubiquitous and time-critical FL at the wireless edge to support delay-
sensitive and data-driven IoT applications. The project will fulfill the needs
of many compelling applications with significant economic and societal impacts
such as augmented reality, autonomous driving, mobile healthcare, and smart
manufacturing. The projectâ€™s educational agenda includes outreach to K-12 with
educational summer camps for high-school teachers, mentoring undergraduate and
graduate students, especially from minority and underrepresented groups, in the
research, and disseminating research outcomes to students and industry partners
through new course development and seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops a novel Federated learning (FL) framework based on cooperative mobile
edge networking that can efficiently support learning and decision making on
distributed Internet-of-Things (IoT) data with high accuracy, low latency, and
guaranteed privacy. Three interconnected research thrusts are investigated in
this project: 1) design of novel network-aware learning algorithms under a two-
level network structure to ensure efficient and effective model training from
decentralized data on IoT devices over wireless edge networks; 2) jointly
optimize resource allocation and learning based on deep reinforcement learning
to learn an accurate model rapidly under system heterogeneity and resource
constraints; 3) develop novel differential privacy techniques to rigorously
protect the privacy of personal data on IoT devices while maintaining high model
accuracy and reducing communication cost. The proposed research will enable
next-generation wireless edge networks that support a plethora of delay-
sensitive and data-driven IoT applications. The proposed research will benefit
not only the wireless networking but also machine learning research communities
by bridging the gap between the evolving mobile computing and networking
technologies and rapidly advancing machine learning
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.