* 2047692
* CAREER: Programming Multi-functional Responses into Civil Structures via Topology Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Xiaojia Zhang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 04/30/2026
* USD 604,774.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program will explore topology
optimization (i.e., finding the optimal shape of a structure for given design
criteria) to create and enable next-generation large-scale civil structures with
a variety of unique and tunable multi-functionalities. The next-generation civil
structures envisioned in this research do not only improve built environment in
normal conditions, but also actively respond to hazardous conditions to better
respond to them. Structures, such as beams, columns, and panels, will be created
with optimized shapes and material constitutions, embedded with stimuli-
responsive materials, to unlock unconventional responses and adaptability. This
research will result in fundamental improvements for risk mitigation and multi-
functionality of civil structures. The knowledge created will also allow
advancement in other fields, such as aerospace structures, architected
materials, and metamaterials. An education and outreach program that centers
around structural design optimization will be executed with the philosophy of
active, interactive, and immersive learning. The activities include creating
immersive education tools, active learning-based outreach to K-12 and
underrepresented groups, multidisciplinary course development, and enhancement
of academia/industry interactions through collaborations with
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this research is to
create multi-functional civil structures and components, with sufficient load-
bearing capacity and efficient material usage. The multi-functionality includes
a variety of unconventional load-displacement responses and the ability to tune
and adapt structural properties via magnetic actuation through a unique multi-
material and multi-physics topology optimization approach. The research
objectives are to: (1) establish an integrated structural framework that
considers geometry, multiple materials, and complex multi-physics interactions;
(2) formulate an optimization-based theory to program the structural responses
and adaptability subjected to mechanical load and multi-physical stimuli; (3)
create optimized structures with multiple functions; and (4) prototype and test
structures with programmed responses and adaptability, and explore practical
issues to calibrate the theory. The overarching theme of this research is to
harness structures made of multiple materials to enlarge the design space and
exploit multi-physics interactions to enable adaptability with minimal effort.
This project will advance the field of multi-functional civil engineering
structures and opens up the possibility for a broad range of applications that
can transform how such structures are designed and constructed, and make them
more efficient, resilient, and sustainable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.