* 2047915
* Collaborative Research:  Telomerase Structure and Evolution in Photosynthetic Eukaryotes
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2025
* Dorothy Shippen, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 01/31/2025
* USD 749,999.00

Telomerase is a complex of proteins and ribonucleic acid (RNA) that functions as
a biological catalyst known in general as an enzyme. It is essential for
faithful genetic inheritance in animals, plants, and single-celled eukaryotes
such as algae. The size, composition and cellular manufacture of the telomerase
complex varies dramatically across diverse eukaryotic taxonomic groups. This
variation makes telomerase an outstanding model system for examining the
evolution of enzymes that are complexes comprised of both protein and RNA. In
2019, the two PIs identified the RNA component of plant telomerase, making it
possible to ask new questions about the evolution of this critical enzyme in
eukaryotic groups in addition to animals and plants. The collaborative proposal
intends to explore the components and structure of telomerases from single-
celled eukaryotes that are photosynthetic but belong to different taxonomic
groups than plants. The proposed work also includes workshops on scientific
leadership and negotiation for graduate students and post-doctoral fellows,
provides research opportunities for diverse undergraduates to learn about
scientific discovery in evolutionary biology, structural biology and genetics,
and provides scientific and educational communities with a curated free database
about diverse telomerase enzymes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this
research addresses a knowledge gap presented by the highly divergent structures
of ciliate, plant, and vertebrate telomerase enzymes despite their conserved
essential function. By revealing the composition and architecture of telomerase
from photosynthetic organisms, novel accessory factors and new modes of RNA-
protein interaction may be uncovered. In addition, the transcription of the RNA
component of telomerases is different in animals and plants; plant telomerase
RNA is transcribed by RNA Pol III while in animals the telomerase RNA is
transcribed by RNA Pol II and requires the protein dyskerin. The proposed
research will investigate the unexpected observation that dyskerin is also
needed for transcription of plant telomerase RNA even though it is catalyzed by
different transcription nanomachines. Expanding analysis of telomerase structure
and function beyond land plants to the basal-branching photosynthetic eukaryotes
provides a unique opportunity to reveal the ancestral features of the first
telomerase. More broadly, comprehensive analysis of telomerase structure,
function and evolution will help to establish fundamental rules underlying the
biomolecular transition from an RNA world to cellular life that primarily uses
protein-based catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.