* 2047771
* CAREER: Learning to Sense: Joint Learning of Task Oriented Cognitive Sensing with Data Driven Reconstruction and Inference
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Ali Gurbuz, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Sensors are an indispensable part of our lives, assisting society’s
transportation, health, safety, and communication needs. Conventional sensing
approaches acquire data in a fixed fashion, independent of the task for which
the data is being utilized. In addition, each of data acquisition,
reconstruction and inference blocks in the data processing pipeline is
independent of one another and optimized separately. This approach has led to
exponential rates of data generation that creates an unbearable demand for
power, storage, processing, and communication requirements in today’s sensing
systems. The goal of this project is to advance the science of learning-based
sensing and processing technologies by developing an adaptive, task-oriented and
physics-aware data-to-decision pipeline, which jointly optimizes data
acquisition, reconstruction, and inference stages in a data-driven learning
framework. The proposed research will establish the foundations of future smart,
adaptive, and resource-efficient sensing systems for a variety of applications,
including biomedical imaging, remote sensing, radar, and wireless
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three interconnected
objectives (i) Developing learning-based physics-aware multi-dimensional signal
reconstruction techniques through foundational relations to regularized inverse
problems and explainable architectures inspired from existing signal processing
models, (ii) Developing mathematical and learning-based adaptive and task-
oriented measurement design approaches with jointly optimized sensing,
reconstruction and processing blocks, and demonstrate its impacts on real-world
problems, (iii) Developing a learning-based data-to-decision framework, which
infers actionable information (classification, parameter estimation) directly
from low number of learned measurements. The central theme of planned
synergistic educational and outreach activities is to increase the scientific
literacy of both the K-12 and university students and the public regarding
sensing systems, signal processing, and machine learning. Because sensing
technologies are on the frontier of how information is perceived and extracted,
and are essential to a wide range of applications, this project will have a high
impact on sensing technologies being developed to improve the quality of our
daily lives, ranging from applications of cameras to biomedical imaging, or from
smart home technologies to autonomous vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.