* 2047484
* CAREER: Taming Wireless Devices Cross-Layer Errors with Assistive Networked Edges
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Jianqing Liu, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 01/31/2023
* USD 302,894.00

Wireless devices such as smart phones, computers and sensors are ubiquitous in
our daily life and modern society, creating unprecedented benefits in work
efficiency, healthcare, automation control and many more. Due to the imperfect
electronics and noisy environments, wireless devices are inherently faculty
which can result in multifaceted data errors in computing, caching, and
communications (C3). These errors have been widely deemed harmful, so the state-
of-the-art on error control mainly target for absolute error removal. Yet, data
errors can be benign or even beneficial (e.g., introducing errors to gradients
may help the machine learning models to escape local optima), while existing
research that are reactive and non-functional fail to turn data errors into
good. Hence, the research objective of this project is to proactively harvest,
render, and control data errors across C3 of wireless devices for significant
performance gains in energy efficiency, throughput, data privacy, etc. Moreover,
the research efforts will be coupled with educational innovations through the
development of new laboratories, lecture contents, outreach demos and a novel
undergraduate/graduate co-learning pedagogy. The successful completion of this
project will enhance diversity in the wireless workforce in the nation, promote
community outreach and create fundamental innovations of wireless technologies
that are transformative to future wireless applications (e.g., AI and smart
health).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research activities include a synergy
of hardware and software designs across layers of application, embedded memory
and front-end radio in wireless devices as well as network protocols on wireless
network edges. Expected outcomes include: (1) Harvest and render errors to
specific data bits (i.e., application-aware) at runtime to realize system
performance gains. (2) Integrate and control errors with contextual awareness
(e.g., channel condition) for optimized adaptation using implicit control
signaling. (3) Develop a suite of edge networking protocols to facilitate
control of erroneous data. In parallel efforts, the proposed education
activities include the creation of hardware- and application-aware wireless
projects, laboratories, lecture contents and outreach demos. These materials
will be delivered holistically by following a designed undergraduate/graduate
co-learning pedagogy and a planned undergraduate research pathway. Various
outreach activities will be also designed and performed to target low-income and
rural K-12 students and first-generation college students – unique under-
represented groups at PI’s home state. Expected outcomes include: (1) Prepare
K-12 students for future collegiate study by offering a clearer disciplinary
focus. (2) Increase the diversity and the population of our nation’s workforce
in wireless technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems, Directorate of
Engineering, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.