* 2047396
* CAREER: Structural and Functional Elucidation of Strigolactone Signaling Pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Nitzan Shabek, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 01/31/2026
* USD 477,569.00

This project is aimed at leveraging structural biology in combination with
biochemistry and plant biology methods to elucidate the sensing mechanism of
strigolactones (SLs), an emerging and unique class of plant hormones that
regulate many aspects of plant growth and development. Although SL research has
a short history, rapid progress has been made in unveiling its critical role in
controlling plant physiology and rhizosphere signaling. Despite these
significant advances, several key questions concerning the mechanisms of hormone
perception, signal transduction, and regulation of hormone metabolism remain
unanswered. This project will support an integrated research, education, and
outreach program that focuses on the study of the structure-function of SL
signaling regulation by utilizing advanced interdisciplinary approaches. The
knowledge generated from this project may have far reaching impacts in
understanding the biology of the SL pathway and advancing technologies in
agriculture, including germination control of crops and parasitic weeds.
Additionally, as an integral part of the research activities, this project will
create a unique teaching platform and outreach program to encourage young
students to pursue knowledge in STEM with two major implementations: (a)
developing a modern biochemistry classroom by implementing an interactive
curriculum that integrates advanced visualization tools; (b) promoting STEM
education for underrepresented groups by pioneering engaging workshops to
inspire the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent
identification of the key components of SL signaling, including a hydrolase
receptor, an E3 ubiquitin (Ub) ligase, and a family of AAA+ ATPase chaperonin-
like transcriptional repressor proteins, open up new avenues of investigation on
the evolution, biochemistry, and physiology of this pathway and its impacts on a
diverse array of developmental processes. However, a mechanistic understanding
of the signal transduction pathway for this class of plant growth regulators
will remain elusive until the structure and biochemical function of the SL
signaling complex are elucidated. Therefore, the main research objectives of
this project are to: (1) Study biochemically, structurally, and in planta the
functional state of the SL-signaling complex. (2) Reveal the mode of action of
AAA+ ATPase chaperonin-like transcriptional repressor proteins, and their role
in regulation of SL physiological responses. (3) Elucidate the molecular basis
of SL-dependent association with the ubiquitin proteasome system, in
particularly with the MAX2 ubiquitin ligase, and the transcriptional repressors,
by utilizing structural biology and plant biology approaches. Outcomes of this
research may not only close a critical gap in understanding the biology of the
SL pathway but may also uncover new paradigms in plant signaling and the
ubiquitin proteasome pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.