* 2047665
* CAREER: A Keystone for Precision Neutrino Physics: Multi-Target Neutrino-Nucleus Cross Section Measurements with the Fermilab Short-Baseline Neutrino Program
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Andrew Mastbaum, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 02/28/2026
* USD 660,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. However, the Standard
Model as it currently exists leaves open many questions about the universe,
including such fundamental questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it
has and why there is no antimatter in the universe. One of the primary areas to
search for answers to these and other open questions about the universe is to
focus on a study of the properties of neutrinos and to use what we know and can
learn about neutrinos as probes of science beyond the Standard Model. We now
know there are three kinds of neutrinos that are distinguishable through the
different interactions that they undergo whenever there is an interaction. We
also know that neutrinos do have a mass and because they do, they can actually
change from one type to another. Detailed measurements of these changes, along
with other current neutrino experiments, form one of the most promising ways to
probe for new physics beyond the Standard Model. Such measurements lie at the
heart of this award which will study neutrino-nucleus interactions in order to
deeply understand how neutrinos oscillate from one type to another. This work
will be crucial to the upcoming neutrino experiment, DUNE, at the U.S. Fermi
National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL), one of the top-priority experiments in
High Energy Physics. This research group at Rutgers University will also broaden
diversity in physics by using their data analysis work to promote engagement in
physics among African-American New Jersey high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently a large interest in experimental
particle physics in Liquid Argon Time Projection Chambers (LArTPC) spurred in
part by the new DUNE project at FNAL and in neutrino physics in general. Another
technology of interest to DUNE is water-based liquid scintillator detectors.
This award will develop both of these technologies and study neutrino
interactions with both liquid argon and liquid scintillator. The data will be
obtained using the Booster Neutrino Beam at FNAL and the detectors of the ANNIE
and SBND experiments. A simultaneous measurement of neutrino interactions with
water and argon targets using the same high-intensity neutrino beam will
precisely relate these two nuclei, enable stringent constraints on models,
deepen our understanding of crucial energy losses to neutrons in liquid argon
detectors, and enable scientists to quantitatively re-tune models. These
advances will enable improved cross-experiment comparisons that enhance our
global picture, and broadly extend the physics capabilities of liquid argon
based detectors. In particular, the proposed work represents a unique window of
opportunity to enable future joint analysis of DUNE and Hyper-Kamiokande
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.