* 2047275
* CAREER: Quantum Gas Microscopy of Frustrated Hubbard Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Peter Schauss, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 06/30/2026
* USD 389,587.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum systems of many
electrons are computationally intractable but are of profound importance for the
understanding of material properties like superconductivity and quantum
magnetism. Direct imaging of electrons in materials including their local
correlations and entanglement is almost impossible, but quantum simulation can
shed light on the microscopic properties of these complex quantum systems. This
CAREER award supports quantum simulation of these systems using fermionic atoms
cooled to a few billionth of a degree trapped in an artificial crystal of light.
This approach provides a versatile platform with wide tunability based on well-
characterized components. A quantum gas microscope with high-resolution imaging
capabilities will be constructed and used to study many-fermion systems with
single-site and single-atom resolution in geometrically frustrated lattices. In
these frustrated systems, several energetic constraints cannot be minimized at
the same time, and their competition leads to exotic low-temperature properties.
This research effort will investigate the impact of the lattice geometry on the
properties of many-fermion systems and will provide insights guiding the search
for novel high-temperature superconductors. The research activities are embedded
in a science education program operating at the K-12, undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral level. The two main pillars of the educational and outreach
program are (a) a hands-on workshop program for K-12 students and (b) a mobile
exhibition of active-learning experiments for the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric frustration in quantum many-body
systems leads to intriguing phenomena like exotic emergent low-energy physics,
massive ground-state entanglement, and topological order. It is naturally
realized in systems with antiferromagnetic interactions on non-bipartite
lattices where antiparallel orientation between all neighboring spins is
inhibited. This research program will realize the Fermi-Hubbard model on a
triangular lattice as a manifestation of a non-bipartite lattice system with
antiferromagnetic interactions. Ultracold fermionic lithium atoms will be loaded
in a triangular optical lattice and detected using the state-of-the-art
techniques of quantum gas microscopy to resolve all individual atoms in the
lattice, allowing unprecedented access to single-atom observables and real-space
correlations. All Hamiltonian parameters can be adjusted over a wide range and
calibrated independently, enabling an extensive study of the phase diagram. The
absence of a unique ground state leads to a rich phase diagram and may allow for
the realization of a stable quantum spin liquid in a Fermi-Hubbard model as
predicted by numerical calculations. The main research thrusts are: (a) Probing
the phase diagram of geometrically frustrated Fermi lattice gases. (b) Detecting
short-range correlations. (c) Measuring chiral correlations in the triangular
Hubbard model. (d) Searching signatures of a quantum spin
liquid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.