* 2047388
* CAREER: SHF: Chiplet-Package Co-Optimizations for 2.5D Heterogeneous SoCs with Low-Overhead IOs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Yarui Peng, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2026
* USD 286,459.00

Design of 2.5D chiplets is becoming increasingly popular as a flexible and
scalable More-than-Moore solution to push computational performance of
integrated circuit chips. With heterogeneous integration, each IP block can be
implemented using the optimum technology node, maximizing design flexibility and
performance. However, a drawback compared with a monolithic 2D chip is the large
overhead introduced by inter-chiplet communication. On-package wires have much
larger parasitics compared with on-chip interconnects. Thus, they may reduce the
performance and energy-efficiency of 2.5D systems. Designing these physical IOs
are expensive and time-consuming. Heterogeneous components cannot be easily
integrated without a commonly used standard, and designers need to
conservatively reserve a large design margin, which inevitably results in non-
optimum designs and increased costs. The timing, power, and signal integrity
properties between chiplets and the package are also not captured by the
traditional design flow and CAD tools. The missing low-overhead, low-cost, and
customizable IOs and design tools significantly slow down the adoption of these
advanced packaging techniques. This project uses a chiplet-package co-design
methodology to combine IC and package designs and provide a seamless environment
for heterogeneous development. The goal is to minimize inter-chiplet performance
overhead, reduce design costs, explore the full potential of 2.5D systems, and
demonstrate the highest integration density and energy efficiency. The proposed
chip design efforts and CAD tools will be used to provide educational materials,
hands-on experience, and guest lectures to students. The project will contribute
to the development of much needed US workforce in the area of research and
development of semiconductors via a diverse set of plans for industry
collaboration, pre-college education, and college and graduate-level education
at the PI's institution, and in the state of Arkansas. The design tools
resulting from the project will be open-sourced and packaged with design
examples and documentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 2.5D chiplet-package co-
design flow will eliminate the boundary between chiplets and the package and
combine additional design synthesis, extraction, and optimization steps to
minimize overhead and costs. The IO synthesis will create and place small IO
cells with just-enough sizing based on detailed extraction results. The active
package synthesis will generate on-package buffers and re-timers to optimize
area, wirelength, and performance. Holistic and In-Context extraction for
chiplet-to-package coupling will provide the highest accuracy for both
homogeneous and heterogeneous designs. The fabrication and testing of 2.5D
systems is intended to ensure realistic validation with measured data. This CAD
flow will further break the boundary between low-voltage and high-power
engineering and enable computer-on-package with heterogeneous integration of Si
logic and GaN/SiC power conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.