* 2047382
* CAREER: Towards Precision Tests of General Relativity with Black Holes and Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Leo Stein, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2026
* USD 160,000.00

For over a century, researchers have studied Einstein's theory of general
relativity (GR) -- our best understanding of gravity -- with increasing
sophistication and precision. With direct detections of gravitational waves
(GWs) from Advanced LIGO and Virgo, it is now possible to test GR in the fully
nonlinear, dynamical, strong-field regime when black holes (BHs) merge with each
other. Gravitational-wave detection also opens the possibility to observe more
subtle aspects of GR, like the permanent deformation to spacetime ("memory")
after a GW passes. Both these new tests and the subtle effects of memory require
higher precision predictions and more careful calculations than before.
Specifically, to carry out precision tests of GR requires performing
supercomputer simulations of merging BHs, both in GR and in theories beyond GR.
One aspect of improving the precision of tests of GR is gaining a deeper
understanding of subtle effects in GR simulations, such as the fundamental
coordinate freedom in GR, that makes it more difficult to compare between
independent simulations. Part I of the research component of this award is to
better understand these GR subtleties. As for simulations beyond GR, the PI and
collaborators have developed a technique for classes of theories that are
"close" to GR, but these simulations have not yet been advanced to the level of
sophistication of GR simulations. Part II of the research component of this
award will advance the state of the art of beyond-GR simulations. Simultaneously
and independently, the educational component of this award will support
development of interactive visualization to help educators teach GR and GWs to a
broader audience. These interactive tools will be made available online to reach
beyond classroom education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part I of the research
component consists of studies intending to push numerical relativity waveforms
to higher precision, not by improving resolution or simulation methods, but
rather by capturing a number of subtle effects. These studies include: (i) high-
precision multi-mode quasinormal ringdown fits, especially for precessing
systems, with the goal of ultimately building a ringdown surrogate model; (ii)
developing a framework for comparing waveforms after modeling out by
transformations of the Bondi–Van der Burg–Metzner–Sachs (BMS) group, for apples-
to-apples comparisons between simulations performed in different gauges, and for
better hybridization with post-Newtonian or effective-one-body waveforms; (iii)
statistically validating BMS (non-)conservation laws; and (iv) explaining the
existence of an approximate symmetry of outgoing radiation from quasi-circular
binary inspirals. Part II of the research component focuses on advancing the
state-of-the-art in simulating binary BH mergers beyond-GR theories of gravity.
This program includes: (i) bringing generation of beyond-GR waveforms into
"production" mode; (ii) controlling the growth of secular effects (due to using
perturbation theory) by applying the numerical dynamical renormalization group;
(iii) building a surrogate model for beyond-GR waveforms; and (iv) validating
this machinery by applying it to scalar-tensor theory, which can also be treated
without recourse to perturbation theory. Finally, the educational component
involves producing interactive visualizations to help teach the principles of GR
and GW physics. These interactive visualizations will include particles orbiting
around BHs, how GWs deform spacetime, how GWs get projected onto LIGO antenna
patterns, and even how GWs from a BBH change as the intrinsic and extrinsic
parameters are varied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.