* 2047821
* CAREER: Scalable Graph Processing to a Quadrillion Edges and Beyond
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* George Slota, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2026
* USD 185,183.00

Graph-structured relational data is ubiquitous throughout the social and
physical sciences. Such datasets include personal relations in social and
communication networks, protein-protein interactions within an organism, and
particle interactions in physics simulations, among many other examples. By
studying these graphs, researchers can develop techniques to identify harmful
actors in social networks, discover novel protein interaction pathways, and
better model interactions within a physical system. However, the large scale and
complexity of these datasets makes them particularly challenging to study, and
studies often require computationally-expensive analytical techniques. These
challenges are further exacerbated by the complexity of the modern large-scale
parallel computational systems on which such studies are often performed.
Solving these challenges enables the real-time analysis of large-scale
constantly-evolving social networks, in-depth studies of full-scale brain neural
connectome graphs, and the general application of computationally-intensive
analytics to other massive relational datasets. The research in this project
presents a set of highly inter-related approaches designed to concurrently
address these challenges. Educational initiatives of this project include the
development of classes that will introduce students in computer science, the
physical sciences, and the social sciences to various aspects of graph theory
and computational graph analytics. High school through graduate students are
being engaged as contributing members of the project's various research goals.
These initiatives are further fostering involvement of students in research,
high performance computing, and open source software
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research in this project is
aimed at developing methods to enable complex computations on quadrillion+ edge
graphs using current petascale and forthcoming exascale high performance
computing platforms. These methods fall under three broad thrusts. The first
thrust relates to "Graph Layout", which is the way in which a graph dataset is
partitioned, ordered, and stored in-memory and out-of-core on a computational
system. An outcome of this thrust is a high quality and scalable means to
optimize graph layout under consideration of data type, algorithmic pattern, and
hardware platform. The second thrust considers "Architecture-centric Processing"
of these datasets under consideration of modern high performance systems. This
thrust is researching how to efficiently map complex graph analytic problems to
complex heterogeneous architectures, while considering multilevel computational
models, asynchronous computations, and various graph layout methodologies. The
third thrust involves the "Development of Scalable and Open-source Software" to
enable the broader scientific community to easily address the challenges of the
prior thrusts as it relates to their specific dataset, analytical problem, and
hardware. This thrust is investigating how to best develop software frameworks
and toolkits that are designed to scale to the massive (quadrillion+ edge) and
irregular power-law graphs arising from these various domains, while efficiently
running on next-generation exascale hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.