* 2047341
* CAREER: Towards Computational Interferometric Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Ioannis Gkioulekas, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2026
* USD 401,911.00

Despite the diversity of computational light transport systems, all existing
technologies are constrained to imaging at macroscopic scales, ranging from a
few centimeters to several meters. This constraint places existing computational
light transport techniques, and the remarkable capabilities they enable, outside
of reach for several critical application areas that require imaging at
microscopic scales, such as medical imaging, industrial fabrication, and
material science. This project aims to change this state of affairs, by creating
a bridge between computational light transport and optical interferometric
imaging, a wave-optics technology well-suited for microscopic imaging. The
project will produce a suite of computational interferometry systems that make
available the full spectrum of computational light transport capabilities at
microscopic scales. The project includes education and outreach programs tightly
coupled to the research activities, namely: 1) the creation of interdisciplinary
courses in visual computing, optics, and imaging; and 2) a series of workshops
and summer courses for middle and high school students. These activities will
bring long-term societal benefit, by encouraging students in secondary education
and from traditionally under-represented backgrounds to take up STEM research
and education as a career path.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will achieve
its objective through three tightly coupled research thrusts: 1) The project
will develop theoretical foundations that unify concepts across incoherent and
coherent imaging. The discovered theories will enable the design of new
interferometric imaging systems that can be programmed to selectively measure
arbitrary light paths, while operating at microscopic scales. 2) The project
will deploy these systems in a range of microscopic applications, including
shape scanning, scattering tomography, and non-line-of-sight imaging. These
task-specific implementations will demonstrate the flexibility and improved
performance of computational interferometry. 3) The project will design hybrid
optical-digital systems that use computational interferometry systems as optical
computers, to perform common calculations with improved speed and signal-to-
noise ratio. The produced computational interferometry systems will be evaluated
under real conditions in medicine (deep tissue imaging), industrial
manufacturing (closed-loop fabrication), and material analysis (scattering
material characterization), thus creating strong potential for transformative
impact in these critical application areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.