* 2047194
* CAREER: Cultivating Curiosity to Promote Learning and Discovery
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Kelsey Lucca, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2026
* USD 511,769.00

Curiosity is fundamental to success in nearly every facet of life. Curiosity
leads to enhanced achievement in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields, improved psychological well-being, and adaptive
aging. Economics experts recently identified curiosity as one of the key
characteristics required to transform society, drive innovation, and shape the
future. Though this points to the importance of cultivating new generations of
curious children, there are still basic questions about how curiosity first
develops and how to effectively promote it. This project will provide new
information about the developmental building blocks of curiosity, the factors
that shape curiosity, and the ways in which early curiosity influences later
learning outcomes. Findings will be disseminated through community-based events
designed to incorporate curiosity-promoting activities into children’s everyday
experiences. By proactively fostering curiosity before children even step foot
in the classroom, this project will have cascading influences on children’s
educational engagement and ultimate success in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the importance of curiosity in learning,
the basic mechanisms that drive early curiosity are poorly understood. Using
newly developed, comprehensive techniques for studying curiosity, this project
will fill this gap and provide new information about the psychological processes
involved in curiosity starting in infancy. Drawing on cognitive science,
developmental science, and education, research questions include: (1) what are
the cognitive processes involved in early curiosity? (2) how does curiosity
unfold across infancy and early childhood? (3) what role does the social
environment play in shaping curiosity? (4) how does curiosity impact STEM
learning readiness? (5) what factors cause increases in preschool-aged
children’s curiosity? This project takes a multi-method approach by integrating
experimental, observational, and longitudinal designs, and will advance our
ability to detect and measure fine-grained individual differences in early
curiosity. This research will transform theories of curiosity, how it develops,
and how it impacts learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.