* 2047631
* CAREER: Mining biological functions from single cell multi-omics data
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2026
* Chi Zhang, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2026
* USD 628,158.00

Biological functional activities include intracellular functions such as
transcriptional regulation, metabolism, and signaling transduction, and
intercellular activities such as cell-cell interactions. With the advent of
single cell multi-omics (scMulti-seq) biotechnology, researchers can study the
biological functions of a complex biological system at the cellular resolution.
The integrative analysis of scMulti-seq data and multiple study objects produces
a wealth of rich information that enables the characterization of species or
tissue specific biological functions, and at the same time, poses great
challenge on how to identify and extract biologically meaningful data patterns.
Though substantial amount of efforts has been made to interpret data patterns in
single cell multi omics data, most of the existing methods focused on
unsupervised learning in a completely data driven manner without considering the
rich existing knowledge. In addition, depending on the types of biological
functions, their underlying mathematical representation forms are different in
scMulti-seq data. This calls for systems biology models and machine learning
concepts to target true biological functions from scMulti-seq data. The first
challenge to study biological functions from scMulti-seq data is to derive the
data patterns that correspond to true biological functions and develop proper
computational models for specific biological mechanisms and pathways. The second
challenge lies in the difficulty of knowledge representation and sharing across
the studies for different species, tissue types and experimental conditions.
There remains an urgent need to integrate knowledge derived from disparate data
sources to optimize the biological functional modeling, such that the learned
knowledge could be utilized to study other biological systems or data types and
promote the generation of new hypotheses. The PI’s long-term career goal is to
develop mathematical formulations and computational methods to model biological
functions from multi-omics data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
new mathematical models and an advanced computational framework to optimize the
mining of biological functions, by integrating scMulti-seq data with context
specific and general knowledge derived from independent data sets or
experiments. The PI's research team will achieve the goals through the following
three objectives. First, a novel subspace representation model will be developed
to identify transcriptional regulation and functional gene modules. The proposed
method will be empowered by a novel local low-rank matrix detection method to
detect gene co regulation modules and a meta-learning framework to optimize
results interpretation. Second, the PI's research team will develop a new graph
neural network architecture to estimate cell-wise functional activities for flux
carrying networks and a graph data clustering method to identify cell groups
with varied functional states and distinct pathways. Thirdly, a knowledge graph
will be constructed to represent the biological functions derived from scMulti-
seq data, which enables the integration of independent knowledge derived from
literature data and development of new biological hypotheses. The project is
expected to deliver novel computational tools that can effectively explore
biological functions from a wide range of heterogeneous datasets, and it could
provide new capabilities for functional interpretation of individual data sets
by maximizing the utilization of existing scMulti-seq and literature data, and
reasoning of new biological hypotheses and mechanisms. Educationally, the
scientific discoveries, including developed methods and biological knowledge,
will be seamlessly integrated into an online educational knowledge base for
large-scale public engagement, and will also lead to new project-based
interdisciplinary training for high school, undergraduate and graduate students.
The results of this project can be found at:
https://zcslab.github.io/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.