* 2047937
* CAREER:  A Combined Experimental and Theoretical Study of Human-Connected Automated Vehicle Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Alireza Talebpour, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 03/31/2026
* USD 528,406.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will contribute to the
national economy and welfare by enhancing the transportation system efficiency
and safety. This will be achieved through introducing a novel congestion
management strategy based on vehicle automation and communications technology.
The current automated vehicle development efforts mainly focus on the safety of
isolated vehicles with little consideration of the impacts of design on human
drivers and on transportation system efficiency. Such design approaches, in many
cases, can potentially result in additional congestion and unforeseen safety
issues for human drivers. Through careful characterization of the interactions
between human drivers and connected automated vehicles (CAVs), this CAREER
project will lead to new paradigms for congestion management and will result in
more efficient utilization of our roadway system and a significant reduction in
congestion throughout the transportation system. This grant will also result in
the development of an online intelligent tutoring system that offers a
systematic approach to teach students the skills and expertise required to
function within highly diverse and dynamic work environments of the future. This
customizable educational platform can be adopted by other disciplines and other
universities across the nation. The findings of this study will be disseminated
to a wide range of audiences through round table discussions, stakeholder
meetings, and webinars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
CAREER grant is to test the hypothesis that humans exhibit a different decision-
making logic when interacting with CAVs in comparison with when interacting with
other humans. This hypothesis will be evaluated using extensive field tests and
data collection from human driver behavior in response to various CAV maneuvers.
This project will also explore the potential for the evolution of human behavior
in response to CAVs over time and will introduce robust models to capture such
changes in human behavior. Utilizing the findings from the field experiments,
this project will lead to the introduction of decentralized CAV-based traffic
shaping methodologies that can maintain a desired traffic state by utilizing
CAVs to influence the behavior of human drivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.