* 2047753
* CAREER: Probing Interfaces in Energy Storage Materials Using Dynamic Impedance Spectroscopy and Multiharmonic Electrochemical Quartz Crystal Microbalance Dissipation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Niya Sa, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 05/31/2026
* USD 589,037.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and partial co-funding from the Chemical Structures, Dynamics, and
Mechanisms - B program, and the Solid State Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research, Dr. Niya Sa and her research team at the
University of Massachusetts Boston are developing innovative approaches to
advancing our understanding of the chemistry of rechargeable batteries. The work
addresses global challenges in the areas of energy storage, utilization, and
environmental stewardship. Dr. Sa will work to communicate the underlying
science and its importance to the general public through outreach activities
that seek to explain the principles of electrochemistry, battery chemistry and
green chemistry to K-12 students and members of groups underrepresented in
science-technology-engineering-mathematics (STEM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
this award, Dr. Saâ€™s team will be implementing the hybrid Dynamic Impedance
Spectroscopy/Multiharmonic Electrochemical Quartz Crystal Microbalance
Dissipation (DEIS EQCM-D) platform to probe complex interfacial systems.
Specifically, they seek to improve understanding of the dynamic Solid
Electrolyte Interphase (SEI) of energy storage materials - critical for
advancing next-generation energy storage devices, yet impeded by the lack of
reliable in situ experimental techniques. The major focus of this work is to
enable quantification of the microscopic mass exchange that accounts for SEI
dissolution, reconstruction, and instability. Coupling DEIS with EQCM-D offers a
significant advance over previously reported ex situ electrochemical impedance
(EIS) or gravimetric EQCM measurements. Working at the interface between
analytical chemistry and material science, the Sa group seeks to advance
fundamental understanding and enable new approaches to energy storage materials
and electrolytes where performance characteristics are critically determined by
the dynamic ion intercalation and mass transport reactions at interfaces.
Students engaged in the work will be trained in state-of-the-art
electroanalytical techniques, energy storage concepts, instrumentation, and
simulations. Dr. Sa is working to provide educational opportunities for
underrepresented groups, and to engage with the local community through
collaboration with the local Science Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.