* 2047169
* CAREER: Autonomous Live Sketching of Dynamic Environments by Exploiting Spatiotemporal Variations
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Lantao Liu, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 02/28/2026
* USD 549,922.00

There are many emergency scenarios that require humans to understand the
environments instantly. For example, after disasters of chemical or nuclear
leakage, the spread and intensity of the contaminant need to be characterized
immediately for the best first response. Inspired by artistic live sketching
which needs to rapidly capture transient scenes and unveil their most salient
spatiotemporal characteristics, the autonomous mobile robots equipped with
advanced artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms will be utilized to "live
sketch" highly dynamic environments through autonomous contaminant sampling and
real-time environmental modeling. Success of this research could potentially be
a game-changer for automated environmental monitoring under extreme conditions.
The results can be naturally extended to many applications including those non-
disastrous but time-critical scenarios such as smog pollution and algal bloom
monitoring. The education objective is to promote general interest in robotics
careers by integrating this research into curriculum development, direct student
involvement in research (particularly for female and minority students), as well
as community outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
project is to investigate principled, expeditious, and precise environmental
modeling techniques through adaptive environmental sampling with robotic
vehicles. This research program tackles a variety of needed techniques drawn
from important AI-robotics subfields including data-driven modeling, sampling
trajectory planning, decision making under uncertainty, as well as multi-robot
coordination. An important goal is to obtain deeper insights into all these
subfields and their connections, leading to a design of a principled and
comprehensive framework for building a complete integrated system. New solutions
of a set of inter-dependent modeling and optimization methods will be developed,
so that the latent environment model and its spatiotemporal variations (e.g.,
contamination distribution and diffusion processes) can be learned with high
accuracy, even through using a small number of samples constrained by a very
short data-collection time window. The proposed efforts include development of
theoretical results and algorithms, but also emphasize their applications in
various challenging and unstructured environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics
program, jointly managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG)
and Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.