* 2047581
* CAREER: Diversity in Learning Contexts and the Emergence of Abstract Reasoning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Caren Walker, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 516,970.00

Relational reasoning is the ability to go beyond direct, perceptual experience
to engage in abstract thought. It a defining feature of human cognition and
critical for scientific thinking. However, young learners often struggle to
prioritize abstract concepts, like same and different, over salient, but often
less informative properties, like color or shape. The investigator will explore
how distinct learning environments may shape children’s tendency to engage in
relational reasoning to better understand what circumstances facilitate (or
suppress) this ability. This project will engage in cross-cultural work to
examine if and how naturally-occurring differences in environmental input
influence the early expression of abstract thought. Additional research will
assess whether specific learning environments may be manipulated to facilitate
skills for abstraction in children. This work challenges existing theories that
posit the gradual, linear emergence of relational reasoning, and will generate
an empirical foundation for thinking broadly about cognitive diversity. Further,
establishing competence in abstract reasoning provides an incentive for
designing learning environments to support recognition of these concepts from an
early age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work tests the claim that although
relational reasoning emerges early, children tend to neglect abstract similarity
due to a learned bias to attend to object properties. This account predicts that
variation in children’s environmental input should lead to distinct cognitive
biases and corresponding differences in the expression of abstract thought. The
investigator will apply a three-pronged strategy to assess this account. Aim 1
will evaluate the robustness of early competence in relational reasoning in
18-30-month-olds in two different cultural contexts to assess whether their
previously reported success results from genuine conceptual understanding. Aim 2
will characterize differences in object- and relational-focus in 3-year-olds
across additional cultures and document effects on reasoning. This will evaluate
claims that differences in lexical bias and context-sensitivity influence the
emergence of abstract thought. Aim 3 will assess the causal role of contextual
factors on reasoning in children by manipulating features of the learning
environment. Together, these aims test the claim that early challenges
associated with relational reasoning do not result from a lack of competence,
but rather a difference in tendency that stems from children’s failure to
recognize when to apply their knowledge. This approach promotes the
investigation of diverse populations and challenges the prevailing view that
children’s reasoning universally develops as a bottom-up, emergent process.
Findings from this project will advance our understanding of how regularities in
the environment may set the developing child on different learning trajectories.
This project is co-funded by the SBE/BCS Science of Learning and Augmented
Intelligence, the Discovery Research preK-12 (DRK-12), and the EHR Core Research
(ECR) Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.