* 2047127
* CAREER: Forward and Inverse Uncertainty Quantification of Cardiovascular Fluid-Structure Dynamics via Multi-fidelity Physics-Informed Bayesian Geometric Deep Learning
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Jian-Xun Wang, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 06/30/2026
* USD 324,896.00

Image-based computational models of the cardiovascular system play an
increasingly important role in advancing the fundamental understanding of
cardiovascular physiology and supporting clinical diagnosis and treatment
planning. However, traditional models are primarily based on well-posed physics
that are solved numerically, and their reliability is limited because of unknown
or uncertain modeling conditions. On the other hand, sparse and noisy data have
become increasingly available thanks to the rapid development of medical imaging
techniques (e.g., flow MR images), which can be utilized for model inference and
uncertainty reduction. Hence, forward uncertainty quantification and inverse
data assimilation in cardiovascular simulations are of paramount importance to
enhancing predictive confidence and prompting clinical translation efforts. This
project will develop computational cyberinfrastructure for data-enabled forward
and inverse stochastic cardiovascular modeling by leveraging recent advances in
scientific machine learning. The project aims to establish a novel paradigm of
data-augmented cardiovascular fluid-structure simulations, which could help
transform personalized cardiovascular diagnostics/therapeutics, leading to
higher quality of life. Moreover, this research program will also try to address
long-standing challenges in effectively engaging students in STEM education
across K-12, undergraduate, and graduate education by promoting an interactive
and inclusive learning strategy. In particular, the PI will (1) design
pedagogical software using physics-informed transfer learning for rapid
interactive fluid simulation based on hand-drawn sketches; (2) develop new
modules on Artificial Intelligence &amp; Mechanics for U.S. Department of
Education TRiO programs to engage K-12 students from low-income families in
emerging interdisciplinary STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this CAREER program is to pioneer a scalable and transformative
computational cyberinfrastructure for forward and inverse uncertainty
quantification (UQ) of cardiovascular modeling based on physics-informed
Bayesian geometric deep learning, leveraging physics/physiological knowledge to
enable efficient probabilistic learning with sparse and noisy data. This project
tackles the fundamental challenges faced by the traditional paradigm of modeling
cardiovascular fluid-structure interaction (FSI) dynamics. In the proposed
framework, geometric deep learning models will be constructed based on both
(partially) known physics and sparse measurement data in a Bayesian manner,
enabling efficient forward and inverse FSI simulations with quantified
uncertainties. Specifically, the PI will (1) formulate a variational PDE-
informed, discretization-based learning framework using graph convolutional
networks and use a reduced basis to constrain the dimension of the solution
space, facilitating network training; (2) enable high-dimensional UQ capability
of the proposed learning framework based on scalable variational Bayesian
inference; (3) establish a multi-fidelity meta-learning strategy to parameterize
solutions in the physical parameter space for rapid surrogate modeling, on the
path to real-time cardiovascular simulations. The fast inference speed, strong
expressibility, and GPU parallelization of deep learning models will be
exploited to enable large-scale stochastic FSI simulations with patient-specific
geometries. This project will build a solid foundation for developing the next-
generation computational cyberinfrastructure of cardiovascular FSI
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.