* 2047609
* CAREER: Characterizing the Unseen Water Quality Consequences of Sunny-Day Floods in Nearshore Waters
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Natalie Nelson, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2026
* USD 429,240.00

Sea level rise has caused frequent tidal or “sunny-day” floods in coastal areas
in the USA and around the world. Tidal floods occur when high tides rise up into
sewers, streets, and sidewalks. During this process, the floods can move
pollutants from land into coastal waters. In spite of the strong potential for
this pollution to impact human and ecological health, coastal water quality
hazards caused by tidal floods are not well understood. The goal of this CAREER
project is to study the ways in which tidal floods impact coastal water quality
specifically focusing on fecal contamination. This goal will be achieved through
the use of highly novel sensing and modeling systems that will be developed to
monitor, explain, and predict water quality following tidal floods. Successful
completion of this project will help engineers, local governments, and
policymakers understand and mitigate risks caused by persistent tidal floods.
Science teachers and undergraduate students will participate in the research and
engage middle and high school students in environmental engineering, coastal
sustainability, and data sciences. These efforts will increase scientific
literacy and build the Nation’s STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to develop a fundamental understanding of how tidal
floods and stormwater runoff interact to influence pollution loading in
nearshore waters. The specific focus of this research is on Fecal Indicator
Bacteria (FIB), a commonly used marker of sewage pollution, in order to develop
explanatory and predictive models to inform the design of sustainable coastal
stormwater infrastructure. To achieve this goal, the project will carry out the
following research objectives: (1) measure nearshore FIB concentrations at high
frequencies using novel sensing technologies, (2) develop mechanistic and
statistical models to explain FIB concentration dynamics during tidal floods and
storm events, as well as over longer timescales of multiple tidal cycles; and
(3) develop a predictive model framework for generating near-term forecasts of
bacterial contamination risk in nearshore waters. Successful completion of this
project will advance process-based understanding of how storms and tidal floods
influence nearshore FIB loading, information that is needed to develop
engineering solutions to mitigate hazards caused by climate change. The use of
FIB concentrations (a widely used pollution marker) will facilitate the use of
this research by a diverse group of regulators, natural resource managers, and
other decision-makers. Additionally, the investigator will develop educational
programming that will: (1) train undergraduate students and secondary school
science teachers in foundational principles of coastal observation and data
science through involvement in research, (2) engage ~12,000 middle and high
school students in coastal and data sciences, and (3) create an open-access
digital repository of coding lessons that have learning objectives focused on
environmental engineering foundations and data analysis skills. Recruitment
efforts will focus on engaging students from underrepresented groups in
environmental engineering, as well as teachers who serve large student
populations from historically marginalized groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.