* 2047632
* CAREER: Human-Inspired Multi-Robot Navigation
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Ioannis Karamouzas, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Cang
* 04/30/2026
* USD 517,800.00

Indoor mobile robots are increasingly becoming a part of our lives. Whether
there are Roombas cleaning the floor or Kiva robots delivering parts in
warehouses, the robots should be able to avoid collisions while successfully
completing their tasks. However, despite the maturity of existing motion
planning techniques and the recent rise of learning and big data techniques,
mobile robots still lack the decision making ability of humans. This Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) project will develop techniques for efficient
and socially intelligent multi-robot navigation, shaping the next generation of
mobile robots that can reason about how their actions influence the other agents
present in the scene and act accordingly, much like humans do. The resulting
advances will facilitate the successful deployment of "thinking" mobile robots
that can be seamlessly integrated into our homes and workspaces. This research
spans across different areas, including motion planning, machine learning, and
reinforcement learning. With its interdisciplinary nature and relevance for
modern technologies, it is ideal for inspiring the next generation of students
and exposing the broader community to STEM areas couched in progressive
applications in robotics and AI. The project includes integrated educational,
research, and outreach activities for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students, promoting a high level of participation by women and underrepresented
minorities, and developing new courses and updated curricula related to
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce a human-inspired
paradigm shift in the design of multi-robot navigation algorithms. Humans know
when they have to be polite and yield to others and when to take decisive
actions, efficiently performing complex navigation tasks without collisions. The
objective of this project is to enable such behavior on mobile robots by
leveraging publicly available human-human interaction data and our own human-
robot interaction experiments along with coupling motion planning with learning
techniques. Specifically, the project will focus on two two inter-related
research thrusts that will lead to i) new algorithms that take advantage of
human trajectory datasets to learn what controls humans take in different
interaction scenarios; ii) new approaches that enhance existing local navigation
planners with the learned controls to enable human-like decision making; iii) a
reinforcement learning framework for multi-robot navigation that generalizes
robot navigation policies to unknown interactions scenarios; iv) new datasets
involving interactions between humans and robots, and subsequently v) new
algorithms for multi-robot navigation in human-populated environments. This work
will be evaluated both in simulation and on real robots, and related algorithms
and datasets will be made publicly available to facilitate further research and
exploration by the robotics and AI community. If successful, this project will
shape the next generation of indoor mobile robots that can enrich our quality of
life and work, and has the potential to significantly benefit society through
its integrated education plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed
and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE). This project is jointly funded by
CISE/IIS, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
and ENG/CMMI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.