* 2047912
* CAREER: Interactive Morphing Materials
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Lining Yao, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2026
* USD 566,020.00

This project will explore a material-driven approach to designing shape-changing
interfaces that are either soft or possess tunable stiffness. Whereas most such
interfaces require embedded rigid electronic components, in contrast the
inherent structural and other properties of interactive morphing materials drive
their sensing and actuation capabilities, from overall shape change to the
dynamic tuning of characteristics such as stiffness, opacity, and phase. Because
their properties are intrinsic, many of these materials can be fabricated as
thin sheets or films in support of applications such as medical and wearable
devices that require conformability and compliance. Imagine a morphing cast, for
example, that could self-assemble by wrapping around the arm. The initial
pattern of holes on the sheet to ensure conformability during the self-wrapping
would subsequently seal via self-growth and self-stiffening of the cast. During
the healing process, as the arm swells and shrinks, the cast would sense those
changes and self-tighten or self-loosen as required; it might also self-degrade
gradually to become lighter and more flexible as healing progresses. This
project will lay the foundation for a future where physical materials become
interfaces that sense and respond dynamically in support of a fundamental
transformation in computational interaction modalities. Since morphing materials
can be applied to many aspects of human endeavor, research outcomes will provide
broad benefits to society in a wide range of areas including accessibility,
learning, future workforce development and sustainable manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will take a multifaceted approach and
tightly couple the research with courses and independent studies in order to
generate a range of prototypes using interactive morphing materials, a framework
of design principles, a library of morphing mechanisms, a design tool that
facilitates the creation of interfaces leveraging morphing materials, and a
formal design study to validate the effectiveness of a morphing material
interface. The project will start by clustering examples of existing and
potential interactive morphing material scenarios in participatory design
sessions with domain experts, design students, and design professionals to learn
what they can imagine creating and figure out how their ideas can be mapped to
critical design parameters, including behavior (both temporal and geometrical),
input and output modalities (e.g., light-responsive self-stiffening), and
functionality. Prototypes based on these ideas will be implemented, and by
conducting user studies (including semi-structured interviews and pre- and post-
questionnaires), a general evaluation plan and metrics for validating
performance both qualitatively and quantitatively will be formulated. This will
be followed by development of toolkits incorporating a library of morphing
mechanisms presented as components for interface design. These mechanisms will
be of two basic types: those that convert physical, analog stimulus (such as
wetness or temperature) into morphing output, and those that can be activated
with a digital signal. In addition to mechanism development, computational tools
based on geometrical principles that can be generalized across different
physical morphing principles will be created. A fast and accurate simulator
enabled by the integration of machine learning and finite element analysis will
be leveraged to derive the geometrical principles of the underlying
computational model, and the design methods and enabling tools will be applied
to conduct in-depth investigations of three application areas: advanced
manufacturing, morphing wearables, and the future of creative
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.