* 2047597
* CAREER:  Integrated Gravitational Wave and Multimessenger Astronomy and Education
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Ryan Fisher, Christopher Newport University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This award supports research in gravitational wave science and it addresses the
priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. Starting with the
initial detection of gravitational waves (GW) from a binary black hole merger by
The Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) and the
French-Italian Virgo detector, and continuing with the first detection of GWs
from a binary neutron star merger, GW170817, associated with a gamma-ray burst
(GRB), GRB 170817A, the era of true GW multimessenger astronomy has begun. The
electromagnetic follow-up campaign of this event discovered associated
afterglows across the electromagnetic spectrum, and has had a significant impact
on the understanding of the progenitors of short GRBs, kilonovae, and the
interior state of neutron stars. This award supports an integrated research and
education plan focusing on the continued search for GWs associated with extreme
energy astronomical events, including GRBs and fast radio bursts (FRB), over the
period when the worldwide GW detector network will expand from 3 to 5 detectors,
and their sensitive range will increase significantly. This expansion of
capabilities will greatly increase the capability of GW astronomy to probe
deeply into the sources of these events and uncover the details of their
creation. The award supports both undergraduate and master's student researchers
in conducting these searches, continuing analysis of detector and search
performance, and engaging the Hampton Roads, VA community through four annual
outreach events held at the local Virginia Living Museum. These outreach events
will be tied to an existing free skygazing program and provide an opportunity
for hundreds of members of the local community to learn about multimessenger
astronomy in an engaging, active learning setting with both hands-on
demonstrations and a combination lecture-demonstration show. The award supports
the development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce through the
engagement of students of all ages at these events and the training of
undergraduate and master’s students to become competent scientific researchers
able to conduct research at the internationally recognized level as the next
generation of gravitational-wave astronomers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As was
demonstrated with the multi-messenger observations of GW170817, combined
detections of GWs with electromagnetic detections have significantly advanced
the understanding of the astrophysics of high-energy events. Additional
detections of GWs associated with GRBs in the fourth and fifth observing runs of
LIGO, Virgo, Kamioka Gravitational Wave Detector (KAGRA), and LIGO-India data
will enable the astrophysical properties of neutron stars and the full
electromagnetic emission model for binary neutron star merger sources to be far
better constrained. Any detection of a GW associated with a FRB would result in
a significant increase in the understanding of the astrophysical origin of these
mysterious events. FRB progenitor models are very poorly constrained, and the
recent observation of an FRB associated with magnetar SGR 1935+2154 have pointed
to a potential for multiple populations. If no coincident detections are made in
this search, it will better constrain models of the FRB progenitors. Finally,
improved sensitivity of the LIGO interferometers through continued detector
characterization efforts will directly result in an increased number of GWs
detected. The award supports both prompt and higher latency, deeper searches for
GWs associated with GRBs using the PyGRB data analysis pipeline, which conducts
coherent, matched-filter searches that extend the effective sensitivity of the
GW detection network. Prompt searches will allow detected GWs to be announced to
the astronomical community for immediate follow-up. The award also supports both
template-based searches and unmodeled searches for GWs associated with FRBs, and
leadership of the effort to characterize the noise in the LIGO interferometers
that impacts the GRB and FRB searches, with the particular focus on improving
search sensitivity and assessing the validity of the GW detections. The
integration of the methods and results of this research into a campaign of four
annual outreach events to be held at the local Virginia Living Museum will not
only increase public scientific literacy and public engagement with science and
technology, but will also instill the importance of engaging the public in the
participating research students. Through training students and public engagement
in a diverse city, this work also broadens the participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.