* 2047628
* CAREER: Linking canopy structure and function in plant water-use economy
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Brian Bailey, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2026
* USD 447,101.00

Rapidly changing climatic and socioeconomic conditions have necessitated a need
for improved quantitative description and prediction of the associated response
of plant system productivity. Current and predicted climatic conditions are
characterized by increased magnitude or variability in heat and drought, which
has the potential to threaten the productivity of natural and agricultural plant
systems. Sustaining the steadily growing human population will require
corresponding increases in the efficiency of agricultural systems. The
overarching aim of this work is to better understand how light availability,
plant architecture, and leaf surface temperature interact to determine the
efficiency of plant systems with respect to input resources. In order to examine
such processes, novel experimental and analytical techniques will be used that
allow for measurement and prediction of interactions between plant structure and
function in three dimensions. Educational activities associated with this
project will produce a novel model/data visualization tool that will help to
educate the next generation of plant scientists through outreach activities. New
three-dimensional plant modeling software will be developed that will allow
students to explore scientific questions related to plant-environment
interactions in an immersive virtual environment. This project will engage and
mentor students at the high-school, undergraduate, and graduate levels, and
provide interdisciplinary training that spans the biological, engineering, and
computer sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The water-related costs associated with
CO2 uptake for photosynthesis are managed by plants in the short-term by varying
the aperture of stomatal pores in response to environmental conditions to avoid
excessive water loss and can also be augmented in the long-term by varying
canopy architecture (e.g., leaf angle and area distributions) and underlying
physiological function. A complete mechanistic theoretical basis that describes
how plants simultaneously control stomatal aperture, canopy architecture, and
physiological parameters in order to maximize carbon gain with respect to water
loss has remained elusive, and represents a significant knowledge gap that has
inhibited efforts to quantitatively describe plant responses to drought stress,
and ultimately to predict plant responses to future climate scenarios
characterized by elevated temperatures and precipitation variability. This
project proposes to advance research and education in plant water-use efficiency
by fusing novel experimental, modeling, and visualization techniques to better
understand the roles of simultaneous variation in light, temperature, and canopy
architecture in optimization of gas exchange by plants across spatial and
temporal scales. Experimental research will span leaf to whole-plant scales, and
from a controlled environment to natural landscapes that traverse a gradient in
temperature and precipitation. High-fidelity functional-structural plant models
will be used to facilitate theoretical analyses that complement experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.