* 2047272
* CAREER: Cryptographic Tools for Usable Human Authentication
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* Jeremiah Blocki, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2026
* USD 348,351.00

Password authentication is a common source of frustration for users and a
constant source of security vulnerabilities. Users struggle with the burdensome
task of creating and remembering passwords for multiple different accounts and
frequently cope by selecting weak (low-entropy) passwords and reusing the same
password across multiple accounts. Over the past decade data breaches at many
prominent organizations have exposed billions of these low-entropy passwords to
the dangerous threat of offline brute-force attacks. Despite their shortcomings
passwords continue to be the most widely adopted form of authentication. The
goal of the project is to develop cryptographic tools to improve the security
and usability of human authentication, especially password authentication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates new combinatorial techniques to
design and analyze memory hard functions, a cryptographic primitive which can be
used to protect low-entropy secrets such as passwords and biometrics against
brute-force attacks. The project develops stronger memory hard functions and
analyzes the concrete security of prior memory hard functions such as SCRYPT,
Argon2 and DRSample. The project adapts tools from statistics and game theory to
better understand the distribution over user chosen passwords and predict how
password attackers will behave. The investigators study how password defenses
can be tuned based on this distribution to optimally protect user accounts
against attackers. Finally, the project develops mechanisms to help users
(gradually) memorize stronger passwords and to help users securely manage
multiple passwords without requiring users to memorize independent passwords for
every account.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.