* 2047380
* CAREER: Quantum Matter Built from Atoms and Photons
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Ana Asenjo-Garcia, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

The realization of efficient interactions between photons and atoms is a central
challenge in modern physics. Besides enabling the exploration of fundamental
science, such interactions are critical for applications ranging from developing
quantum networks to precise clocks. However, conventional approaches to enhance
atom-photon interactions face major bottlenecks in the form of uncontrolled
dissipation. This project will address this issue by leveraging the fact that
ensembles of atoms interact with light in a collective manner, and dissipation
can be suppressed cooperatively. In particular, ordered atomic arrays can be
employed as extremely efficient light-matter interfaces that allow one to
control the propagation of light and its interaction with matter in an
unprecedented fashion. This will lead to the efficient implementation of
protocols for quantum information processing and storage. Alongside research
goals, the PI will develop a comprehensive educational and outreach plan aimed
at training and recruiting both undergraduate and graduate students interested
in pursuing careers in STEM. It includes the development of a new course in
quantum optics as well as a joint Columbia-IBM Quantum summer school. The PI is
committed to broadening the quantum workforce pipeline and through this CAREER
award she will mentor a diverse group of students as well as develop an outreach
program targeted at underrepresented students at a nearby Harlem high
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of this career-development plan
is to theoretically discover and control quantum optical phenomena in ordered
atomic arrays, and to advance their potential as light-matter interfaces. The
plan will leverage the PIâ€™s recent demonstration that interference in photon
emission suppresses unwanted decay through the emergence of dark states, which
can be harnessed for implementing quantum information protocols with fidelities
well beyond previously-known bounds. This project addresses three intertwined
fundamental issues, at the single-, few-, and many-body levels. First, the PI
will develop novel concepts for coherent trapping and manipulation of single-
photon states. Second, the PI will harness deterministic and controllable
photon-photon interactions in arrays to design quantum photonic circuitry,
including photon transistors and gates. Third, the PI will advance the
understanding of correlated many-body dissipative dynamics, which remains a
challenging theoretical task. Throughout the pursuit of these goals, the PI will
expand the quantum optics theoretical toolbox, including new analytical methods
and computational techniques that will have broad applicability in other
research areas, and guide experimental realizations of scalable atomic matter
with collaborating experimental groups. This award holds transformative
potential in the areas of quantum information science, nonlinear quantum optics,
and many-body physics in open systems and strengthens the connections between
the atomic physics, condensed matter, and quantum information
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.