* 2047955
* CAREER: Model-based Analysis of Dynamic Networks using Continuous-time Network Models
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Kevin Xu, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 03/31/2023
* USD 242,721.00

Networks are all around us in many forms, ranging from online social networks to
public transportation networks to gene networks in biology. Most networks change
over time and are often called temporal or dynamic networks. In this project, a
framework for modeling and analyzing dynamic networks that change continuously
over time will be developed, even though the networks may only be periodically
observed. This framework advances the interdisciplinary field of network science
along with the computer and information sciences by developing models to
separate the underlying dynamics of the networks from the times at which the
networks are observed. The framework can be applied to analyze dynamic network
data in many scientific disciplines and in public health applications, including
networks of face-to-face interactions between people, which can help scientists
better understand the spread of infectious diseases such as COVID-19. This
project advances education in network science by creating a curriculum for
instruction of dynamic networks at the undergraduate and graduate levels. The
project also trains new graduate and undergraduate students, including female
students from the University of Toledo's ACM-W chapter, in interdisciplinary
data science research. Finally, the project develops and integrates methods for
analyzing dynamic networks into the open-source DyNetworkX Python package to
reach others who could use them in impactful ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temporal
dynamics in networks are known to provide crucial information about the
underlying complex systems being modeled by the networks. While significant
advances have been made towards understanding the structure of static networks,
dynamics are usually incorporated in an ad-hoc manner by creating discrete time
snapshots aggregated over some arbitrary time period, primarily for convenience
of analysis. The goal of this project is to develop a unified framework for
model-based analysis of dynamic networks using continuous-time models that can
be applied to both discrete- and continuous-time dynamic network data. Towards
this goal, the research team will target five specific aims: 1) learning
continuous-time network models from aggregated counts of relational events over
time, 2) creating Hawkes process-based generative models for timestamped events
with durations, 3) developing kernel smoothing approaches for analyzing dynamic
networks, 4) modeling different types of measurement error in dynamic network
data, and 5) creating time- and memory-efficient dynamic graph data structures
to enable analysis of large dynamic networks with high temporal resolution.
Dynamics of networks are given minimal coverage in current network science
curricula and textbooks. The model-based analysis techniques to be developed in
this project build upon fundamental network theory and empirical observations
about real networks and are thus ideal for integration into a typical graduate
or undergraduate network science course. The investigator will develop a
publicly-available curriculum for instruction on dynamic network
representations, models, and analysis methods. The results of this project will
provide a glimpse of the possibilities enabled by continuous-time network models
and guide future research and education efforts on dynamic
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.