* 2047838
* CAREER: Soil Liquefaction Evaluations at Multiple Scales: Reshaping Research, Training, and Education Through Physics-Guided Data Science
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Katerina Ziotopoulou, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2026
* USD 567,806.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will investigate and
formalize new approaches for learning from geotechnical data, and inform the
next generation of liquefaction evaluation tools. Soil liquefaction remains a
leading cause of earthquake damage worldwide. The rarity of earthquakes poses an
enduring challenge, geosystems are complex and hard to sample, and the
uniqueness of each requires predictive inferences beyond the existing database.
Owing to cutting-edge instrumentation and experimentation, new reconnaissance
approaches, and generous resources for data storage, the increasing availability
of geotechnical data, combined with open-source algorithms, creates an
opportunity to exploit the potential of Data Science for reshaping our
engineering toolbox. Aligned with NSFâ€™s Big Ideas on Harnessing the Data
Revolution and Convergence Research, this CAREER award will open new avenues for
integrating physics-based and data-driven methods to accelerate discoveries in
geotechnical engineering and develop robust validated geotechnical tools that
will facilitate integration with multi-hazard analysis capabilities and broadly
contribute to reducing earthquake risk and increasing societal resilience. The
standards of practice will also be elevated by formulating efficient test
programs that meet economic constraints. Through an organic education plan, this
CAREER grant will prepare the geotechnical engineers for the workplace of the
future by fostering four core competencies: (i) interdisciplinary thinking to
achieve creative solutions in research and practice, (ii) Data Science literacy
to harness the power of engineering data, communicate information visually, and
deliver reproducible, and transparent products, (iii) diversity to develop
geoengineering solutions on a wealth of perspectives and experiences, and (iv)
communication skills to engage in teamwork and effective dissemination. All data
will be archived and made publicly available in the Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
aims to investigate, prove, and formalize the application of Physics-Guided Data
Science in liquefaction evaluations by working at three scales with a wealth of
numerical and experimental data. The objectives are to probe known, and discover
new, high-dimensional interactions of soil properties, loading, and responses
for liquefiable soils at the element and centrifuge model scale, and explore the
transfer of knowledge to a field case history. The scope includes: (i)
development of transferable mechanics-based engineering models, (ii)
quantitative validation framework for numerical models, (iii) methodology for
reduction of suspected biases in experimental and numerical data, (iv) smarter
experimental design targeting key predictors for responses of interest, and (v)
smarter site investigation campaigns to identify risk-driving vulnerabilities.
The T-shaped education plan will develop pedagogical approaches that include:
(i) case-based student-centered hybrid teaching modules, (ii) interactive user
experiences introducing students to basic concepts of earthquake engineering and
data-enabled decision making, (iii) training and support of Earth Science
teachers from underserved districts, (iv) outreach to pre-middle school girls
and ladder mentoring of female students to address diversity and inclusion, and
(v) establishment of a new series of department- and college-wide activities
investigating interdisciplinary thinking. This CAREER grant will also provide
summer support to three graduate students working in Hazards Engineering to
formalize interdisciplinary conversations and accordingly pursue innovative
research avenues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.