* 2047627
* CAREER: Unlocking Reactivity-Based Separations of Olefins using Metal-Organic Frameworks
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Phillip Milner, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2026
* USD 550,000.00

Chemical separations, which involve partitioning a mixture of compounds into its
individual components, are critical to the industrial production of commodities
such as plastics. Separations account for 15% of energy consumption in the
United States alone. The development of new energy-efficient separations could
greatly reduce greenhouse gas emissions, improve the sustainability of the
chemical industry, and decrease the cost of everyday consumer products.
Traditionally, separations are carried out based on differences in the physical
properties of chemicals, such as their boiling points. Here, the investigator
will develop sponge-like materials capable of separating chemicals based on
their differing reactivities. This will enable industrial separations with much
higher selectivities for one component over another and potentially unlock new
types of separations. This project will be highly interdisciplinary, involving
aspects of chemistry, chemical engineering, and materials science, which will
help strengthen communication between these fields. In addition, new scientists
from underrepresented communities will be trained, improving the diversity of
the STEM workforce. As part of the project, the public, especially underserved
students in rural communities, will learn about the importance of chemical
separations, sustainability, and green
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unsaturated molecules such as olefins are
critical building blocks for the global production of polymers. However,
polymerization reactions typically require ultrapure streams of olefins to
proceed efficiently. Currently, mixtures containing olefins (including mixtures
of olefins/paraffins or olefin isomers) are inefficiently separated based on
small differences in their physical properties. This project seeks to separate
mixtures containing olefins based on differences in their reactivities rather
than physical properties. Specifically, porous crystalline materials known as
metal-organic frameworks (MOF) will be designed such that they can undergo
reversible cycloaddition reactions with olefins. These novel MOF systems will
allow for separations to be carried out with unparalleled selectivities and for
the production of ultrapure olefin product streams in an energy-efficient
manner. The materials design strategy is potentially generalizable to
separations involving a range of unsaturated molecules, including carbon
dioxide, reflecting the versatility of this approach. The separation efficiency
of the strategy will be assessed using gas adsorption analysis and breakthrough
measurements. The reactivity of the adsorbents will be characterized using in
situ solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance, X-ray diffraction, and Infrared
spectroscopy. This interdisciplinary research program will forge new connections
between chemists, chemical engineers, and materials
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.