* 2047041
* CAREER: Controlling Nonlinear Wave Propagation in Metastructures with Contact Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2026
* Kathryn Matlack, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 11/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will conduct fundamental
research to uncover the relationship between the mechanical response of
interfaces in metastructures and nonlinear mechanical wave propagation.
Metastructures are engineered media that can control how mechanical energy
propagates through materials. Current metastructures find limited use in
engineering materials as they either only control small-amplitude waves or
require compliant constituents or complex constraining systems. Knowledge of how
to control and steer more realistic high-amplitude mechanical waves in
engineering materials may result in safe, efficiently operating, and long-
lasting components in aircraft, automotive, and energy infrastructure, which
remains as one of society's pressing needs. This award will promote the progress
of science by answering fundamental scientific questions related to the
mechanics of nonlinear wave phenomena. This award will also support education by
introducing and implementing an outreach program that integrates research and
education by combining music and STEM. The program will enrich youth summer
music camps with modules that relate music to acoustics. Further, a university-
wide acoustics community will be developed that integrates with and broadens the
outreach program, to provide a unique mentoring experience for both
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New wave phenomena
have been uncovered through the study of metastructures, which are periodically
engineered materials that control frequency and spatial properties of acoustic
waves. However, it is not well understood how different forms and variations in
local nonlinearity relate to global nonlinear wave responses in metastructures,
nor how a broad range of nonlinearities can be physically realized. While
existing work has shown beneficial nonlinear wave responses due to Hertzian
contact in granular media, this work will instead establish links between
contact interface geometry at various length scales, their nonlinear mechanical
response, and emergent global nonlinear wave phenomena that results from
periodic configurations of these contacts. This will be done using a close
integration of measurements, analytical models, and finite element simulations.
The frequency-dependent nonlinear reflection and transmission coefficients will
be measured from contact interfaces with engineered geometries on multiple
length scales, fabricated with metal 3D printing. Then, analytical models will
be introduced to describe the nonlinear response of these interfaces. Hybrid
analytical-finite element models will be introduced to characterize nonlinear
wave propagation through various periodic arrangements in 1D and 2D of the
studied contact interfaces. These responses will be validated by full wave field
measurements. This new knowledge will be used to determine relationships between
physically realizable local mechanical nonlinearities and global wave
propagation in metastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.