* 2047218
* CAREER: Unraveling Fundamental Mechanisms Governing Grain Refinement in Complex Concentrated Alloys Made by Additive Manufacturing Towards Strong and Ductile Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2026
* Wei Xiong, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 03/31/2026
* USD 526,334.00

The ability to produce strong yet tough structural alloys has been a quest to
fully exploit the integrated innovation of materials and manufacturing. One
longstanding challenge is the well-known strength-ductility trade-off; the
stronger a given material is, the less ductile it becomes. Grain structure
refinements have been studied for conventional alloys to enhance both the
strength and ductility. To date, however, it remains unclear how grain
refinements may be effectively applied to complex concentrated alloys (CCAs),
which are compositionally compound with multiple principal chemical elements,
made by additive manufacturing. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
award supports fundamental investigations into additive manufacturing of CCAs.
The project will perform different studies to test a hypothesis that increasing
the entropy (i.e., level of disorder) in an alloy system will retard grain
coarsening and stabilize microstructures, and thus, achieve both great strengths
and high ductility. The research findings will bridge the knowledge gaps of
microstructure engineering in designs and additively manufacturing of CCAs for
high temperature and other critical applications. In concert, the formulated
outreach activities will advance the research and educations in training the
next generation of researchers and STEM leaders in advanced manufacturing,
specifically fostering inclusions of women and minorities in manufacturing and
related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to
understand the underlying mechanism of grain refinements in CCAs made by
additive manufacturing through a mixture of dissimilar alloy powders and
subsequent melting and solidifying. The project will investigate grain growth
kinetics and phase stability in complex composition space, using an effective
research toolkit comprised of machine-learning enhanced modeling, high-
throughput fabrication experiments, as well as microstructural and material
characterizations. This research will address knowledge needs related to
microstructure engineering for the additive manufacturing of CCAs by exploring
microstructure configurations generated from dissimilar alloy using powder-based
additive manufacturing technologies (directed energy deposition and powder-bed
fusion, both using a laser heat source) with following expected outcomes: (i)
quantification of alloy entropy effects on process-structure-property
relationships to reveal the fundamental mechanism to strengthen CCAs with
refined grains or other means, (ii) microstructure formation in CCAs to
understand the difference between complex concentrated vs. traditional alloys
made by powder based additive manufacturing, and (iii) process-structure-
property models to establish specifically for CCAs in the composition space
between stainless steels and nickel-based superalloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.