* 2047476
* CAREER: Debugging the Fragmented DNS Infrastructure at Scale
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Zhou Li, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 05/31/2026
* USD 316,000.00

Domain Name System (DNS) is one of the most critical Internet infrastructures.
It underpins nearly every Internet activity, translating user-friendly names
like www.google.com to computer-friendly IP addresses. Though designed as a
highly reliable infrastructure in its blueprint, DNS failures are not rare,
sometimes even leading to the network outage of a country. Debugging DNS
failures is undoubtedly important but also challenging. Though DNS can be seen
as a distributed system, it is open-ended and fragmented, containing numerous
service providers and being interfered by powerful network adversaries. Though
the basic logic of DNS is conceptually simple, its implementation is highly
customized on the client-side devices and DNS bugs can be caused by the complex
interactions between code and non-code resources. These unique settings make DNS
failures and bugs complex and difficult to be
diagnosed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to develop novel platforms,
techniques, and tools to enable holistic debugging for the DNS Infrastructure.
This work is organized through two research thrusts: debugging DNS failures at
the network layer, and debugging client-side DNS bugs at the software layer. For
the first thrust, a comprehensive reference to the real-world DNS failures and
bugs are to be created first by mining the public text with DMiner, a tool
powered by Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques. To reproduce a DNS
failure, a new measurement platform, DTrap+, will be developed with innovative
usage of peer-to-peer proxies to crowd-source the debugging tasks. To enable
cross-layer and adversary-resilient debugging for DNS, DTrace, an end-to-end
tracing framework for DNS, and DARTrace, a secured tracing protocol, will be
developed. The second thrust focuses on the DNS bugs embedded in the Internet of
Things (IoT) devices. The DNS implementations will be extracted from the IoT
firmware with DFirm, a tool powered by symbolic execution and library matching.
The DNS bugs will be uncovered by DScope, a tool enforcing multi-component
analysis on the DNS implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will have significant societal impacts in the following aspects. First, ensuring
reliable network services for the Internet users is one core mission of the
Internet community. By enabling effective fault discovery and root-cause
analysis of DNS services and clients, this project makes an important
contribution to this mission. Second, through a set of educational tasks, this
project will democratize DNS and the general network debugging for students,
researchers, industry partners, and the public. Third, this project will
prioritize research opportunities for the underrepresented population through
programs like UCI ASPIRE and OC STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data, code, and
knowledge base developed under this project will be released at dns-
debug.github.io.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.