* 2047271
* CAREER: Synthetic ‘remote control’ of kidney tissue formation towards large-scale models of congenital disease
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2026
* Alex Hughes, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2026
* USD 529,904.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to create
kidney tissues in an environment mimicking that of natural development in the
body. The kidney is a hotspot for birth defects that affect the size, number,
and arrangement of filtration units, called nephrons, and the tubules that carry
urine within the kidney and out to the bladder. This project seeks determine the
engineering rules that guide tubules as they form in the kidney and then to
mimic nephron fusion with the tubule network. Together, these activities will
create more "true-to-life" kidney tissues in a dish that can be used to study
the origin of kidney birth defects at a fundamental level and inform new
intervention strategies for childhood and adult diseases that originate from
such defects. Two integrated educational projects are designed to equip a new
generation of young scientists with the quantitative skills needed to contribute
to the emerging discipline of “developmental engineering." The first project is
creating a summer research experience for undergraduate students in which
participation will be broadened by focusing recruitment efforts on under-
represented minority, women, and first-generation students through several
partnerships based on the investigator’s commitment to removing barriers to the
use and generation of technology by all people. The second project is creating
free and publicly available lesson/lecture plan modules through a crowd science
platform called quanti.us. These modules will serve high school and
undergraduate sciences educators and aim to stoke student interest in cutting-
edge scientific problems while equipping them with quantitative problem-solving
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s long-term research goal is
to develop advanced biomanufacturing strategies based on the control of tissue
morphogenesis with expectations that efforts will lead to the creation of human
tissues with sufficient complexity to be models for drug development or directly
in regenerative medicine. Toward this goal, this CAREER project is focused on
mimicking nephron differentiation and fusion with the ureteric tree in synthetic
tissue models of the developing kidney, which will be accomplished by generating
human kidney tubule networks with controlled size and connectivity and then
directing nephron formation at many spatial sites within them to better capture
kidney structure at cm-scale. The project addresses the need for models of
kidney development outside of the body with sufficient organization across
length-scales to properly study common development diseases of the kidney such
as CAKUT (congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract), which is marked
by incomplete organization of epithelial networks necessary for kidney function.
Studies are designed to test the hypothesis that the mechanical microenvironment
of kidney epithelial bud branching into the surrounding extracellular matrix
(ECM) "mesenchyme" during development sculpts tubule elongation and geometric
spacing. The research plan is organized under two specific aims: (1) Determine
the mechanical contribution of the tissue micro-environment to epithelial tubule
guidance using tissue-engineered mimics of the mesenchyme and an existing FEM
model and (2) Engineer nephron integration into dynamic tissue scaffolds through
spatially guided differentiation, leveraging cell patterning, biochemical, and
optogenetic approaches to direct the differentiation of early nephron lineages
at many specific sites in tubule networks within dynamic scaffolds at once. The
ability to mimic human kidney development beyond the level of a single nephron
or tubule will finally create opportunities to study and develop therapies for
congenital kidney diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.