* 2047402
* CAREER: From Pore to Pipe: A Multiscale Experimental and Numerical Study of Piping in Unsaturated Soil
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Jack Montgomery, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2026
* USD 563,818.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will explore the
relationship between soil piping and rainfall-induced landslides in unsaturated
soils. Piping occurs when flowing water erodes soil forming a conduit, or pipe,
below the ground surface. Piping is one of the leading causes of failures of
levees and dams, a major source of soil erosion worldwide, and can lead to the
development of voids and sinkholes that may damage overlying infrastructure. The
mechanics of piping remain poorly understood, hindering the development of
methods to detect and monitor piping and methods to prevent failure or repair
piping once it has begun. This project will develop a physics-based framework
for assessing the development, progression, and consequences of soil piping
through a multiscale program of experiments and numerical simulations. Improving
the ability of engineers to detect and evaluate piping features will increase
the resiliency of civil infrastructure to landslides and sinkholes, and help to
reduce degradation of agricultural land and soil loss in hillslopes. This
research will be integrated with an education and outreach program that seeks to
increase interest and retention among traditionally underrepresented students in
civil engineering. This will be accomplished through the creation of formal and
informal educational activities, including educational modules for undergraduate
and 7th-12th grade students and a citizen science-driven database of sinkholes
and piping features. This project will also create a new course to train
graduate students to effectively communicate their research to diverse
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The process of soil piping involves complex
hydro-mechanical interactions that occur across multiple length scales.
Researchers in various disciplines have studied different aspects of soil
piping, but there is a need for a convergent research approach to bridge the
current knowledge gaps. This project will fill this need by identifying the
hydro-mechanical properties and interactions that control subsurface erosion in
unsaturated soils. X-ray micro-CT imaging will be used to understand how the
soil microstructure influences erosion rates and large-scale experiments will be
performed to examine pipe progression and collapse at the mesoscale. Non-
destructive geophysical imaging will be integrated with measurements of suction,
water pressure, and surface deformations to understand the interactions between
the pipe and surrounding soil over time. These experiments will provide the data
needed to develop and validate coupled hydro-mechanical simulations of soil
piping and its influence on stability of slopes. The analysis framework
developed in this study will be applicable to many other piping-related problems
across a variety of disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.