* 2047192
* CAREER: Ecological turnover at the dawn of the Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event - quantifying the Cambro-Ordovician transition through the lens of exceptional preservation
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* JAVIER ORTEGA-HERNANDEZ, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 05/31/2026
* USD 552,165.00

The first animals originated over half a billion years ago, but marine life did
not reach modern-like levels of biodiversity and ecological complexity until
approximately 450 million years ago during the so-called Great Ordovician
Biodiversification Event, or GOBE (go-bee). Although the GOBE represents a
critical transition between the appearance of the first animals and the
subsequent exploration of dry land, this major event is largely informed by a
biased fossil record consisting mainly of shells, bones, and teeth. This project
investigates how exceptional fossil deposits – which contain the remains of
soft-bodied animals – impact our knowledge of marine biodiversity and ecology
during the early stages of the GOBE. New investigations of the Fezouata fossil
biota of Morocco will lead to the discovery of dozens of new extinct animal
species, produce an unrivalled understanding of the organization of the first
modern-like marine communities, and allows for an evaluation of the rise in
ecological complexity that defines the biosphere today. This project integrates
undergraduate students from groups that are underrepresented in geology and
evolutionary biology into an ambitious research, educational and outreach
program. In addition, the project will produce a unique augmented reality-
enhanced natural history museum exhibition in Greater Boston, as well as
authoritative online resources for K-12 students, teachers, and the general
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates how exceptionally
preserved non-biomineralizing fossil organisms impact our understanding of
animal evolution and ecology during the early stages of the GOBE, which caused
the largest and fastest diversification at lower taxonomic levels of marine
organisms for the entire Phanerozoic. Cutting-edge imaging techniques, such as
X-ray computed tomography, will be used to study the Fezouata fossils to reveal
new anatomical features normally obscured by the rock matrix. These techniques
will allow for the description and characterization of the full biodiversity of
the Tremadocian-Floian Fezouata biota of Morocco. Conducting stratigraphically
controlled sampling and working with specimens in museum collections will allow
the PI to reconstruct the paleoecology and community structure of fossil
organisms from the Fezouata biota and assess their spatiotemporal variability
within this deposit. Finally, the project will test how non-biomineralizing
organisms inform patterns of ecological turnover during the Cambrian-Ordovician
transition and lead to the early establishment of modern-like marine
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.