* 2047693
* CAREER: Designing for Learning at the Intersection of Sports, Analytics and Physical Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Marcelo Worsley, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 05/31/2026
* USD 552,247.00

Northwestern University will design athletic-centered learning experiences that
help student-athletes see the relevance of computing in athletics. This project
will focus on ways for connecting computer science with athletics, and will work
to uncover strategies for effectively encouraging participation of student-
athletes of color in computer science in youth after-school and out-of-school
athletics. Recognizing the important role that coaches play in the development
of student-athletes, the research team will conduct interviews with both
student-athlete and coaches to better understand their perceptions of computer
science. These interviews will also touch on the ways that the youth sports
programs are already using technology. The project team will use this
information to design new tools and activities that reflect the preferences and
perceptions of student-athletes and coaches. The research team will also
organize after-school and summer enrichment programs to teach athletes and
coaches about the exciting opportunities for designing sports-related
technologies. Some of the experiences will teach participants about designing
sports wearables, machine learning and data science. Finally, the research team
will use artificial intelligence to assess learning within these participant-
facing activities. By tapping into the large number of youth participating in
sports, the research team hopes to identify a possible strategy for broadening
participation in computer science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
grounded in the STEM activation framework, which considers the confluence of
fascination, competency beliefs, values, scientific sensemaking and participant
engagement. Specifically, the project positions participation in athletics as an
asset for learning computer science. Moreover, the project aims to disrupt the
popularized dichotomy between athletics and academics by developing the
pedagogical, technological and analytic tools needed to support athletic-
centered computer science learning experiences. The pedagogical tools include
novel learning activities that bridge data science, engineering design, machine
learning and physical computing, with athletics. The technological tools include
age-appropriate and accessible interfaces for collecting, visualizing and
drawing inferences from the multimodal data that students collect. Technological
tools also include supporting students in designing and building custom
wearables using physical computing. Finally, the analytic tools leverage the
PI’s expertise in Multimodal Learning Analytics (MMLA) to extend and scale
elements of the STEM Activation Framework’s Observation and Engagement Protocol
via automated feature extraction and data annotation. The project uses an
iterative, user-centered and design-based research approach to realize these
goals and activities. This work contributes to research on 1) developing and
supporting novel pathways to computing careers, 2) the design and implementation
of tools that facilitate collecting, analyzing and learning with multimodal data
and physical computing, and 3) leveraging multimodal analytics to identify new
ways to characterize learning and engagement in non-traditional learning
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.