* 2048519
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Asymmetric Shocks in Contests: Theory and Experiment
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Jian Song, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2023
* USD 9,420.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds research that
will combine economic theory and laboratory experiments to investigate how the
distributions of random shocks affects the effort provisions of rank-tournament
participants. In rank-order tournaments, an individual’s competitive output
equals the effort she or he exerts, plus a random shock. Because of their
prevalence, tournaments have received a great deal of scholarly attention. Other
research has assumed that the distribution of the random shock is symmetric.
However, some real world tournaments include asymmetric shocks. For example, in
elite competitions like the Olympics athletes exert significant amounts of
effort. Their scores typically cluster near the boundary of possible
performance. Consequently, there is no chance that an athlete will face an
extremely positive shock, however, there is a small chance that an athlete will
suffer an extremely negative shock. This project will combine theory and
experiment to compare effort provisions in tournaments under different shock
distributions. The research design will allow the researchers to directly
measure tournament participant’s effort and compare the incentive effects under
different types of shocks. The findings of this research could develop an
improved understanding of why and how the distributions of random shocks affect
effort provision in competitive environments, shedding new light on how people
make decisions when very bad outcomes are unlikely but
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses theoretical and experimental
methods to compare effort provisions in rank- order tournaments under different
shock distributions. Theory finds that, under optimal principal-agent contracts,
the effort exerted by tournament participants should be invariant to the shock
distribution. However, this result has never been tested, as all existing
empirical and experimental literature focuses on environments where the shock
distribution is symmetric.&lt;br/&gt;This project fills this gap.
Methodologically, an effort-choice experiment is employed with treatments that
differ in shock distributions. In that experiment, after players choose the
effort they would like to exert, the computer then draws a random shock,
independently for each player. A player’s output is the effort she or he
chooses, plus the random shock chosen by the computer. This experimental design
directly measures a player’s effort and allows for the comparison of the
incentive effects of different shocks. This project will extend and inform the
current literature by shedding light on the influence of the shape of the shock
distribution on a tournament participant’s effort decisions. The results of this
project will further facilitate a better understanding of how people make
decisions when very bad outcomes are unlikely but
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.