* 2048356
* Collaborative Research: Creating and testing data science learning tools for secondary students with disabilities
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Andreas Stefik, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Noll
* 05/31/2025
* USD 634,361.00

The main goal of this collaborative project is to create and evaluate a
universally accessible data science infrastructure for high-school-aged
learners, with a focus on students with disabilities. Data science is critical
in the development of industry-relevant computational thinking skills. Computing
initiatives, including data science, are rapidly growing at the preschool-12th
grade level because of the compelling career pathways that data science skills
provide. A careful investigation into already-at-scale data science initiatives
shows that such tools and curriculum are largely not accessible to individuals
with disabilities, nor do they have a strong foundation of human factors
evidence supporting their designs. These issues are crucial and must be resolved
for workforce equity and a diverse science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) pipeline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring
together investigators in computer science, mechanical engineering, education,
social science, and cognitive neuroscience to rethink the tools that support the
teaching and learning of data science at the high school level. The overarching
goal will be to create and evaluate data science tools and curriculum that are
not just in legal compliance for accessibility, but that carefully take into
account the needs of learners, including those with disabilities. This project
will involve numerous strategic partnerships including two schools for students
with disabilities, the Disabilities, Opportunities, Internetworking, and
Technology Center, and an engaged advisory board representing computing
accessibility (AccessComputing), data science industry (RStudio), and data
science governance (Association for Computing Machinery Data Science Task
Force). The rigorous research plan will include iterative, user-focused
development, empirical quantitative investigations, qualitative focus groups,
and a culminating in-classroom field study, targeting an estimated total of 385
students, 105 teachers, and 30 industry professionals as participants across all
studies. By creating, deploying, and rigorously evaluating the first data
science tool and curriculum that is accessible to all, the project intends to
help create equitable pathways for all students to enter the field of data
science. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.