* 2048266
* CAREER: Towards Networked Airborne Computing in Uncertain Airspace: A  Control and Networking Facilitated Distributed Computing Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Junfei Xie, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 01/31/2026
* USD 368,238.00

Networked airborne computing is a new computing paradigm that relies on the
airborne network formed by aerial vehicles with direct flight-to-flight
communication links to achieve computing in the air. It can not only benefit a
wide range of existing applications (e.g., drone show, precision agriculture and
emergence response), but also give rise to a variety of new applications (e.g.,
next-generation air traffic control, Internet of Things and real-time
3-dimensional mapping). Despite the exciting applications, enabling networked
airborne computing requires overcoming many formidable challenges such as
3-dimensional node mobility, highly uncertain operating environment and strict
safety requirements. This project aims to develop an innovative theoretical
framework that conquers these challenges to enable networked airborne computing.
Unlike traditional mobile computing systems that treat mobility, uncertainty and
communication as constraints for computing, the proposed framework exploits
their benefits to facilitate robust, efficient and scalable computing in the
uncertain, dynamic and heterogeneous airspace.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed framework, featured by fast response, resilience to uncertain
disturbances and failures, scalability, and adaptivity to system and
environmental changes, will advance the fundamental Computer and Network Systems
(CNS) science and engineering on mobile computing and produce broader civilian
and economic impacts related to unmanned systems based applications. The
findings of this project will also contribute to fields such as distributed
computing, stochastic optimal control, networking, real-time decision-making
under uncertainty and experiment design. Innovative education and outreach
activities (e.g., virtual lab modules, summer camps and internships) will
produce a profound impact on the community and significantly benefit students,
especially underrepresented minorities, at different levels in San Diego county
and beyond. The proposed dissemination activities (e.g., workshops and
tutorials) will further broaden the impact of the proposed research and benefit
the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.