* 2048122
* CAREER: Faithful Natural Language Generation
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* William Wang, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 03/31/2026
* USD 332,989.00

Natural Language Generation is a fundamental component of many real-world
applications, including generating captions for visually-impaired people. The
CAREER project will seek to develop new methods for generating higher quality
and more reliable sentences, and ensure better and more faithful generation
results. The project will also lead to open-source software and tools that
facilitate the diagnosis of neural generation models, and provide resources for
building the next generation faithful language generation models. The
investigator will integrate research with educational components, and enable
underrepresented high school students to access Artificial Intelligence and
Natural Language Processing research and course materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge that prevents deep learning based
natural language generation models in practical deployment is faithfulness. For
example, in the task of image captioning, when using sequence-to-sequence models
for generation, it often leads to the “hallucination” phenomenon: an object that
does not belong to the context might be generated in the text. Similarly, in the
task of data-to-text generation (e.g., generating a Wikipedia biography from
structured data) problem, deep learning models are prone to generate erroneous
entities and attributes that do not belong to the input data. These behaviors
significantly downgrade the performance of neural generative models, and the
faithfulness of the output becomes a significant issue for building the next
generation faithful natural language generation engines. This project will
investigate the complex relationships between uncertainty and faithfulness at
various levels. And several mitigation strategies will also be considered. An
interactive agent will be built to reason in user-generated text to understand
the faithfulness constraint. The goal of this project is to deeply understand
how to quantify and access faithfulness in robust settings, and build useful
open-source software that facilitates this purpose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.