* 2048075
* CAREER: Principled Deep Reinforcement Learning for Societal Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Zhaoran Wang, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

The recent breakthrough in deep reinforcement learning (RL), especially its
superhuman-level performance in board and video games, e.g., Go, Atari, Dota,
and StarCraft, opens up new avenues for controlling many complex and unknown
systems via learning. However, for practical purposes beyond game playing, deep
RL still suffers from a lack of efficiency and trustworthiness. In terms of
efficiency, the empirical success of deep RL requires millions to billions of
data points and days to weeks of running time. In terms of trustworthiness, the
empirical success of deep RL is only measured by the received reward, which does
not account for safety and robustness. Such a lack of efficiency and
trustworthiness is further exacerbated when we scale up deep RL to design and
optimize societal systems in critical domains, e.g., healthcare, transportation,
power grid, financial network, and supply chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER proposal addresses these challenges by establishing a theoretical
framework for analyzing the computational efficiency and sample efficiency of
single-agent deep RL and an algorithmic framework for achieving such
efficiencies. Moreover, it leads to a stochastic game framework for achieving
safety, robustness, scalability, fairness, risk-awareness, and incentivization
in social systems via multi-agent deep RL. The research plan emphasizes
connecting deep RL with multiple fields, e.g., nonconvex optimization,
nonparametric statistics, causal inference, stochastic game, and social science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education plan emphasizes teaching data-driven
decision making as a fundamental skill for future generations, especially for
future leaders, in societal contexts. In particular, it aims to promote the idea
of data-driven social leadership and support underrepresented minority
researchers and students, who personally experience pressing challenges in
societal systems, from K-12 education to graduate training. In order to cope
with the ongoing pandemic, the outreach plan involves organizing online seminars
on data science and artificial intelligence, mentoring remote interns by
integrating research and education, and engaging remote students via DataFest
and Client Project Challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.