* 2048496
* Collaborative Research: Pathways and fate of freshwater near the southern tip of Greenland
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Renske Gelderloos, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 92,940.00

This project will investigate how freshwater melt from the Greenland ice sheet
exits the coastal ocean near Cape Farewell, the southernmost tip of Greenland.
As the coastal current transporting much of the fresh water on the shelf reaches
the Cape, the strong wind forcing combined with its orientation with respect to
the coastline curvature and complex bathymetry may flush water offshore there.
The project will deploy drifters and profiling floats, interpreted in the
context of modeled circulation to investigate how this high volume freshwater
may enter the open ocean. Prior studies have indicated the potential influence
this exported shelf water may have on the Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation (AMOC), and hence global climate. The project will support the
career development of an observational young investigator, a project-specific
website will be developed, an undergraduate summer student fellow will help
analyze the data, and a volunteer undergraduate student will participate in a
research cruise. This work will clarify how shelf-derived fresh water at high
latitudes can influence the large-scale ocean circulation, and should be
applicable to other regions where buoyant coastal currents veer around sharp
bathymetry. Broader relevance will include addressing where and how meltwater
may affect the North Atlantic spring bloom through its supply of micronutrients
and stratification of the subpolar North
Atlantic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current melting of the Arctic and
the Greenland Ice Sheet introduces enough fresh water into the subpolar North
Atlantic to significantly alter the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation,
but where and how this water leaves the shelf ocean to interact with the
boundary currents and deep basins of the subpolar North Atlantic is poorly
constrained. This project will use a joint observational and modeling study to
explore the pathways and fate of fresh water around Cape Farewell, and to
determine the forcing mechanisms that drive the fluxes. Surface drifters and
rapidly-profiling Argo floats will be deployed along the southeast Greenland
shelf in 2021 and 2022 to assess the along-stream, cross-stream, and vertical
coherency of the coastal current. The modeling component will seed a high-
resolution (~2 km lateral grid spacing) year-long run of the MITgcm with virtual
floats in the coastal current to follow their pathways around Cape Farewell,
complemented by an examination of model circulation response to internal
instabilities and external forcing, and quantification of the resulting modeled
shelf-basin exchange. This work will provide the first comprehensive study of
the shelf-basin exchange around Cape Farewell, a process often invoked to
explain North Atlantic variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.