* 2048207
* CAREER: Investigating the DNA Repair Mechanisms of Non-Traditional Genome Editing Agents
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Alexis Komor, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 01/31/2026
* USD 777,701.00

Genome editing tools have driven a revolution and enabled the work of countless
researchers across the fields of biomedical science, agriculture, biotechnology,
and synthetic biology. Despite the fervor with which these technologies have
been adopted, many of them suffer from key shortcomings such as unwanted DNA
sequence modifications and low efficiencies for certain types of edits and in
certain types of cells. This project seeks to tackle these limitations by
furthering basic understanding of DNA repair mechanisms involved in the editing
processes. The research will enable expansion of the current suite of genome
editing tools, while simultaneously providing graduate student and postdoctoral
researchers with training for successful careers in science. The project also
includes a research-practice partnership with San Diego area public high schools
with high enrollments of socioeconomically disadvantaged students. The students
will be introduced to cutting edge genome editing technologies in a topical and
approachable manner, with the goal of inciting excitement and further engagement
with higher education beyond standard classroom
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To alter the sequence of genomic DNA at will,
genome editing tools all rely on initial introduction of damage into the DNA of
live cells. “Nontraditional” genome editing tools, such as base editors and
prime editors, are a class of recently developed editors that employ other types
of DNA damage than double-stranded breaks to mediate the editing process. This
project will use high-throughput gene knock-down strategies in combination with
reporters for various base editing and prime editing outcomes to characterize
the role of DNA repair genes in processing nontraditional genome editing
intermediates. This effort will be complemented by computational and
experimental research to determine how base editing and prime editing outcomes
change in relation to different stages of the cell cycle. These studies
represent the first investigations into DNA repair mechanisms employed by
nontraditional genome editors, and the outcomes will advance the efficiency and
precision of existing editing tools as well generate editing tools for new types
of genomic modifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Genetic Mechanisms and Systems and Synthetic Biology programs of the
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences
Directorate&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.