* 2048423
* CAREER: Forecasting Impacts to Reduce Exposure to Smoke (FIRES) - Modeling wildfire smoke transport in the western U.S.
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2025
* Heather Holmes, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2025
* USD 406,767.00

The largest wildfires in the United States occur in the western part of the
country; an area with a population of over 77 million people. Smoke from
wildfires is harmful to humans and reducing smoke-related illnesses requires
limiting outdoor work and other activities in areas impacted by fire. These
areas of impact can extend several hundreds of miles away from the fire, thus
accurate prediction is critical to protect human health. Currently, weather and
air quality models are used to provide smoke warnings to the public. However,
there is a critical need to improve these models to correctly forecast the smoke
transport over mountains. This research project will transform these models and
advance the state-of-the-science of modeling the dynamic atmosphere over
mountainous terrain. The new model will be used to develop an online smoke
forecasting tool that provides warnings to protect human health during wildfire
events in the western U.S. This project will enhance undergraduate STEM
education by developing an online computational modeling course that fills a gap
in existing curricula. Together, these educational products will enhance our
ability to protect human health through accurate wildfire forecasting, while
training the next generation of forecasters and increasing the scientific
literacy of the Nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regional scale air models that
simulate wildfire smoke transport have significant uncertainties over
mountainous terrain due to the complexities of the atmospheric flows and
difficulties in estimating smoke plume injection heights. To improve smoke plume
forecasts there is a critical need to develop new models that reduce
uncertainties associated with both meteorological conditions and emissions
modeling. The aim of this research is to use a cross-disciplinary approach to
improve our fundamental understanding of wildfire smoke plume dynamics and
complex atmospheric flows governing smoke transport over mountainous terrain.
Successful completion of this work has the potential to transform our knowledge
of the coupled atmosphere-fire-human system and greatly improve our ability to
protect human health. The central hypothesis is that atmospheric turbulence
parameterizations developed for flat terrain do not correctly simulate the
planetary boundary layer structure over mountainous terrain leading to biases in
the chemical transport modeling of wildfire smoke plumes. The four research
objectives of this project are to: 1) improve models for vertical mixing over
mountains to reduce the uncertainties in modeling smoke plume transport, 2)
develop a novel model for smoke plume injection height to improve the vertical
distribution of wildfire smoke emissions concentrations and subsequent regional
transport, 3) incorporate model improvements for atmospheric mixing and wildfire
emissions into a chemical transport model to improve smoke plume forecasts in
the western U.S., and 4) create an online smoke forecasting tool using the
improved regional scale smoke plume transport model. The education and outreach
objectives of this project are to enhance numerical educational opportunities
for undergraduate students by developing an online course focusing on numerical
weather prediction modeling and high-performance computing and increase
collaboration with local stakeholders to provide unique service-learning style
research experiences for undergraduate students related to wildfire science in
Nevada. A primary product of this research will be an online smoke forecasting
tool designed in collaboration with a data visualization and communication
expert. This online tool will be shared with local stakeholders to help inform
the public about poor air quality events by issuing warnings that aid in
reducing wildfire smoke exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.