* 2048476
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: An experimental analysis of the role of group identity in leadership effectiveness
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Moumita Roy, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2023
* USD 8,327.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the role of leaders
in mitigating cooperation failures in groups especially when group members have
distorted incentives is a relevant issue in economics. This research project
will use economic theory and experimental methods to study whether beliefs and
decisions of group members vary according to whether the leader shares the same
group identity as the followers. The project will combine insights from
behavioral economics, social psychology, leadership, and management studies to
compare the effectiveness of ingroup and outgroup leaders. Social identity
theory suggests that a shared group identity between leaders and followers could
increase trust in an ingroup leader's effectiveness in fostering cooperation.
The research design will investigate whether ingroup bias can lower overall
cooperation and efficiency in groups with outgroup leaders. Ingroup bias can
become a challenge for effective diverse leadership. This research will help to
fill in gaps in knowledge of the detrimental effects of ingroup bias and will
have broad impacts on the study of leadership. Further, the results of this
research project will shed light on identity-based discrimination which can
provide important inputs into policies that improve diversity and inclusion in
leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a novel laboratory experimental design, the
project uses identity manipulations within a leadership game. Groups play a
public goods game where the leader encourages cooperation within each group
following a two-fold identification strategy which creates artificial group
identities. Laboratory subjects acting as followers decide whether to follow a
leader’s cooperation suggestion in a group task. The main hypothesis is that the
ingroups will exhibit favoritism towards ingroup leaders and discrimination
against outgroup leaders. The difference in a group’s cooperation levels under
ingroup and outgroup leadership will help in isolating the effects of shared
group identity on leadership effectiveness. Extending this to a second study
where the leaders use a reward mechanism to incentivize higher cooperation it
can be observed whether a reward mechanism can bridge the gap between ingroup
and outgroup leader effectiveness. The project makes two contributions. It
provides an interdisciplinary approach to studying&lt;br/&gt;the interaction
effects of group identity and leader effectiveness. Second, the results will
allow researchers to understand the ramifications of shared social identities
between leaders and followers and prevent the negative consequences that may
arise out of the lack of inclusion of diverse leaders. Overall, the results will
have policy implications for both organizations and policy
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.