* 2048510
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP-17-ANT: Molecular speciation of trace element-ligand complexes in the Southern Ocean and Antarctic shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Daniel Repeta, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 133,135.00

The supply of iron and other biologically essential trace elements to surface
waters is a critical regulator of biological growth in the Southern Ocean. Sea
ice volume and the physical dynamics of the Southern Ocean are currently
experiencing rapid changes. An understanding of the corresponding changes in
metal cycling is needed as these elements are essential for the growth of
phytoplankton which plays an important role in modulating atmospheric CO2. One
of the major knowledge gaps is understanding how soluble forms of these metals
are generated and transported to the surface ocean. Many trace elements are
insoluble in seawater and precipitate close to their sources unless they are
bound to a dissolved organic molecule, or ligand, that keeps the metal in
solution. Little is currently known about what these ligands are, where they
come from, or how they affect the reactivity and fate of metals in the Southern
Ocean. The study proposed here is designed to identify the organic ligands that
bind to metals and determine the ligand sources and reactivity along the
Antarctic continental margin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
survey the molecular speciation of six biologically important trace elements
(Fe, Cu, Zn. Ni, Co, Mn) along the US GEOTRACES cruise track along the Antarctic
shelf in the Amundsen Sea in order to better understand trace element cycling
across the region. The goal of the GEOTRACES expedition is to identify processes
and quantify fluxes that control the distributions of trace elements and their
isotopes to the Southern Ocean. As part of this effort, the investigators will
assess biological ligand production as the ecosystem shifts from low
productivity iron-starved conditions in the Antarctic Circumpolar Current to
higher productivity along the upwelling continental margin, with a particular
focus on assessing production within the Amundsen Sea polynya blooms and sinking
organic matter remineralization zones. Second, changes in the accumulation,
saturation, and composition of ligands in Circumpolar Deep Water will be
measured as the water passes across the Antarctic shelf and receives inputs from
sediments and glacial meltwaters. Finally, the role of sea ice on metal-ligand
dynamics will be investigated. Metal ligands are a central parameter of
numerical ocean models that predict and estimate metal distributions, and
results from this project will provide those models with knowledge of the
processes that supply ligands and affect ligand concentrations. Two graduate
students and undergraduate interns will be supported and trained as part of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.