* 2048395
* Dynamic Discrete Choice Estimation with Partially Observable States and Hidden Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Yanling Chang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 349,801.00

This award will investigate rigorous methods for data-driven model
identification and estimation for stochastic dynamic decision processes. Many
dynamical systems are modeled via discrete states that evolve via stochastic
transitions and control inputs. Rather than assume a model structure in advance,
this project develops methods to "learn" the model structure, including
preferences of the controller and model states, from available data. The project
will develop these new methods in the context of technology-assisted human
performance in vehicle operations. Humans drivers operating vehicles on a busy
highway often engage in secondary tasks that demand cognitive effort (e.g.
attending to a business-related phone call, listening to a podcast). The driver
is aware of their engagement in the secondary task but may be only imperfectly
aware of its effect on their own ability to drive safely. On-board autonomous
technology with the ability to accurately estimate the driver’s safety level may
improve performance through auditory warnings or partial automation (e.g.,
adaptive cruise control). However, existing estimation methodologies are built
on the assumption that the driver has perfect state observability, whereas the
driving task’s overall level of safety is only imperfectly observed. This
project provides a novel estimation method to build a predictive model of the
agent’s driving behavior by considering imperfectly observed driving states
(e.g. safe and unsafe driving). The research benefits the society by enabling
on-board automation system to monitor the driver's activities and potentially
intervene to improve driving performance and safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will develop new methodologies and algorithms for learning a model of
dynamic decisions with hidden states. The research draws on and generalizes
dynamic discrete choice models to consider memoryless partially observable
states. This project will also examine estimation of (non-exponential) semi-
Markov hidden models with state-dependent sojourn time distributions. This
research will rigorously examine whether and/or under what conditions the models
are identifiable and ascertain the implications for robustness of estimation
results. The new methods will leverage experimental collection of observable
data known to correlate with distraction (e.g., breathing rate, heart rate
variability, eye-tracking) together with observed actions (e.g., maneuvers) to
estimate a compact model of the agent's control policies and the dynamics of
partially observable states (safe and unsafe driving). The model and estimation
approach will be validated through a high-fidelity driving simulation
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.