* 2048810
* Collaborative Research: Establishing an Iron Resonance Wind-Temperature Lidar at High-Frequency Active Auroral Research Program (HAARP) for Active Studies of Polar Aeronomy
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Bifford Williams, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 03/31/2024
* USD 112,694.00

The award supports a collaborative effort between researchers at the University
of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF), Cornell University, G &amp; A Technical Software
Incorporated (GATS), the University of Colorado Denver (CU Denver), Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University (VTech), and the German Aerospace
Center (Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt, DLR) to build a state-of-the-
art solid-state iron resonance wind and temperature lidar system (IRWTL) and to
operate this instrument at the high-frequency active auroral research program
(HAARP) facility located in Gakona, Alaska (62°N, 145°W). This instrument will
be used to conduct a series of coordinated observations with the Ionospheric
Research Instrument (IRI) at HAARP that will be operated in campaign mode
centering upon three major heating experiments. The Arctic atmosphere and the
subauroral region are a natural laboratory for understanding plasma-neutral and
dynamical coupling in the atmosphere and geospace. The lidar will measure the
profile of the ion-neutral collision frequency needed for the determination of
D-region electron density profiles from IRI HF radar data. A second application
of coordinated IRWTL and IRI measurements is aimed at the investigation of the
charge transfer mechanisms in dusty plasmas based on lidar observations of polar
mesospheric clouds and radar observations of polar mesospheric summer echoes.
These coordinated measurements will also study the dynamical forcing of E-region
winds using the technique of radar artificial periodic irregularities. The
combined IRWTL and IRI observations will be used to study D-region structure as
determined from the data collected from the detection of ELF/VLF waves generated
by the IRI facility. These studies will have a variety of broader impacts
including the study of fundamental processes in plasma physics, aerosols, fluid
dynamics while advancing radio science and remote sensing technology and
techniques. The award will support research training and professional
development of graduate students and two postdoctoral associates. The IRWTL will
support the participation of both UAF undergraduate students and visiting
students in scientific investigations and engineering projects. This effort
fosters collaboration between three universities, an aerospace company, and a
national space center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IRWTL lidar system will enhance
the HAARP research infrastructure as a state-of-the-art solid state resonance
lidar system using a frequency-stabilized Nd:YAG laser to achieve atmospheric
illumination at the iron resonance emission wavelength at 372 nm. During
geomagnetically active periods the auroral electrojet and auroral precipitation
occur overhead at the HAARP site facilitating HF heating experiments to higher
altitude ranges than otherwise would be the case. The IRWTL observations will
yield new wind and temperature measurements in the mesosphere-lower thermosphere
in both daytime and nighttime throughout the year; these results would be
compared with similar wind and temperature observations obtained at the Poker
Flat sodium resonance wind and temperature lidar system located in central
Alaska to search for evidence of large scale structure in polar mesospheric
winds. The observations, analyses and results of this activity will contribute
to national and international programs, including CEDAR and SCOSTEP
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.