* 2048863
* Collaborative Research: U.S. GEOTRACES GP17-OCE and GP17-ANT: Thorium-230, Thorium-232 and Protactinium-231 tracers of trace element supply and removal
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Christopher Hayes, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2024
* USD 461,787.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. Many
trace elements are essential for life and are thought to limit biological
productivity throughout much of the ocean. This limitation, in turn, partly
controls the ability of the ocean to support other marine life as well as the
ocean's capacity to absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. This project will
provide constraints on the processes that supply and remove trace elements in
the South Pacific Ocean and Amundsen Sea which are currently not well
quantified. Naturally occurring radioactive isotopes such as thorium-230 and
protactinium-231, which will be measured as a part of this work, can be utilized
as proxies to provide critical information about the processes that supply iron
and other micronutrient elements, as well as the rates of those processes. The
isotope thorium-232 will also be utilized as a tracer of the supply of elements
that are added to the ocean through the deposition of aerosol dust and from
coastal sediments. These rates and fluxes can be used to improve our
understanding of the micro-nutrient iron and the sinking fluxes of carbon which
are both critical in the global carbon cycle. Outreach and broader impacts will
be achieved through undergraduate and graduate teaching, community events such
as the Ocean Sciences Bowl and other efforts through the international GEOTRACES
program.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will provide support for four
collaborating labs (University of Southern Mississippi, University of Minnesota,
Lamont-Doherty at Columbia University and CalTech) to undertake measurements on
two US GEOTRACES cruises in the South Pacific, known as GP17 (GP17-OCE running
from Tahiti south to the marginal sea ice zone and GP17-ANT focusing on the
Amundsen margin). The PIs will measure dissolved and particulate concentrations
of Th-230 and Pa-231. In addition, they will measure dissolved and particulate
Th-232 concentrations and analyze a limited number of aerosol samples, aerosol
leachates, colloidal size fractions and surface sediments for these
radionuclides. They will be used to quantify trace element supply, including
sedimentary inputs from the Amundsen Sea’s glacial meltwater pump and
atmospheric dust inputs in one of the world’s lowest dust input regions.
Additionally, the team will be able to quantify trace element removal, including
sinking particulate fluxes for carbon, as well as trace elements, and scavenging
characteristics of variable particle composition regimes. These goals also
contribute to assessing Th and Pa as key palaeoceanographic
proxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.