* 2048349
* Characterization of Meteoroids and Meteors through Simulations and Remote Sensing Using High-Power Large-Aperture Radars
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Sigrid Elschot, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 05/31/2024
* USD 594,254.00

Approximate 100 tons of extraterrestrial matter, primarily composed of
meteoroids, enters the Earth’s atmosphere every day. Meteoroids are defined as
solid particles of natural origin in space, which typically originate from the
breakup of comets and asteroids and are categorized according to their origin.
On average, over 100 billion meteoroids enter Earth’s atmosphere daily with
masses larger than 1 microgram. Meteoroids travel between 11 and 72.8 km/s
relative to the Earth if in solar orbit; a small, though as yet undetermined,
fraction originates outside of our solar system, implying that distant stellar
systems can impact Earth’s environment. The light and associated physical
phenomena associated with a meteoroid’s passage through a planet’s atmosphere is
called a meteor, which results from the plasma created by the meteoroid as it
ionizes the gas along its trajectory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although meteoroids
have a profound effect on our space environment, we know very little about their
fundamental properties. The connection between meteoroid properties and plasma
formation still remains poorly understood due to a lack of knowledge regarding
how background properties influence the plasma dynamics and also how selection
effects in the observing instrument impacts detection. This project seeks to
answer these questions by probing into the plasma physics that surrounds the
meteoroid, known as the head echo plasma, and uncover the connection between
meteoroid properties, plasma formation, and the properties of the background
ionosphere. The research will address many of the outstanding questions in the
meteor and meteoroid community, including the mass deposition rate into our
atmosphere, the dominant density population, and the effect of the background
electric and magnetic fields on plasma expansion and distribution. This
fundamental research includes the development of three simulations, including a
Direct Simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC) model and a Particle-In-Cell (PIC)
algorithm to determine the plasma formation and expansion, and a Finite-
Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) model to correlate radar signal strength with
plasma density. The project team will also collect and analyze High-Power,
Large-Aperture (HPLA) radar data at diverse geographic locations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to the National Space
Weather Program’s goal of understanding the evolution of ionospheric
irregularities, and answer the following three scientific
questions:&lt;br/&gt;1) What are the properties of meteor plasmas, including
peak plasma density and distribution?&lt;br/&gt;2) How is meteoroid ablation and
plasma formation affected by the physics of the upper atmosphere and
ionosphere?&lt;br/&gt;3) What are the properties of the parent meteoroids,
including mass, bulk density, and velocity, and how do they correlate to the
meteor plasmas?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will enable
understanding of impact plasma and facilitate collaboration between MIT Haystack
Observatory and Stanford University. The HPLA data, in addition to the models
and simulations developed, will be widely disseminated to enhance scientific and
technological understanding. Graduate students will be involved in all aspects
of the modeling and simulation, and both undergraduate and graduate student
students will be able to analyze the HPLA data, which will contribute to the
training of the next generation of scientists and engineers. The research will
be integrated into the classroom at Stanford University, including three
graduate classes and one undergraduate class designed and taught by the PI. In
addition to developing and teaching these courses, the PI frequently engages in
outreach activities, such as with grade schools, the Mission to Mars Program for
undergraduate students, and various television programs, such as National
Geographic, the Weather Channel, and PBS NOVA, where she has described how
meteoroids can threaten interplanetary space programs. These endeavors will
inspire another generation of students beyond those directly engaged at Stanford
University to pursue a degree in this field of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.