* 2048708
* Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conferences
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jon Steinsson, Brookings Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2024
* USD 425,000.00

Support from the National Science Foundation will provide partial funding for
the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (BPEA), which will consist of
semiannual conferences with subsequent publication of the papers and discussion.
The conferences will be designed to bring together economic scientists to focus
on the scientific analysis of economic policy issues. These issues include:
labor market mobility and challenges and lessons from COVID; new challenges for
monetary policy; determinants of inflation; lessons from crisis relief programs;
an assessment of the effect of epidemiological policy on the economic crisis;
long-term implications of the federal debt; dynamics of post-pandemic recovery;
economic dynamism; productivity and the economics of technological innovation;
macroeconomics of climate change; and, the economics of race and gender. The
papers will be presented at the conference and will be available online to the
public. They will develop empirical analysis, will employ a wide range of
research methods, and will focus on real world problems that affect the U.S.
economy including the future of growth and productivity in the U.S. and abroad.
The award will promote the national interest by improving the quality of the
economics used in making policy decisions and will provide better evidence for
policies that contribute to the competitiveness of the U.S.
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the Brookings Papers
is to support economic research that directly informs economic policy, with a
focus on macroeconomic policy broadly interpreted. The BPEA conferences will be
marked by a high degree of interaction among the organizers, researchers,
discussants, and attendees. Each researcher invited to present will engage in an
intensive process of three rounds of review, criticism, discussion and editing.
BPEA will encourage scientists to apply the best knowledge of the profession to
pressing policy issues and will use policy concerns to point the profession's
way toward new science. The broader impacts of the Brookings Papers conference
occur at three levels. First, the papers themselves can have direct impact by
informing current policy makers. Second, the conference will play a broader role
in the policy and economic education of the general public; this role is enabled
because of the relevance of the papers and the considerable press attention the
conference receives. Third, the conference series will provide important support
in the academic community for research that directly tackles policy
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.