* 2048080
* CAREER: Structural and Functional Plasticity Induced By Loss of a Co-Innervating Neuron
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Robert Carrillo, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 02/28/2026
* USD 938,360.00

Our nervous system is composed of billions of intricately connected neurons that
can actively modify their activity patterns and their influence on the circuit
partners they communicate with. Each neuron can receive and process information
from thousands of other neurons through discrete connections, called synapses.
It is currently not known whether changes made at one synapse between two
neurons can influence the development and/or activity of neighboring synapses
that the target cell makes with other synaptic partners. For example, it might
be the case that a decrease in communication at one synapse triggers increases
in communication at other synapses in a brain circuit. The goal of this study is
to document the existence of such compensatory programs, and to elucidate their
underlying mechanisms. This project is conducted using individual cells in the
neuromuscular circuitry of the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster because of the
advantages this preparation presents for studying and manipulating synaptic
function, and because of striking functional similarity these cells share with
mammalian excitatory brain synapses. The project includes a joint University of
Chicago - University of Puerto Rico summer program for undergraduate students,
which will integrate underrepresented citizens into cutting edge research labs
to facilitate their development as independent researchers. It will additionally
strengthen ties with predominantly Hispanic and Black schools on the south side
of Chicago through outreach programs that allow high school students and
teachers to conduct project-relevant lab experiments and disseminate the work in
their respective classrooms. A joint quarter-long laboratory course for
undergraduate juniors and seniors at the Woods Hole Biological Laboratories will
enable students to gain high levels of competence in advanced neuroscience
experimental techniques. This project will advance our understanding of neural
circuit function and adaptation, as well as enhance education and participation
of underrepresented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neural circuits have
highly complex connectivity patterns in which many inputs congregate on single
targets. The number and strength of the synapses provided by each input can vary
greatly, but how these synapses respond to perturbations – a process known as
synaptic plasticity – is not completely understood. Unlike the densely packed
synapses of the brain, motor neuron-muscle connections are easily visualized and
differentiated from each other, facilitating examination of all synapses from
each input. The central hypothesis of this project is that co-innervation in
early circuit development creates an environment in which subsequent functional
defects trigger synaptic plasticity in the remaining connections. Rigorous
analyses of several co-innervating motor neuron pairs will characterize the
contribution of each input to the total muscle activity and examine how
perturbations in one input induce structural and functional plasticity
phenotypes in the adjacent input(s), a process we refer to as inter-input
synaptic plasticity (IISP). Genetic manipulations combined with calcium imaging
and electrophysiological recordings will examine IISP in the neuromuscular
circuit and help delineate molecular pathways that enable IISP. The results of
this project will fundamentally advance understanding of how synaptic inputs
develop and interact in a complex nervous system. The educational module expands
student research experiences, while the outreach plan combines mentoring and
research to train underrepresented high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students and expand access to neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.