* 2048544
* A Quantitative Meta-Analysis and Qualitative Synthesis on the Impacts of Informal STEM and ICT Programs on Cognitive and Socio-emotional Outcomes of Youth Participants
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Mande Holford, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,056.00

As the pace of innovation accelerates, the need for technology-rich experiences
and pathways to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communications technology (ICT) careers has become increasingly
essential. Thus, a critical challenge faced by educators is to develop
strategies that provide youth access to high quality STEM and ICT programs, and
that motivate them to persist in STEM trajectories. Alarmingly, data suggest
that positive STEM attitudes, especially among females and members of
historically underrepresented racial and ethnic groups, tend to decline as youth
transition from elementary to middle school and again from middle school to high
school. Promisingly, informal STEM learning programs are thought to be important
vehicles for addressing issues of underrepresentation, declining interest, and
for facilitating sustained participation in STEM and ICT trajectories. However,
it is largely unknown how and to what extent informal learning programs impact
participants’ awareness, interest, and engagement in STEM and ICT majors and
careers. To address this knowledge gap, this synthesis project will investigate
the impact of informal STEM and ICT programs on the cognitive and social
emotional outcomes of youth participants. Importantly, this synthesis study
differs from many other quantitative analyses and qualitative syntheses because
one of the major goals of this project is to extract program design principles,
technology-based innovations, theoretical underpinnings, and best practices from
studies that exhibit exemplary evidence of rigorous research design and impact.
This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in STEM and ICT careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this synthesis study is to perform a
quantitative meta-analysis and qualitative synthesis of research on youth
participants of informal STEM and ICT programs. The project addresses two major
research questions: (1) How and to what extent do informal, out-of-school time
STEM and ICT learning experiences impact participants’ awareness, interest and
engagement in STEM majors and careers? (2) What are the program design
principles, technology-based innovations, theoretical underpinnings, and best
practices of rigorously designed informal, out-of-school time STEM and ICT
programs that exhibit exemplary evidence of impact that can be adopted by STEM
practitioners to maximize impact and broaden participation of underrepresented
groups? To address the two main research questions, first, the project team will
perform a systematic literature review and a quantitative meta-analysis to
assess how and to what extent informal STEM and ICT learning experiences impact
participants’ awareness, interest, and engagement in STEM majors and careers.
Second, the project team will use two validated rubrics to identify studies that
exhibit exemplary evidence of research design quality and impact. From these
studies, the team will conduct qualitative analyses to identify program design
principles, technology-based innovations, theoretical underpinnings, and best
practices for adoption by STEM practitioners to maximize impact and broaden
participation of underrepresented groups. By focusing on programs with exemplary
evidence of impact that specifically target females, underserved populations,
and members of historically marginalized racial and ethnic groups, the findings
can be used by practitioners to inform program design and practice, and to
maximize the impact of underrepresented students. The deliverables of this
project will include peer-reviewed publications, webinars, and conference
presentations to ensure that the results of this study are disseminated to the
science education community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.