* 2048637
* How Built and Social Environments Affect COVID-19 Disaster Impacts in the Gulf of Mexico
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Bonnie Ghosh-Dastidar, Rand Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Daan Liang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 885,149.00

Stark differences in access to resources and opportunity across the United
States by both geography and race/ethnicity are often magnified when disaster
strike. Clarifying for whom and why disasters cause most distress is important
for mitigating risk, reducing burden on social, economic, and health-care
systems in the United States, and for addressing disparities. This project
examines how characteristics of built and social environments are associated
with 1) changes in behavioral health and financial wellbeing from before to
during the pandemic, and 2) COVID-19-related risk responses for residents in
coastal counties in the Gulf of Mexico. We will collect new survey data from
2,520 households across all five Gulf states, asking about physical and mental
health, financial wellbeing, risk perceptions, COVID-19 experiences and losses,
and social networks and other resources. The new data will be compared with
existing (pre-pandemic) data collected since 2016 with the same set of
respondents. We will integrate the survey data with assessments of
characteristics of the built environment and examine the extent to which
characteristics of built and social environments predict COVID-19 risk
responses. This award will advance understanding of disaster impacts across time
and place. The current focus is on COVID-19 and associated response policies
impacting Gulf Coast communities and will advance science of risk perception and
models of community vulnerability and resilience. Additionally, the project will
advance national health, prosperity, and welfare by generating insights that
directly support public-health and risk-communication efforts. Findings will
help policymakers target assistance toward individuals, households, and
neighborhoods most in need of support during complex crises such as the COVID-19
pandemic. The team will engage and build a more diverse workforce, partnering
with political science students and faculty at Xavier University, an
historically black university in New Orleans LA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project examines how characteristics of built and social environments are
associated with 1) changes in behavioral health and financial wellbeing from
before to during the pandemic, and 2) COVID-19-related risk responses for
residents in coastal counties in the Gulf of Mexico. This work adds
significantly to an existing longitudinal, probabilistic panel study of
residents across all five Gulf states comprised of 2,520 households for which
data have been collected since 2016 on physical and mental health, financial
wellbeing, risk perceptions, disaster experiences, social networks, and
extensive sociodemographic data. The new data will build an integrated
assessment of characteristics of the built environment, social resources,
COVID-19 illness experiences and losses, and impacts on individual functioning
with a third wave of data collection. These new, geocoded survey data will be
integrated with census-tract and county-level data about the conditions of
respondents’ built and social environments (e.g., walkability, social
vulnerability). The project tests hypotheses that: 1) characteristics of the
built environment moderate, 1) social resources and COVID-19 experiences and
losses explain, and 3) pre-COVID-19 factors predict, patterns of change in
behavioral health and financial wellbeing. We will also test the extent to which
characteristics of built and social environments predict COVID-19 risk
responses. We will also demonstrate the feasibility of social science
infrastructure for multi-level, disaster research and train diverse students in
transdisciplinary theories and methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
advances theoretical understanding of the mechanisms of disaster impacts across
time and place with a focus on COVID-19 and associated response policies
impacting Gulf Coast communities. Additionally, this research will generate
knowledge that elucidates pathways to vulnerability and resilience in other
disaster contexts. The data will permit empirical tests of interdependencies
between different built and social environment factors at multiple levels. The
project’s findings will help policymakers to target assistance toward
individuals and neighborhoods most in need of support during complex crises such
as the COVID-19 pandemic. The project will also demonstrate potential methods
for a large-scale, prospective disaster research infrastructure. We will
leverage multiple opportunities to engage and build a more diverse workforce,
partnering with political science students and faculty at Xavier University, an
historically black university in New Orleans LA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.