* 2048887
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP-17-OCE: Molecular speciation of trace element-ligand complexes in the South Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Rene Boiteau, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 133,705.00

All microscopic life in the ocean requires iron to grow and to thrive. This iron
is supplied by dust that is carried from land out across the ocean by strong
winds, or by volcanic activity deep within the ocean. However, large areas of
the ocean are very remote from both land and deep-sea volcanic activity, and the
amount of iron that reaches these areas is quite small. In these regions
microscopic life is often limited by the very low concentrations of iron that
characterize this environment. To use iron, microbes must first extract it from
seawater. To do this, some microbes have the ability to manufacture unique
organic compounds called siderophores that are specifically designed to capture
iron from seawater and transport it into the cell. The presence of siderophores
in seawater acts as a signal to know where in the ocean iron may be limiting
microbial productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;US GEOTRACES program is a
cooperative, multi-investigator effort to make high quality, high-resolution
measurements of metal concentrations across representative sections of major
ocean basins. GEOTRACES data will serve as a benchmark against which future
measurements, made as the ocean responds to climate change, can be referenced.
Most biologically important metals in the ocean are bound to organic compounds
such as siderophores, and the goals of our project are to identity and measure
these metal-organic complexes at the molecular level on a section across the
South Pacific and Southern Oceans between Tahiti and Antarctica. The section
will consist of ~ 30 evenly spaced sites where samples of seawater will be
collected from the surface to the bottom of the ocean. Trace-metal organic
complexes will be extracted from these samples and analyzed in the laboratory
for iron, copper, cobalt, nickel, zinc, manganese, and iodine containing
complexes. The molecular identities, concentrations and water column
distributions of these complexes will be determined and used to assess how
microbes acquire and use trace metals and other nutrients. In parallel, select
samples will also be collected and analyzed for microbial genomes to provide
information on which classes of microbes manufacture and use siderophores to
acquire iron. Data will be archived in national and international databases. The
project activities will help train the next generation of marine scientists and
inform the public about how science can inform us about the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.