* 2048499
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Specifying and Verifying Secure Compilation of C Code to Tagged Hardware
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Andrew Tolmach, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 499,838.00

Software vulnerabilities are a significant and ongoing threat to the security of
individuals, critical infrastructure, and the nation. Many of these
vulnerabilities arise from the widespread use of the C programming language,
which provides little protection against the effects of common programmer
mistakes. New hardware monitoring architectures can detect such errors and limit
their security impact, but these protections only work when they are deployed
correctly. This project aims to build a provably secure platform for executing C
code on monitored hardware, using formal specification to define its desired
behavior and formal verification to confirm that it is correctly implemented.
Demonstrating the feasibility of this high-assurance platform will make it
possible for engineers to adopt monitored hardware systems with confidence, with
the ultimate goal of reducing cybersecurity threats to the systems that underpin
our world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will formally specify and verify C
compiler infrastructure that targets emergent tag-based hardware architectures
which support flexible and efficient security monitoring. Specific project
contributions include (1) a novel specification language for describing C-level
security properties in simple and flexible ways; (2) generic techniques for
verified compilation of C programs and their associated security properties to
tag-enhanced machine code; (3) a new C memory model which captures the minimum
memory safety requirements needed to prove that the compiler preserves program
behavior; (4) application of the compiler framework to implement formally
specified and verified implementations of a broad spectrum of C memory safety
policies; and (5) application of the framework to implement novel policies for
compartmentalizing programs with controlled memory
sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.