* 2048998
* US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE: Evaluating Southern Ocean Control of Global Marine Si Isotope Distribution
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Mark Brzezinski, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 05/31/2024
* USD 681,045.00

The Southern Ocean around Antarctica is connected to the rest of the global
ocean through the meridional overturning circulation. That circulation moves
water from the Southern Ocean through the tropics and all the way into the
northern hemisphere. Those waters carry nutrient chemicals that fuel the growth
of phytoplankton throughout the global ocean whose photosynthetic carbon
fixation is a major factor in setting how much atmospheric carbon dioxide is
removed by ocean biology. Diatoms are a key group of phytoplankton involved in
this process of carbon uptake and they are especially abundant in the Southern
Ocean. Diatoms are unique among the phytoplankton because they need the element
silicon to grow. They take the silicon (Si) that is dissolved in seawater and
use it to produce a shell made of opal called a frustule. In this project we are
interested in how the availability of dissolved Si, as set by the Southern
Ocean, controls the distribution and abundance of diatoms in the sea and their
contribution to ocean biogeochemistry such as the uptake and removal of carbon.
We will use a relatively new tool to trace diatom dynamics – silicon isotopes.
Variations in silicon isotopes in the dissolved Si in seawater and in diatom
frustules can inform the level of diatom growth that has occurred in ocean
waters and how diatom growth is coupled to ocean circulation and nutrient
transport. The distribution of isotopes of silicon between Tahiti in the tropics
to the Southern Ocean will allow us to better understand how the physics,
chemistry and biology of the Southern Ocean controls diatom activity at global
scales. The research will involve an early career scientist and undergraduate
students at UCSB. The PIs will also reach out to regional K-12 schools through
UCSB’s Research and Education Experience Facility (REEF) by developing curricula
on Southern Ocean biogeochemistry and the GEOTRACES
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silicon isotopes will be measured in full ocean
depth profiles along US GEOTRACES GP17OCE from Tahiti, French Polynesia to Punta
Arenas, Chile. It is now clear that successful application of the Si isotope
proxy in the modern ocean and for paleoclimate reconstructions requires a
mechanistic understanding of how the silicon isotopic composition of ventilating
waters masses varies in time and space. Our goal is to test hypotheses related
to predictions from models that processes in the Southern Ocean dictate silicon
isotopes distributions throughout the global ocean. That prediction arises
because the Southern Ocean is the central hub of the meridional overturning
circulation. The interplay between silica production in Southern Ocean surface
waters, opal export and the Southern Ocean counter current meridional
circulation traps silicic acid in the Southern Ocean while partitioning and
redistributing Si isotopes between mode and deep waters. Heavy Si isotopes are
distilled out of the Southern Ocean in relatively shallow mode waters while
light isotopes ride the northward flow of deep waters. Individual aspects of
these predictions have been examined previously; however, measurements of Si
isotopes in GP17OCE will provide the first section that samples all relevant
water masses synoptically. Those distributions together with other data
collected on GP17OCE will allow a more comprehensive evaluation of these
mechanisms partitioning Si isotopes in the Southern Ocean and their
redistribution in the overturning circulation more
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.