* 2048523
* US GEOTRACES OCE: Measuring the distribution of stable carbon isotopes and estimating organic matter export rates
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Paul Quay, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 05/31/2024
* USD 553,935.00

The goal of this project is to measure the concentration of the rare isotope of
carbon (13C) present in the carbon dioxide (CO2) molecules dissolved in seawater
of the South Pacific Ocean. 13C atoms make up only 1% of the carbon atoms on
earth whereas atoms with the common carbon isotope (12C) make up 99% of the
carbon atoms. Variations in the concentration of 13C atoms are represented
relative to the concentration of 12C atoms and expressed as the 13C/12C ratio.
The utility of measuring spatial variations in the 13C/12C of CO2 in the ocean
results from two observations. First, during photosynthesis the 13C/12C of the
plant (phytoplankton in the ocean) is distinctly different from the 13C/12C of
CO2 consumed during photosynthesis. Second, the 13C/12C of CO2 molecules
produced during the combustion of fossil fuels (coal, oil, natural gas) is
measurably different from the 13C/12C of CO2 in the atmosphere and ocean. As a
result, measuring the spatial variations of 13C/12C of CO2 in the ocean can be
used to estimate variations in the rate of photosynthesis and the rate at which
CO2 produced by fossil fuel combustion is being adsorbed by the ocean.
Estimating variations in these two rates are goals of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 13C/12C of CO2 in the ocean depends in large part on
the rates of photosynthesis and respiration, which results in spatial
covariations in the 13C/12C of CO2, concentrations of primary nutrients (nitrate
and phosphate) and trace elements that are used by phytoplankton (e.g.,
Cadmium). In this project, the planned measurements of the 13C/12C of CO2,
nutrients and trace elements during the GEOTRACES GP17 cruise will be used to
determine how the north-south variations in biological productivity
(photosynthesis and respiration), elemental composition of sinking particles and
water mass mixing control the regional variations in the 13C/12C of CO2,
nutrients and bioactive trace element distributions in the S. Pacific Ocean. An
improved understanding of the biological, chemical and physical processes that
control spatial variations of 13C/12C of CO2, bioactive trace elements and
nutrient distributions in the modern ocean will improve our ability to use
13C/12C and trace elements measurements on CaCO3 preserved in the sedimentary
record to reconstruct past changes in the ocean circulation and CO2 cycling in
the paleo ocean. The project will involve undergraduate students in the research
activities and carry out public outreach through University of Washington,
Program on Climate Change (PCC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.