* 2048296
* Collaborative Research: ABI Innovation: Enabling machine-actionable semantics for comparative analyses of trait evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 06/22/2020,08/31/2023
* Wasila Dahdul, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 73,541.00

The millions of species that inhabit the planet all have distinct biological
traits that enable them to successfully compete in or adapt to their ecological
niches. Determining accurately how these traits evolved is thus fundamental to
understanding earth's biodiversity, and to predicting how it might change in the
future in response to changes in ecosystems. Although sophisticated analytical
methods and tools exist for analyzing traits comparatively, applying their full
power to the myriad of trait observations recorded in the form of natural
language descriptions has been hindered by the difficulty of allowing these
tools to understand even the most basic facts implied by an unstructured free-
text statement made by a human observer. The technological arsenal needed to
overcome this challenge is now in principle available, thanks to a number of
recent breakthroughs in the areas of knowledge representation and machine
reasoning, but these technologies are challenging enough to deploy, orchestrate,
and use that the barriers to effectively exploit them remains far too high for
most tools. This project will create infrastructure that will dramatically
reduce this barrier, with the goal of providing comparative trait analysis tools
easy access to algorithms powered by machines reasoning with and making
inferences from the meaning of trait descriptions. Similar to how Google, IBM
Watson, and others have enabled developers of smartphone apps to incorporate,
with only a few lines of code, complex machine-learning and artificial
intelligence capabilities such as sentiment analysis, this project will
demonstrate how easy access to knowledge computing opens up new opportunities
for analysis, tools, and research. It will do this by addressing three long-
standing limitations in comparative studies of trait evolution: recombining
trait data, modeling trait evolution, and generating testable hypotheses for the
drivers of trait adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The treasure trove of
morphological data published in the literature holds one of the keys to
understanding the biodiversity of phenotypes, but exploiting the data in full
through modern computational data science analytics remains severely hampered by
the steep barriers to connecting the data with the accumulated body of
morphological knowledge in a form that machines can readily act on. This project
aims to address this barrier by creating a centralized computational
infrastructure that affords comparative analysis tools the ability to compute
with morphological knowledge through scalable online application programming
interfaces (APIs), enabling developers of comparative analysis tools, and
therefore their users, to tap into machine reasoning-powered capabilities and
data with machine-actionable semantics. By shifting all the heavy-lifting to
this infrastructure, tools can programmatically obtain answers to knowledge-
based questions that would otherwise require careful study by a human export,
such as objectively and reproducibly assessing the relatedness, independence,
and distinctness of characters and character states, with only a few lines of
code. To accomplish this, the project will adapt key products and know-how
developed by the Phenoscape project, including an integrative knowledgebase of
ontology-linked phenotype data, metrics for quantifying the semantic similarity
of phenotype descriptions, and algorithms for synthesizing morphological data
from published trait descriptions. To drive development of the computational
infrastructure and to demonstrate its enabling value, the project's objectives
focus on addressing three concrete long-standing needs for which the difficulty
of computing with domain knowledge is the major impediment: (1) computationally
synthesizing, calibrating, and assessing morphological trait matrices from
across studies; (2) objectively and reproducibly incorporating morphological
domain knowledge provided by ontologies into evolutionary models of trait
evolution; and (3) generating testable hypotheses for adaptive diversification
by incorporating semantic phenotypes into ancestral state reconstruction and
identifying domain ontology concepts linked to evolutionary changes in a branch
or clade more frequently than expected by chance. In addition, to better prepare
evolutionary biologist users and developers of comparative analysis tools for
adopting these new capabilities, a domain-tailored short-course on requisite
knowledge representation and computational inference technologies will be
developed and taught. More information on this project can be found at
http://cate.phenoscape.org/.