* 2048604
* US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE: Investigating the role of the Southern Ocean's biogeochemical divide in shaping the global distributions of radium and barium isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Matthew Charette, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2024
* USD 587,649.00

The GEOTRACES program aims to understand the distribution of trace elements and
their isotopes in the oceans. Trace elements, by their very nature, are scarce.
Despite their scarcity, trace elements are valuable tools for studying marine
processes, such as: tracking chemical inputs to the ocean from the land or
seafloor, identifying patterns of ocean mixing, and tracing ocean biology. This
project will study these processes by measuring and modeling the distributions
of two chemically similar elements — radium and barium. These measurements will
be made on samples collected as part of the U.S. GEOTRACES GP17-OCE expedition.
This expedition will collect samples from the Southern Ocean in late 2022. The
Southern Ocean experiences deep mixing, which is important for bringing
nutrients to the sea surface. Measuring radium and barium isotopes in these
samples will help study the sources, cycling, and sinks of nutrients that
support marine biology in the Southern Ocean and beyond. The findings will be
shared with regional science teachers and students through a collaboration with
the local Sea Grant Program, and the data will support the research of other
scientists involved in GEOTRACES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last 25 years have
seen a paradigm shift in our understanding of the controls on marine nutrient
cycles. Rather than arising from local vertical processes, the large-scale
distributions of many elements are now thought to arise from processes occurring
in the Southern Ocean, which are then communicated to lower latitudes through
lateral circulation. A circulation-driven mechanism is also hypothesized to
contribute to the global distributions of radium and barium isotopes, but this
remains to be tested. In this project, researchers from the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution will test this hypothesis by analyzing radium and
barium isotopes in dissolved and particulate samples collected from the Pacific
Sector of the Southern Ocean. These measurements will establish compositions for
the southern-sourced mode/intermediate and bottom waters that are important end-
members in the global overturning circulation. The team will also study the
processes that control the composition of the end-members — particle formation
and dissolution, interactions with sediments, hydrothermalism — and assess their
significance using statistical and mechanistic modeling. The results will reveal
the role of the Southern Ocean in controlling the global distributions of radium
and barium isotopes, which will help refine the application of these tracers as
tools for studying biogeochemical processes in the present and past
oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.