* 2048323
* Research and Development Support for Early Career Cartographers and Geospatial Scientists
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Patrick Kennelly, Long Island University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This project will support travel for 25 early career researchers in the field of
cartography and geographic information science (GIScience) to attend the 30th
International Cartographic Conference (ICC). This project targets the
professional development of early career scholars who are currently completing a
graduate degree, or are in the early stages of their academic, professional
career. The ICC covers all aspects of cartographic research and is an ideal
scientific venue for young scholars to present their research and to talk face-
to-face with an international community of scientists. The merit of this funding
is evident from previous young scholars who have attended the ICC, as reflected
in their scientific publications and funding awards to support research. The
broader impact of this support for students and early career scholars is
research innovation and collaboration that promotes future global leaders in
cartography and GIScience from the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation in the ICC will lead to the
development of cutting-edge research and will enable U.S. scholars to take the
lead in these endeavors. These young scholars develop new research agendas that
investigate key scientific and societal challenges, promote collaboration with
the international community, and disseminate advances in cartography and
GIScience through workshops, seminars, and peer-reviewed publications. These
accomplishments result in the development of more innovative and productive
research in cartography and GIScience that serves the Nationâ€™s interests
regarding spatial information infrastructure. The event will provide new
insights and approaches to cartographic research throughout the world, including
the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.