* 2048826
* Mixing Inferred from Coherent Mesoscale Eddies (MICME)
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Christopher Pitt Wolfe, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 169,702.00

This project will provide a new technique for estimating surface-layer mesoscale
diffusivity by tracking coherent mesoscale eddies using satellite altimetry. The
estimated diffusivities will help constrain the distribution of oceanic tracers
and can be used to validate and improve mesoscale eddy parameterizations in
numerical models. Development of this technique will also provide insights into
dynamics of ocean macro-turbulence and the mechanisms of mesoscale eddy mixing,
which could contribute to the understanding of eddy transport in a broad variety
of flow regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ocean components of modern climate
models are of insufficient resolution to resolve mesoscale eddies; thus, eddy
tracer transport is typically parameterized as a diffusive process. However,
variations in the magnitude and spatial pattern of tracer diffusivity in these
models can potentially lead to large differences in their simulated climates.
This project will quantify the impact of coherent ocean eddies on mesoscale
mixing. The central hypothesis is that the dispersion of coherent mesoscale
eddies will provide an efficient estimate of the mesoscale diffusivity in the
ocean. The first objective is to identify how inhomogeneity affects the
relationship between the movements of coherent mesoscale eddies and tracer
diffusivities in an idealized general circulation model. The project will then
estimate the magnitude and anisotropy of global mesoscale eddy diffusivity with
coherent mesoscale eddy trajectories from satellite
altimetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.