* 2048757
* Multiphase Metabolic Modeling of Biochemical Producing Bacterial Communities in Bubble Column Reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Michael Henson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 05/31/2022
* USD 3,112.00

Development of cost-effective technologies for sustainable production of
commodity fuels and chemicals remains a paramount challenge for the United
States. Bacteria-based chemical production represents an alternative to
petrochemical processes due to the microbes’ evolved ability to utilize diverse
feedstocks and synthesize a broad array of biochemicals. However, the
effectiveness of microbial systems has only been demonstrated at large scale for
a limited number of applications, such as conversion of corn-derived sugar to
the fuel additive ethanol. To succeed in the marketplace, microbial systems must
offer more flexibility with respect to the feedstock they consume as well as the
biochemicals they produce. Industrial waste gases rich in CO and CO2 represent
an abundant and cheap source of carbon for upgrading to more valuable chemicals.
Over the past decade, gas fermentation with CO2-consuming (acetogenic) bacteria
has been shown to be a promising technology for large-scale conversion of such
waste gases to ethanol. However, gas conversion to more valuable chemical
products is considerably more challenging. The goal of this project is to
develop the gas fermentation process simulation and optimization technology
necessary to advance microbial systems for large-scale production of platform
chemicals, the building blocks of a wide range of chemical products. The
proposed research will significantly advance a novel microbial paradigm for
conversion of cheap waste gases into value-added products by focusing on
critical process systems engineering challenges. The research team will recruit
women and URM students into the project through the NSF-sponsored Northeast
Alliance in Minority and Graduate Education and the Professoriate program at
UMass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale gas fermentation requires specialized
bubble column reactor technologies and sophisticated operating strategies to
maintain desirable multiphase hydrodynamics, achieve high gas-liquid mass
transfer rates, minimize the inhibitory effects of dissolved gases and
synthesized byproducts on cellular growth, achieve high cell densities, and
ensure high volumetric productivity over a range of feed conditions. While
bubble column reactors have been extensively investigated for CO fermentation,
studies have been limited to acetogen monocultures and existing process
engineering challenges have received very little attention. We have been
developing a bubble column modeling approach based on combining genome-scale
stoichiometric models of microbial metabolism with multiphase transport
equations governing column hydrodynamics. In this project, these sophisticated
models consisting of linear programs (LPs) and partial differential equations
(PDEs) will be utilized to develop dynamic process modeling and optimization
strategies for coculture bubble column reactors. Our target is the conversion of
CO-rich gas streams containing CO2 and/or H2 to the platform chemicals butyrate
and 2,3-butanediol. The proposed research has three specific aims: (1) Perform
monoculture and coculture continuous-flow stirred tank reactor experiments with
the acetogen Clostridium autoethanogenum and computationally identify promising
gut bacteria by quantifying their metabolic activity; (2) Develop dynamic models
of bubble column bioreactors for in silico investigation of coculture stability
and performance for different gut bacteria paired with C. autoethanogenum; and
(3) Perform rigorous optimization of the most promising coculture systems to
determine dynamic startup and steady-state operating policies to maximize
volumetric productivity. Collectively, the three aims will yield innovations in
bioreactor process engineering through the systematic development of
optimization approaches for LP-PDE models and in gas fermentation for renewable
chemical production through the integrated development of dynamic modeling and
optimization technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.