* 2048396
* Variation in Livelihood, Socioeconomic, and Development Outcomes among Communities with Correctional Facilities
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Kristin Doughty, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 06/30/2024
* USD 154,048.00

Communities rely on prisons and incarceration as standard criminal-justice
responses. Small cities, towns, and rural communities adapting to major economic
changes since the 1970s have increasingly leveraged the demand for correctional
facilities as sources of new employment and growth opportunities. This project
examines what sort of variation exists in the way prisons impact community
cultural, social, political, and religious life. It has been well established
that the reliance on prisons has important socioeconomic impacts for neighboring
regions, as norms and ideas circulate across traditional community borders. Less
understood is how variation in prisons intersects with individual
characteristics to affect livelihoods in prison towns and neighboring areas.
This project uses cultural anthropological fieldwork methods to investigate the
broad impacts of incarceration on contemporary society and individual
livelihoods. Investigating variation in prison factors such as their age,
security level, and inmate population, in conjunction with data on surrounding
community cultures and livelihoods, this comparative study provides insights
that inform public officials and residents at local, state, and national levels
to understand the specific ways that prisons shape culture, religion, society,
and politics outside prison walls, informing rehabilitation efforts in
marginalized communities. The project trains numerous undergraduate and graduate
assistants in scientific data collection and analysis methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a broad comparison of prison and non-prison towns,
this project investigates the specific ways by which local cultures and
institutions shape local livelihoods and understandings of prisons in prison
towns and more widely. Specifically, the investigators are conducting
collaborative ethnographic research through participant observation, interviews,
life histories, and document analysis. Their research focuses on a range of
towns housing prisons in a region with 35 prisons, jails, juvenile facilities,
and immigration detention facilities within a two-hour radius, including prisons
that are significant to the history of incarceration. The research focuses
attention on the interface between prison and everyday life, and therefore
provides empirical evidence of how, both as brick-and-mortar institutions and as
a set of ideas, prisons shape how people understand and experience diverse
notions of law and politics, including community, citizenship, justice, and
accountability. The project thereby merges theory in law and science with
anthropological ideas to generate a more nuanced, community-centered set of
insights that seek to specify how individuals, embedded within diverse
communities, create and transmit meanings relevant to carceral
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.