* 2048068
* CAREER: Scalable Remote Sensing Computational Framework for Near-real-time Crop Characterization
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Chunyuan Diao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 06/30/2026
* USD 306,212.00

The increasing proliferation of earth observation satellites, along with the
explosive growth of remote sensing data, has dramatically facilitated timely
land surface characterization worldwide. With several national and international
agricultural initiatives, near-real-time crop type characterization has become
vital for providing early warnings on food insecurity and timely crop yield
forecasting, and for global food market transparency. However, near-real-time
crop type characterization remains a challenge in agricultural remote sensing,
due to the difficulty in collecting timely crop ground reference data, the
limited generalizability of existing characterization models, and the lack of
appropriate remote sensing cyberinfrastructure. Recent advances in satellite
remote sensing and computational cyberinfrastructure open a new avenue to tackle
the challenge. The overarching goal of the project is to establish a scalable
remote sensing computational framework for near-real-time crop type
characterization and to promote computational remote sensing education. The
computational framework can transform the large-scale agricultural monitoring
paradigm to meet the timely crop characterization requirements of global
agricultural initiatives. The framework can substantially boost the ability to
respond rapidly to emerging food crises, as well as create cross-cutting impacts
in advancing a broad spectrum of remote sensing and agricultural research. The
synergistic education and outreach activities offer unique learning
opportunities about computational remote sensing to students from K-12 to the
graduate level, and will broaden the participation of underrepresented students
in computing. These activities also facilitate the open development and adoption
of the computational framework across a range of disciplines. Therefore, this
research aligns with the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and to
advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
advanced remote sensing computational framework focuses on the development of a
benchmark data repository called CropSight, a crop characterization modeling
system, and a cutting-edge remote sensing cyberinfrastructure, to catalyze near-
real-time crop and land surface characterizations. CropSight is a unique
national-scale crop ground reference data repository, and embodies a wealth of
season-long remotely sensed crop growth and environmental attributes across crop
growing locations for most crop types in the U.S. CropSight can be generalized
to continental and global scales, and will be used as a large-scale, systematic,
and consistent ground reference data repository. The crop characterization
system comprises a suite of novel deep learning-based computational models that
can fuse the imagery from a set of earth observation satellites for timely crop
monitoring, as well as identify varying crop types via innovative modeling of
complex crop-environment interactions. The system will increase modeling
generalizability for crop type characterization, and holds considerable
potential to be extrapolated over wide geographical regions. The remote sensing
cyberinfrastructure will include a highly scalable and cloud native
implementation of the CropSight and a near-real-time on-demand crop monitoring
system. With a serverless architecture, the project will build the cloud
middleware that integrates various geospatial data sources and enables data-
intensive remote sensing data analytics for timely crop characterization. The
cyberinfrastructure will empower the paradigm shift from conventional compute-
limited remote sensing analysis to planetary-scale massive imagery analysis for
timely land surface monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.