* 2048361
* I-Corps: Point-of-use microfluidics-based electrochemical platform for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substance (PFAS) detection in source water
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2021,04/30/2023
* Sagnik Basuray, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a point-of-use, microfluidics-based electrochemical platform for
per- and polyfluoroalkyl substance (PFAS) detection in source water. Human
exposure to PFAS is a public health concern. The commercialization of a point-
of-use electrochemical PFAS detection device will significantly improve water
quality by providing an on-site, cost-effective portable technology to detect
emerging contaminants. It offers a unique replaceable cartridge system of
capture molecules that integrates seamlessly with the sensor module to test for
a catalog of contaminants. The point-of-use device automates sample analysis and
displays lab-quality results in an easily understood format, eliminating the
need for bulky equipment, tedious sample preparation, and trained laboratory
technicians. This simple display solves major issues of PFAS tests currently
available in the market. Additionally, the device will be rapid, reliable, and
affordable, making it ideal for use in low-resource or underserved areas with
limited access to advanced equipment. The availability of a modular, rapid
device will allow researchers to quickly optimize and rapidly respond. As the
sensor is tailorable to a variety of potential contaminants, threats, and
diseases, it may have multiple applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a rapid, sensitive, and selective, field-
deployable, microfluidics-based, point-of-use electrochemical sensor platform.
The platform integrates non-planar interdigitated electrodes with a microfluidic
channel packed with an engineered nanoporous material called metal-organic
framework. This platform has significant benefits over the current generation of
electrochemical biosensors. Electrode nanoporosity mitigates non-specific
adsorption and overcomes diffusion limitations leading to rapid signal
acquisition. The microelectrode design results in a high signal-to-noise ratio
leading to increased sensitivity. Sensitivity and selectivity can be decoupled
using the shear force (controlled using the flow-rate) as a tuning parameter.
The device’s current detection limit of 0.5 ng/L for perfluorooctane sulfonate
(PFOS) is much lower than the US Environmental Protection Agency's health
advisory levels of 70 ng/L or 70 ppt in drinking water. Finally, the developed
sensor's modular nature allows the sensor to be decoupled from the capture
molecule interface. The sensor can be easily adapted by packing different
capture molecule-specific materials to detect many different emerging
contaminants in drinking water like GenX compounds and heavy
metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.