* 2048821
* Innovative Science, Technology Engineering, and Mathematics Work Force Development Project
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2023
* Dwayne Joseph, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Toya frank
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,467,971.00

The Morehouse College's Innovative Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics Work Force Development Project will engage minority male students in
an active, inclusive learning community to enhance their interest in science and
mathematics education and careers. The objective of the project is to shift from
passive learning to active learning within the context of real-life problem-
solving scenarios in order to promote academic success in middle school and high
school and prepare students academically to attend a college or university.
Learning modules will expose students to innovation and creativity to provide a
dynamic, engaging, and realistic environment of hands on activities to learn
concepts within physics and mathematics that have applications in real life. The
publication of findings from this project will provide an avenue for improving
minority participation in science and mathematics education and careers. This
could have significant influence on the national educational agenda by providing
empirical findings on the best approach to understand the mechanism underlying
these findings. The program will incorporate a strong entrepreneurial component
designed to develop these students into future science and mathematics business
leaders who will not only participate in the science and mathematics workforce,
but will also contribute to the expansion of the science and mathematics
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engage Black male students in a
long-term Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program that will
include a four-week Summer Program, Hands-on Field Experience, and Saturday
Academy during the academic year. The program will bridge middle school students
into high school and impact 42 students/year by admitting 14 students each from
6th, 7th and 8th grades respectively for a 3-year experience that includes
culturally sustaining: 1) academic, social integration and advising; 2)
knowledge and skill development; and 3) support and motivation which ultimately
impacts students' confidence, academic outcome and Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics career choices. The goals of the project are: 1)
Increase Science and Mathematics identity; 2) Increase the awareness and
perception of Science and Mathematics as a career; and 3) Increase broadening
participation of underrepresented populations in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics programs and careers. The research plan will focus
on the research questions: (1) What factors and key experiences effectively
promote awareness of Science and Mathematics careers, motivation to pursue a
Science or Mathematics career, and persistence in undertaking education pathways
to those careers? (2) In what roles and in what ways do parents, mentors,
caregivers, and other community members motivate students to become aware of,
interested in, and prepared for Science and Mathematics careers? The
effectiveness of proposed active-learning experiences to enhance science and
mathematics education of underrepresented minority students will be evaluated
using a mixed method approach including a focus on three inter-related
subjective constructs known to predict persistence in science: scientific self-
efficacy, science identity, and intent to persist in science. To ensure ongoing
quality of the project activities, external formative and summative evaluations
with both qualitative and quantitative analysis will be conducted to gauge
progress toward program goals. This project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports
projects that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and
processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.