* 2048125
* CAREER: Ultrafast Localized Plasmas in Dense Fluids: From Fundamental Phase-Change Phenomena and Diagnostics to Efficient Heat and Mass Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Dion Antao, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2026
* USD 533,897.00

Energy and water are the interconnected foundations of our global society.
Central to most thermo-electric energy conversion and water purification
technologies are liquid-vapor phase-change processes such as boiling,
evaporation and condensation. To improve these technologies that convert thermal
energy to electrical energy or provide clean water, phase-change phenomena must
be both efficient and controllable. The goal of this CAREER project is to
integrate research and education around the use of ultrafast (20-100
nanoseconds) and fast (0.1-10 microseconds) pulsed plasma discharges in liquids
and vapors to probe, manipulate or tune and enhance heat and mass transfer
processes during liquid-vapor phase change encountered in boiling and
desalination processes. Plasma, one of the four fundamental states of matter, is
an ionized and highly energetic state of matter with unique physical and optical
properties (consider, for example, lightning). By controlling the duration of a
plasma in a dense fluid, such as liquid water, losses via heat transfer and
electrolysis may be minimized, and the impact of the plasma on the fluid may be
controlled. In this project, the plasma will be tailored to the applications.
Ultrafast or non-thermal pulsed plasmas will be sued to measure temperature and
species or locally perturb a fluid during boiling, and fast or thermal pulsed
plasmas will be used to locally alter the state of the fluid in desalination
processes. The project will also leverage this cross-disciplinary approach to
convey the importance of efficient energy conversion and water resource
utilization to a diverse group of students, ranging from grades K-8 to the
university level, in the Bryan-College Station area of Texas. The goals of these
efforts are to engage, encourage, and support the pursuit of science-related
higher education and to train informed, current/future consumers of our energy
and water resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual focus of this project
is the interaction between extremely short timescale pulsed non-thermal and
thermal plasma discharges in dense fluids and the thermodynamic phase
transitions that result from rapid energy deposition in the fluid. These plasma-
fluid interactions will be experimentally characterized to fundamentally study
highly transient liquid-vapor-solid phase-change and the physicochemical
processes resulting from the controlled energy/timescale of pulsed plasma
discharges in fluids. The fundamental studies will be leveraged to develop novel
optical diagnostic techniques to measure species concentration and vapor phase
temperature in situ during phase-change heat transfer using a non-thermal plasma
as the probe. The findings will also be used to tune and enhance heat/mass
transfer processes during boiling heat transfer and water purification through
on-demand and localized bubble nucleation via a non-thermal plasma and salt-
water separations through a thermal plasma. The plasma-fluid interaction
framework will be leveraged as a novel vehicle to engage and introduce a diverse
group of early-age students to energy conversion and clean water technologies
and to spark their interest in science and engineering higher-education. The
knowledge resulting from these research activities will also be actively
integrated into thermal-fluid sciences curricula at the undergraduate and
graduate levels to introduce and train students in state-of-the-art energy
conversion and water purification technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.