* 2048042
* CAREER: A Holistic Framework for the Analysis of Information Dynamics in Human Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Emrah Akyol, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2026
* USD 191,604.00

Communications between humans is different from communications between machines
due to cognitive limitations, biases, and misaligned objectives, yet human
behavior is still predictable in a statistical sense. Motivated by this
observation, this project investigates problems of theoretical and practical
significance concerning human communication networks. Typical scenarios include
human-machine systems and social networks where selfish agents, some of whom are
prone to bias and limitations, control nodes to manage information flow to
maximize their own perceived payoff. While relevant models have been studied in
the field of Behavioral Economics, their extensions to realistic communication
and control settings pose many open problems. This project will adopt a holistic
approach that considers an end-to-end problem jointly from information, control,
and game-theoretic perspectives, leveraging tools and models from all three
disciplines. A notable application of the developed framework is on modeling
public opinion polarization and misinformation spread over social networks.
Another application pertains to mitigating the impact of bias in information
processing systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will address fundamental
questions regarding the emerging human communication paradigm. This growing
research field requires revisiting key results in classical communication and
control theories and poses significant challenges, requiring approaches and
tools from multiple disciplines. The research outcomes are expected to
constitute an essential step in understanding the interplay of game theory and
economics with information theory, control, communications, and compression.
Specific goals of this project are categorized into three groups. The first set
of goals investigates communication and compression problems between agents with
misaligned objectives, cognitive limitations, and biases. The second set of
goals concerns behavioral linear averaging models of opinion evolution and their
applications in polarization dynamics. The final set of goals explores truthful
data gathering strategies in behaviorally biased information
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.