* 2048981
* Collaborative Research: Funsize Physics Version 3: PAST ACHIEVEMENTS, LESSONS LEARNT AND THE WAY FORWARD
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Leigh Smith, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 03/31/2025
* USD 51,604.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique FunsizePhysics website
invites the science-curious public to experience some of the excitement of
current scientific discovery in condensed matter physics as it unfolds. The
website offers cutting edge science written by the scientists themselves and
strives to be welcoming with beautiful graphics and simple everyday language
that relates to everyday experience. Active researchers describe the wonder,
beauty and potential of ground-breaking nanoscience on this website, in the
belief that the science-curious public of any age should be able to explore and
understand current scientific advances. The collection of current research by
scientists makes their work broadly accessible. The description of fundamental
concepts by leading researchers in their fields describes everyday concepts and
techniques that are basic to research in condensed matter science. Activities
that can be performed at home relate back to both current research and to basic
concepts and techniques. This project implements strategies that will advance
the goal of explosive growth for this website, using existing resources to speed
the rate of new contributions and expand the social media presence of Funsize
Physics. The ability to draw a larger audience ensures a bigger reach and
broader impacts on a larger proportion of the population, to fulfill the goals
of science literacy, public engagement, and broadening participation in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funsizephysics.com serves as a repository for the
ground-breaking research of the condensed matter physics community, with
visually appealing, relatable, and evocative descriptions of the community's
research and activities and serves an important mission of "promoting the
progress of science". This proposal outlines strategies that will advance the
goal of explosive growth for this website, using existing resources to speed the
rate of new contributions and expand the social media presence of Funsize
Physics. The project will increase engagement with traditionally
underrepresented groups, both as contributors and as users, by collaborating
with underrepresented minority institutions and by posting Spanish language
translations of our posts. The Intellectual Merit of this proposal lies in the
analysis of best practices for communicating to a broad audience of interested
and curious non-scientists. The use of detailed statistics gathered on the
website provide an extensive data set on posts, media platforms, and point of
entry into the website. Analysis of these data sets aims to strengthen
strategies to engage the public and provide both the impetus and the confidence
for scientists to reach out. The Broader Impact of the Funsize Physics project
is dedicated to disseminating current research results and successful physics-
based activities from the condensed matter community to a broad
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.