* 2048962
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE: Mapping nitrous oxide sources and sinks through isotopic measurements in the Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Annie Bourbonnais, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2024
* USD 54,049.00

Nitrous oxide is a powerful greenhouse gas that is produced by microbial
activity in soils and the ocean. The Pacific Ocean is an important component of
oceanic nitrous oxide production and emission to the atmosphere due to its large
area and pockets of low oxygen in the eastern tropical Pacific. The largest
amounts of nitrous oxide observed in the global ocean occur in these pockets of
low oxygen. These regions appear to impact nitrous oxide distributions
throughout the Pacific Ocean, but the sources of nitrous oxide in these regions
may be quite different. This work will provide a better understanding of both
the natural distribution of nitrous oxide in the global ocean, as well as the
mechanisms and controls on its production for future emission projections. This
will be accomplished by collecting nitrous oxide isotopic measurements at
different water depths from the central Pacific, where relatively little work
has focused. Measurements of nitrous oxide isotopic composition is a powerful
analytical tool that will help to answer these important questions about this
powerful greenhouse gas. The Stanford component of this project will be carried
out primarily by a PhD student, who will be trained in a variety of laboratory
techniques, data analysis, and computer modeling. We will also use support from
this project to increase diversity in the Geosciences by providing first-time
research experiences to underrepresented minority students through Stanford’s
SURGE (Summer Undergraduate Research in Geoscience and Engineering) Program. One
of the project’s lead investigators, Bourbonnais, will also give a series of
introductory Chemical Oceanography lectures at Benedict College, a private
historically black, liberal arts college in Columbia, SC and support two
undergraduate students from Benedict College through summer internships at the
University of South Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address
three main questions related to N2O cycling in the Pacific Ocean: (1) What
features of N2O distribution in the central Pacific Ocean are driven primarily
through mixing and circulation vs. biological processes; (2) Which
biogeochemical processes control the distribution of biologically produced N2O
in the central Pacific Ocean; and (3) How does the production (amount,
mechanism, yield) of N2O relate to the availability of oxygen in situ? This
collaborative project will be carried under the GEOTRACES program, an
international effort to understand the distribution of elements in the global
ocean. With the synthesis of the GEOTRACES GP17 and GP15 sections, we will have
an opportunity to examine the distributions of N2O and its isotopes (an
indicator of production mechanisms) relative to oxygen, trace elements, and
water mass tracers. Data from this project will be made available to the public
through the Biological and Chemical Oceanography-Data Management Office
(www.bco-dmo.org). The data will also be compiled in GEOTRACES data products
that will be freely available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.