* 2048720
* Collaborative Research: Redefining the footprint of deep ocean methane seepage for benthic ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Lisa Levin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 498,985.00

This research examines the role of deep-sea organisms in determining the fate
and footprint of methane, a potent greenhouse gas, on Pacific continental
margins. The investigators are evaluating the deep ocean methanosphere defined
by the microbial communities that consume methane and the animals that directly
feed on or form symbioses with methane-consuming microbes. They are also
investigating animal communities that gain energy indirectly from methane, as
well as those that take advantage of carbonate rocks, the physical manifestation
of methane consumption in seafloor sediments. The study of methane seeps in the
deep waters of both Alaska (4400-5500 meters) and Southern California (450-1040
meters) is enabling comparisons of the methanosphere under different food-
limitation and oxygen regimes. By applying diverse chemical, isotopic,
microscopy, and genetic-based analyses to seep microbes and fauna, this study is
advancing understanding of the contribution of methane to deep-sea biodiversity
and ecosystem function, information that can inform management and conservation
actions in US waters. In addition to training for graduate and undergraduate
students at their home institutions, the investigators are collaborating with
the Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program (ANSEP). They are recruiting
Alaskan undergraduates to participate in the research, contributing to ANSEP’s
online resources that promote interaction between scientists and middle and high
school students, and participating in ANSEP’s annual residential Career
Exploration in Marine Science programs to engage middle school students in
learning about deep-sea ecosystems and the variety of career pathways available
in marine related fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Microbial production and
consumption of methane is dynamic and widespread along continental margins, and
some animals within deep-sea methane seeps rely on the oxidation and
sequestration of methane for nutrition. At the same time, understanding of
methane-dependent processes and symbioses in the deep-sea environment is still
rudimentary. The goals of this study are to 1) examine the diversity of animals
involved in methane-based symbioses and heterotrophic consumption of methane-
oxidizing microbes and how these symbioses extend the periphery of seeps,
contributing to non-seep, continental slope food webs; and 2) determine whether
carbonates on the seep periphery sustain active methanotrophic microbial
assemblages, providing a localized food source or chemical fuel for thiotrophic
symbioses, via anaerobic oxidation of methane, or free-living, sulfide-oxidizing
bacteria consumed by animals. The investigators are addressing these goals by
surveying, sampling, and characterizing microbes, water, sediments, carbonates
and animals at a deep seep site on the Aleutian Margin and a shallow site off
Southern California. Shipboard experiments and laboratory analyses are using
molecular, isotopic, geochemical, and radiotracer tools to understand transfer
of methane-sourced carbon from aerobic methanotrophs under multiple oxygen
levels, pressures, and photosynthetic food inputs. This approach offers a wide
lens by which to examine the methane seep footprint, allow reinterpretation of
past observations, and identify new scientific areas for future study. Improved
characterization of the deep continental margin methanosphere informs climate
science, biodiversity conservation, and resource
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.