* 2048692
* Neurobehavioral Mechanisms of Value-Directed Remembering
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Barbara Knowlton, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 476,617.00

Every day, we encounter an enormous stream of incoming information and are able
to selectively remember most of the key events and things that are most
important and valuable to us, while simultaneously forgetting much of the rest.
This project addresses the basis for our human ability to assign value to
information, and to make valuable information a priority in memory. The project
also addresses the role that different parts of the brain play in storing this
information. Unfortunately, the ability to prioritize is sometimes impaired in
older adults who may also have difficulties with recall and memory. The research
in this award develops new ways to help people use their memory more efficiently
by focusing on what matters most and by developing memory skills that will help
to improve memory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research tests the hypothesis
that people learn valuable information by two independent mechanisms: (1)
automatic memorization of highly salient and important stimuli, and (2) more
effective, attention-driven strategies to commit information to memory that is
believed to be important. This hypothesis will be tested by using functional
magnetic resonance brain imaging that will allow visualization of which brain
areas are active under two conditions: (1) when people are presented with
valuable information and remember it without intending to, and (2) when people
intentionally try to learn information that is valuable. To explore the role of
different brain areas, different components of the brain network for memory are
stimulated using non-invasive, transcranial direct current stimulation to
enhance the specific learning of valuable information. To study the effects of
aging on recall and remembering, the investigators compare memory in younger and
older adults to determine whether the use of strategies (compared to more
automatic learning of high value items) comes into play differently for the
elderly. This research yields a deeper understanding of the role of value in
shaping our memories and of the key brain networks involved in this process. The
translational impact of this understanding will benefit society by improving
behavioral and neurobiological methods to enhance value-directed
remembering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.