* 2048183
* CAREER: Differentiable Network-Accelerator Co-Search Towards Ubiquitous On-Device Intelligence and Green AI
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Yingyan Lin, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2026
* USD 223,783.00

There exists a vast and increasing gap between the prohibitive complexity of
powerful Deep Learning (DL) algorithms and the constrained resources available
for implementing them. It has been recently recognized that jointly designing
the DL algorithms and their hardware accelerators is very promising in closing
this vast gap. However, existing works have just begun to scratch the surface of
its full potential. This project aims to foster a systematic breakthrough in
developing DL accelerators and their achievable acceleration efficiency by
jointly searching (co-search) for DL algorithms and their accelerators. The
overarching goal of this project is to develop, implement, and experimentally
validate a new paradigm of designing deep DL accelerators for enabling: (1)
orders of magnitude faster development speed; (2) much improved hardware
efficiency, and (3) unprecedented flexibility to control the trade-off between
hardware efficiency and task performance, by holistically fostering a systematic
breakthrough in automated network-accelerator co-search. The educational plan is
to continue and expand an existing collaboration with Technology for All, an
organization that targets low-income and underserved persons, by mentoring and
advising high school students from underrepresented communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will advance knowledge and produce
scientific principles and tools for a new paradigm of designing DL accelerators
with orders-of-magnitude improvement in both development speed and hardware
efficiency. First, a generic design space description and a performance
predictor will be developed to serve as key enablers for both (1) automated
accelerator search and (2) automated network-accelerator co-search, opening up
many opportunities for innovating efficient DL accelerators. Second, based on
the aforementioned design space description and performance predictor, an
automated and Differentiable Hardware Accelerator Search (D-HAS) engine will be
designed to enable both (1) efficient navigation over the large and discrete
design space of DL accelerators and (2) the significantly faster development of
DL accelerators. Third, building upon the above D-HAS, an innovative network-
accelerator co-search framework will be established to enable simultaneous
search for optimal DL network and accelerator pairs that together will maximize
the achievable hardware efficiency. Finally, a unique resource (Rice
University's ASTRO platform) will be leveraged to benchmark and demonstrate the
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.