* 2048994
* Building a Youth-Led Learning Community through Automating Hydroponic Systems
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Maureen Kenny, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,414,733.00

In this project, youth will apply scientific and computational science concepts
and practices by learning to create and build automated systems where they can
grow their own food. These specialized growing systems will utilize hydroponics
where plants are grown without soil. Computational science is an
interdisciplinary area that combines skills and knowledge from science,
computation, computer science, engineering, and mathematics to solve problems.
The prevalence of computational science in industry and everyday lives
necessitates the development of a STEM workforce knowledgeable to solve complex
real-world problems. Researchers will train high school youth to program low-
cost micro-controllers to collect data and use that data to automate hydroponic
systems. To support the high school youth's interest in obtaining a post-
secondary degree, they will be mentored by first-generation college students
from alumni of Boston College's College Bound program and Lasell University's
Pathways to Diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study ways to
design an internal learning environment that promotes youth skills and interest
in pursuing STEM careers. Utilizing a design-based research framework and
drawing upon a mixed-method data collection approach including observations,
surveys, interviews, and youth generated artifacts, the project team will
explore how and in what ways the use of physical computing coupled with
computational science improves youth interest and knowledge to pursue STEM
careers. Survey data will be analyzed by first evaluating the measurement
quality of the latent variables using confirmatory factor analysis and then
using latent variable growth modeling to assess changes in repeated measures for
four time points. The research and evaluation work will track 500 youth and
their families over time and evaluate what aspects of the program are critical
to youth success and STEM career self-efficacy and awareness. This work offers
an approach to support youth in examining careers across fields of agriculture,
computation, and science teaching. This project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports
projects that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and
processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.