* 2048828
* Developing underserved elementary students’ systems thinking and economic literacy through investigations of local ecological-economic systems
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Kanae Tokunaga, Gulf of Maine Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 12/31/2023
* USD 477,058.00

This project will advance efforts to better understand and promote practices
that broaden access to and interest in regionally relevant science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) occupations for underrepresented youth in the state
of Maine. This project will engage students in investigations of local marine
ecosystems through the construction and revision of computational models of
those systems. Students will further explore human-nature interactions through
participation in simulated gameplay modeling the social and ecological impact of
economic decision-making within resource-driven economies. Maine’s aquaculture
industry will serve as the context for this work, providing both a setting to
study relationships within marine ecosystems through hands-on learning
experiences at active farms, but also the context within which relationships
between economic and ecological systems are identified, tested, and understood.
Key contributions of this project include (1) elucidating a model for local
school districts to connect participating youth with a regional workforce
through industry and community partnerships, (2) broadening participation in
Maine’s growing aquaculture industry, (3) providing Maine elementary students
with a foundation of systems thinking and economic reasoning, and (4) supporting
a future citizenry who understand how particular decisions based on anticipated
futures can achieve or not achieve certain environmental
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will prepare 250+ elementary
students from rural and immigrant/refugee communities within the state of Maine
to participate in Maine’s growing aquaculture industry through the design of an
integrated suite of learning experiences that will include hands-on field
experiences at active aquaculture farms, mentorship with local farmers, and
classroom-based activities which foreground the affordances of scientific
modeling as a means to represent, test, and understand relationships within the
natural world. The goal is to establish a bridge between the classroom and a
regional workforce, and to develop multiple areas of skill and knowledge –
including systems thinking and economic reasoning – that can be flexibly
deployed across a students’ entire academic career and across evolving future
work environments. This project will use a mixed methods approach to explore the
impact of the learning innovations on the experiences and understandings of both
teachers and students. Instruments used will include teacher and student
interviews, surveys measuring learner identity and interest in STEM careers, and
classroom observations of the curriculum in practice. The understandings that
result from the project’s research will elucidate a model for connecting local
youth with regionally relevant careers and contribute to the understanding of
how a learning model connecting students with a local workforce can support the
development of STEM knowledge and identities, particularly in those from
underrepresented backgrounds. This project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports
projects that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and
processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.