* 2048351
* New Cosmogenic 21Ne and 10Be Measurements in the Transantarctic Mountains
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Mark Kurz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 481,644.00

Part I: Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;Antarcticas ice sheets constitute the largest ice
mass on Earth, with approximately 53 meters of sea level equivalent stored in
the East Antarctic Ice Sheet alone. The history of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet
is therefore important to understanding and predicting changes in sea level and
Earths climate. There is conflicting evidence regarding long-term stability of
the East Antarctic Ice Sheet, over the last twenty million years. To better
understand past ice sheet changes, together with the history of the
Transantarctic Mountains, accurate time scales are needed. One of the few dating
methods applicable to the Antarctic glacial deposits, that record past ice sheet
changes, is the measurement of rare isotopes produced by cosmic rays in surface
rock samples, referred to as cosmogenic nuclides. Whenever a rock surface is
exposed/free of cover, cosmic rays produce rare isotopes such as helium-3,
beryllium-10, and neon-21within the minerals. This project will involve
measurement of all three isotopes in some of the oldest glacial deposits found
at high elevation in the Transantarctic Mountains. Because the amount of each
isotope is directly linked to the exposure time, this can be used to calculate
the age of a surface. This method requires knowledge of the rates that cosmic
radiation produces each isotope, which depends upon mineral composition, and is
presently a limitation of the method. The goal of this project is to advance and
enhance existing measurement methods and expand the range of possibilities in
surface dating with new measurements of all three isotopes in pyroxene, a
mineral that is commonly found throughout the Transantarctic Mountains. This
technological progress will allow a better application of the surface exposure
dating method, which in turn will help to reconstruct Antarctic ice sheet
history and provide valuable knowledge of former ice-extent. Understanding
Antarcticas ice-sheet history is crucial to predict its influence on past and
future sea level changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Measurements of in-situ produced cosmogenic nuclides in
Antarctic surficial rock samples provide unique time scales for glacial and
landscape evolution processes. However, due to analytical challenges, pyroxene-
bearing and widely distributed lithologies like the Ferrar dolerite of the
Transantarctic Mountains, are underutilized. This proposal aims to changes this
and to improve the cosmogenic nuclide methodologies for stable isotopes (21Ne
and 3He) and radioactive nuclides (10Be) in pyroxenes. Proposed methodological
improvements will be directly applicable to erosion rates and deposition ages of
important glacial deposits, such as the controversial Sirius Group tills, and
also to younger glacial features. Bennett Platform is the focus of this study
because it is one of the southern-most Sirius Group outcrops along the
Transantarctic Mountains, where cosmogenic ages are
sparse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary measurements demonstrate large
discrepancies between 3He and 21Ne age determinations in Sirius Group pyroxenes.
One possible explanation is composition dependence of the 21Ne production rates.
Coupled measurements of 3He, 21Ne, and 10Be in well-characterized pyroxene
mineral separates from Ferrar dolerite will be used to better constrain the
production rates, major element and trace element dependencies, the assumptions
of the method, and ultimately advance the application of cosmogenic nuclides to
mafic Antarctic lithologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of this study
are to improve measurement protocols for 10Be in pyroxene, and the determination
of the composition dependence of 21Ne production rates by measuring mineral
compositions (by electron microprobe), and nuclide concentrations in mineral
pairs from young lava flows. Further aims are the validation of the nucleogenic
contributions and the effects of helium diffusive loss through measurements of
3He/21Ne production ratios, combined with measurements of shielded samples of
the Ferrar dolerite. Combined measurements of 3He, 21Ne and 10Be in pyroxenes
have rarely been published for individual samples in Antarctica. The new and
unique measurements of this study will advance the applicability of in-situ
produced cosmogenic nuclides to both young and ancient Antarctic surfaces. The
study will be performed using existing samples: no field work is
requested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.