* 2048230
* CAREER: Ultra-compact High-speed Infrared Polarimetric Spectroscopic (IRPS) Imaging system
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Yu Yao, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 06/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Polarization, similar to intensity and wavelength, contains important
information of light. Polarimetric imaging provides quantitative measurements of
the polarization state at individual pixels while spectrometers capture the
intensity information at each specific wavelength of light. Infrared
polarimetric spectroscopic imaging technique combines the advantages of both
infrared spectroscopy and polarimetric imaging. It not only enables chemical
mapping of objects, but can also provide spatial information of molecular
structure, morphology, homogeneity and surface conditions, which are essential
for chemical analysis, biomedical imaging, cancer diagnosis, space and
industrial applications. Existing Infrared polarimetric spectroscopic imaging
system often suffer from bulky physical size, long image collection time, low
spatial resolution and limited operation wavelength range. The objective of this
CAREER project is to design and implement compact broadband high speed infrared
polarimetric spectroscopic imaging systems. The proposed systems are compact,
fast, broadband and have the potential to provide complete and accurate
measurements with high spatial and frequency resolution. They can become
powerful enabling tools for medical researchers, doctors and others. Such
systems can potentially also be adopted in industries for material analysis and
process monitoring. The education and outreach program of this CAREER project
will promote multidisciplinary research involving nanotechnology, optical
imaging, infrared spectroscopy and biomedical engineering by involving
undergraduate and high school students and woman and underrepresented groups in
research activities. A group of 5-6th grade students (preferably girls) will be
introduced to optic engineering in an online/hybrid program developed by the PI
and a course on metasurfaces and metamaterials and their applications will be
developed. The research outcomes will be disseminated to the public, industry,
medical researchers, doctors and other application experts to increase public
awareness, collect feedback and seek opportunities to move the technology toward
practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed to design and
implement ultra-compact infrared polarimetric spectroscopic imaging systems with
broadband wavelength coverage and fast imaging collection speed. The focus is to
demonstrate and integrate metasurface-based polarization state generator and
analyzer with broadband mid-infrared source and imaging sensor to improve the
system compactness, imaging collection speed and measurement accuracy. The
proposed polarization state generator and analyzer devices will be investigated
and implemented by exploiting unique properties of high speed tunable
metasurfaces. Theoretical and experimental analyses will be carried out to study
the performance of the proposed system and explore the fundamental limitations
of imaging speed, measurement accuracy, spatial and spectral resolution. The
impacts of device and system imperfections, such as fabrication deviations,
noise, alignment error, will also be investigated. Infrared polarimetric
spectroscopic imaging measurements of thin films and other samples will be
performed with prototype systems to explore the advantages and limitations of
the proposed system in practical applications for future guidance on device and
system improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.