* 2048852
* A Technological Framework for Fostering Collaboration by Linking Novice Makers with Mentors and Peers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Nathan Holbert, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2025
* USD 641,278.00

The Connected Spaces (C/S) project will research and develop a technological
toolkit and design framework designed to connect youth makers with peers,
mentors, and technical assistance. Makers tinker, design, create and invent,
often working with peers in makerspaces equipped with traditional materials and
tools as well as with 3-D printers, electronics, computer design and other
technologies. Black, Latinx, and female middle and high school learners may
struggle to find maker communities that have members "like them." The project is
designed to connect prospective and geographically distributed middle and high
school makers who are underrepresented in STEM with peers, mentors, and
technical assistance. C/S includes two primary technological components: a
digital dashboard for providing connection and knowledge awareness, and the
Mentor Projector for supporting collaboration and debugging. Youth and
undergraduate mentors will be recruited through university and community
organization partners. The project will research whether, as a result of these
connections, participating learners will improve their sense of belonging and
identity as makers and develop increased interest in pursuing STEM career
pathways. Through the research and development process, over 150 participants
will be reached directly. Project research findings and resources will be shared
online and disseminated widely through conferences and in publications reaching
researchers, designers, makerspaces, and educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C/S
will design a set of digital tools that support meaningful collaborations
between novice makers, peers, and mentors. Research will focus on understand the
relationship between the interactions supported by C/S and students’ knowledge
and interest in STEM. Through the development C/S and its rollout across
library, community, and university makerspaces in communities with diverse
populations, project research aims to answer the following overarching
questions: 1) What forms of social interactions and collaborative construction
between novice makers can be supported by connecting middle and high school
students as a distributed community of makers? 2) How do learners’ perceptions
of STEM careers and their desire to pursue them change after interacting with
peers, facilitators, and mentors through Connected Spaces? The project will
collect data using quantitative and qualitative methods and analyze this data
across multiple levels of interaction. Measuring the degree to which this occurs
will require documenting the specific kinds of interactions and collaborations
as well as evaluating the degree to which these interactions are productive and
meaningful. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.