* 2048400
* Collaborative Research: Solid-State Selenium Photo-multiplier with a High-K Dielectric Blocking Layer for High, Noise-free Avalanche Gain
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Dragica Vasileska, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 07/31/2024
* USD 66,507.00

Proposal Number: 2048390 (Lead), 2048397 &amp; 2048400&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Amirhossein Goldan (PI), Ayaskanta Sahu (Co-PI) &amp; Dragica
Vasileska (Co-PI)&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: Solid-State Selenium
Photo-multiplier with a High-K Dielectric Blocking Layer for High, Noise-free
Avalanche Gain&lt;br/&gt;Institution: State University of New York Stony Brook
(Lead), New York University &amp; Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The
search for a solid-state photodetector that mimics the behavior of a classical
vacuum photomultiplier tube has been a long-standing quest because of the highly
stochastic impact ionization process in single-crystalline semiconductors.
Amorphous selenium is the only disordered semiconductor that produces avalanche
multiplication gain while exhibiting a very low excess noise factor due to non-
ballistic and single-carrier impact ionization. The primary objective of this
project is to fabricate and characterize high sensitivity solid-state
photomultipliers by fully exploiting the deterministic avalanche multiplication
properties of amorphous selenium via a solution-processed oxide blocking layer
with a high dielectric constant. From the theoretical perspective, the noise-
free nature of the hole impact ionization process will be modeled in amorphous
selenium to enhance scientific insight into hot carrier transport in disordered
structures. The resulting technology can be utilized in a wide range of advanced
fields and applications such as medical diagnostic imaging, high energy physics,
Cherenkov imaging detectors and trackers, optical communications, and time-
domain spectroscopy. The broader impact of this project involves training of
students (graduate, undergraduate, and under-represented) in this exciting field
of research, and dissemination of tools and materials
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Amorphous selenium is
poised to revolutionize solid-state photodetection and imaging through its
noise-free single-carrier avalanche multiplication gain. Currently, to achieve
high dynamic range and linear mode operation, the detectors used for low-light
detection are almost exclusively made of vacuum photomultiplier tubes, where
only electrons exist and are multiplied deterministically by the dynodes.
However, photomultiplier tubes are bulky, have poor quantum efficiency in the
visible spectrum, and cannot be made into an imaging array. Although solid-state
crystalline semiconductors are also used as avalanche photodiodes, the amount of
enhancement in signal-to-noise ratio is often severely limited by excess noise
due to the stochastic nature of the avalanche impact ionization process. Thus,
the optimal signal-to-noise ratio typically occurs at very low gains. This work
proposes a true solid-state alternative to the vacuum photomultiplier tube using
amorphous selenium as the bulk avalanche i-layer, which is a unique disordered
photosensing material. In this amorphous selenium layer, hole carrier transport
can be shifted entirely from localized to extended states, where holes
experience deterministic and non-Markovian impact ionization avalanche. To
utilize this material property in devices and imagers, and to achieve reliable
and repeatable avalanche gain without irreversible breakdown, a non-insulating
n-type hole-blocking/electron-transporting layer is required. This work proposes
use of room-temperature, solution-processed quantum-dots, as the high-k
dielectric hole-blocking n-layer. Solution synthesis of colloidal quantum dots
allows for high-quality stoichiometric and vacancy-free crystals with potential
for room-temperature deposition in the desired reverse-biased p-i-n structure,
without inducing any crystallization of amorphous selenium, as opposed to other
incompatible high-temperature fabrication techniques. This methodology enables,
for the first time, reaching an avalanche gain of 10E6 or beyond using a solid-
state material. Computational models that explore the physics of the hole
blocking layers shall be created to understand and optimize device performance.
To this effect, an in-house kinetic Monte Carlo code used to model transport
through defects will be developed. Next, an in-house full-band Monte Carlo
simulator, that utilizes the full band structure of selenium, will be
established to examine the hole impact ionization process in bulk selenium. As a
final step, the kinetic and the full-band Monte Carlo results will be coupled
for computer-aided design simulations, to provide design guidelines for the
fabrication of more efficient selenium
photomultipliers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.