* 2048055
* CAREER: Fukaya Categories and Noncommutative Hodge Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Sheel Ganatra, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2026
* USD 159,990.00

The shape and global behavior of physical systems arising in classical
mechanics, a purview of the field of symplectic geometry, is known to be largely
determined by the appearance and quantity of certain area-minimizing surfaces
known as pseudoholomorphic curves. This research project aims to further develop
systematic rules for understanding and counting such pseudoholomorphic curves in
a large class of physical systems, by establishing formulae reducing the study
of area-minimizing surfaces of different shapes (spheres, surfaces with many
holes, etc.) to the study of a simpler type of area-minimizing surfaces (disks),
and subsequently by understanding the degree to which such latter counts (of
disks) can be assembled from a decomposition of the physical system into
elementary pieces. Applications will be studied to mirror symmetry, a far-
reaching geometric duality first discovered in string theory involving (on one
side) counts of such curves. The educational component of the project aims to
create a series of online virtual research activities in symplectic geometry and
related areas, including organization of a virtual seminar (ongoing), workshops,
and mini-courses. The PI will also train and encourage mathematics students
through traditional workshops, new course and seminar content, undergraduate and
graduate advising, and outreach to K-12 students through science
fairs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The long term research project funded by this award
is to establish and further develop systematic frameworks for computing
invariants in symplectic geometry and mirror symmetry coming from
pseudoholomorphic curve theory. In one direction, it aims to develop and apply
new structural results such as local-to-global principles to simplify the study
of Fukaya categories of closed symplectic manifolds, with applications to
homological mirror symmetry. In another, the project aims to further elucidate
the relationship between Gromov-Witten invariants and the Fukaya category, with
applications to enumerative mirror symmetry. The third and final direction is to
study and further explain the appearance and coincidences of certain integral
lattices in mirror symmetry. Many of the latter invariants can be packed into
the notion of a non-commutative Hodge structure, giving a useful framework for
the proposed work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.