* 2048152
* CAREER: Optoelectronic Local Probes Measuring Microstructural Degradation and Recovery Under Accelerated Environmental Stressors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Heayoung Yoon, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2026
* USD 379,621.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Defects in semiconductors play a critical role
in the performance and stability of modern electronics. The ability to
interrogate such defects is therefore of great importance in producing reliable,
high-performance electronics that underly the modern economy. Existing methods
often measure properties without sufficient resolution to resolve defects on the
length scales that they occur. Thus, existing methods provide limited
information about the unique local properties. This CAREER project aims to
establish an innovative measurement platform that can directly observe the
carrier dynamics of microstructured optoelectronic devices. Solar cells based on
metal halide perovskites will be the focus of this work. Such devices have
remarkable performance, but poor stability, posing a basic challenge for real-
world applications. Defect chemistry, ion migration, and microstructural
characteristics have all been considered as culprits for the poor stability, but
the underlying physical mechanisms are not fully understood. The PI’s research
team will use local optical and electrical probes under controlled environmental
conditions to study the microstructure of perovskites and elucidate reasons for
performance degradation. This fundamental understanding will help to guide the
rational design and synthesis of perovskites for robust and reliable solar
cells. The PI’s research vision is integrated with an educational plan that aims
to generate curiosity and excitement for solar energy and electron microscopy
for a broad range of students, with a particular focus on young women students
in Utah. The PI will involve undergraduate and graduate students in research and
promote the participation of students from underrepresented groups in STEM. An
interactive website with streaming videos and educational resources will assist
in disseminating the research findings to the general public in the US and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Metal halide
perovskites are ideally suited for photovoltaic applications, particularly solar
cells. This novel class of semiconductors features low-cost processing, rich
chemical and structural diversity, tunable bandgaps, and unique defect tolerance
and “self-healing” capabilities. Despite considerable efforts, the underlying
physical mechanisms for the inferior stability of perovskite solar cells are not
fully understood. Many established characterization techniques measure the
averaged properties, on a length scale far greater than that of the electronic
and structural inhomogeneity, which is on the order of the typical grain size
(&lt; 1 micrometer). To tackle this challenge, the PI uses an innovative
measurement platform that can directly observe the degradation kinetics of
perovskites at the level of individual microstructures, surfaces, and interfaces
in real-time. By integrating optoelectronic probes (e.g., low-energy electron
beam, near-field photon source) with isolated/mixed environmental stressors in a
scanning electron microscope system, the research team aims to visualize the
local defects (e.g., mobile ions) and charge carrier dynamics during
deterioration and recovery in the perovskites. In addition to the in-situ
electrical and optical imaging, the team is designing and fabricating small
nanocontacts on individual grains and grain boundaries for quantitative analysis
of ion migration and local carrier transport within the microstructures under
both individual and mixed stressors. The research team will apply 2D/3D
analytical and numerical models based on modified Poisson drift and diffusion to
analyze the quantitative datasets collected with nanocontacts. This CAREER
research will provide comprehensive knowledge on the “performance-
microstructure-stressor” relationship of single-junction perovskite solar cells
and general guidelines to mitigate the environmental
deterioration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.