* 2048452
* The influence of hierarchical and multiscale river morphology and sediment heterogeneity on hyporheic exchange processes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Corey Wallace, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 520,884.00

Solutes, heat, and other dissolved constituents interact along rivers as river
water and groundwater mix, often referred to as hyporheic exchange. Processes
within the hyporheic zone have the potential to mitigate contaminant loads in
rivers and improve water quality. These processes depend on the shape of the
channel and the distribution of sediment types and thus vary across space and
time. This project will combine innovative field measurements with advanced
computer models to provide insights into the influence of sediment heterogeneity
and river channel morphology on solute fluxes and nutrient cycling. Results of
this research will have practical applications in water resource management, and
will guide strategies to optimize both surface water and groundwater quality.
The project will use the Theis Environmental Monitoring and Modeling Site at the
University of Cincinnati. Hands-on activities at the site will stimulate student
interest, and prepare them for water-related STEM careers. A diverse group of
K-12 students will receive hands-on experience through a water program developed
in partnership with the Cincinnati Museum Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project goal is to provide insights into how multiscale sediment heterogeneity
and river channel morphology control hyporheic exchange processes, and to
improve the capacity of numerical models to predict spatial patterns of
hyporheic flux, solute residence times, and resulting biogeochemical
transformations. The project will utilize innovative field observations to
develop and validate multiscale numerical models. The project will address
several primary goals: (1) quantify the controlling influence of multiscale
fluvial forms and associated stratal architecture on hyporheic flux and solute
residence times, and determine the relevance of scales; (2) determine how
multiscale fluvial forms and stratal architecture influence biogeochemical
reaction dynamics within the hyporheic zone; and (3) identify which
heterogeneity and morphologic attributes are most essential for understanding
and accurately predicting hyporheic exchange
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.