* 2048202
* CAREER: Dual-comb photoacoustic microscopy with super-resolution wavefront shaping
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Shu-Wei Huang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2026
* USD 508,000.00

This CAREER project will establish the first dual-comb photoacoustic microscopy
(DC-PAM) for deep-tissue high-speed spectro-imaging. After decades of
development, laser microscopy now provides unrivaled spatio-temporal resolution
and optical biopsy capability, where tissue histopathology is directly examined
in vivo without surgical procedure. However, microscopic depiction of cellular
structures deep within human tissues remains a grand challenge. Laser microscopy
is therefore currently limited to superficial imaging, with compromised
capability to provide comprehensive assessment of human tissues such as cerebral
cortex, endothelium, and articular cartilage. By establishing a new microscopy
technique, this project will enable deep tissue imaging capabilities that
facilitate early disease diagnosis and management. The first biomedical
application of DC-PAM is to target the early diagnosis of osteoarthritis, a
major public health concern and economic burden costing $136.8 billion annually.
Transformative imaging capability of DC-PAM is also applicable to other
biomedical fields, including surgical guidance, cancer assessment, transcranial
neuroimaging and stimulation. Moreover, innovative photonic and acoustic
technologies developed in this project will provide the scientific community new
tools for addressing challenges in atmospheric sensing and quantum photonics.
This project is also aimed at cultivating STEM students’ passion in applying
photonic technology to address real-world biomedical problems. The goal will be
achieved through several fully integrated educational and outreach activities
with programs across the campus, the Colorado Photonics Industry Association,
and The Optical Society. The specific education objectives are to: 1) engage
high-school students with summer research experience through the CU Science
Discovery program; 2) provide interdisciplinary research opportunities to
undergraduate students through the Discovery Learning Apprenticeship program; 3)
develop a new lecture/lab course to engage first-year graduate students with
state-of-the-art bioimaging and biosensing technologies; and 4) host a community
college faculty every summer for collaborative research experiences and joint
development of educational DC-PAM modules through the NSF funded ARETe
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to combine theory and technology
of coherent light source, device microfabrication, and bioinstrumentation to
establish the first DC-PAM for deep-tissue musculoskeletal spectro-imaging.
Photoacoustic microscopy (PAM) is an emerging deep-tissue microscopy technique
that enables in vivo imaging with molecular absorption contrast and micrometer-
scale resolution at millimeter-scale depth. Dual-comb spectroscopy (DCS) is a
growing high-speed spectroscopic method that offers parallel detection of
multiple molecular absorption lines with self-calibrated precision and high
sensitivity in the absence of any mechanical moving part. DC-PAM will uniquely
combine the advantages of PAM in imaging depth and DCS in imaging speed in a way
that the techniques also compensate for each other’s drawbacks. Further, optical
illumination wavelength will be extended to the recently identified fourth near-
infrared window to fundamentally reduce the multiple light scattering and use
the molecular specificity of lipid, collagen, and water. Finally, a super-
resolution photoacoustically guided wavefront shaping (PAWS) method will be
devised without employing any nonlinear effect, pushing the DC-PAM imaging depth
well beyond optical diffusion limit, while maintaining cellular resolution.
Specific research objectives are to: 1) demonstrate a dual-comb light source
architecture and undertake a full theoretical analysis and experimental
characterization; 2) develop a dual-comb ultrasonic detect system and establish
a super-resolution PAWS method without nonlinearity; and 3) validate the DC-PAM
through imaging studies on bovine patella cartilage tissues with naturally
occurring osteoarthritis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.