* 2048231
* CAREER: Neural Mechanisms Underlying a Neuroprosthetic Skill
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Tanuj Gulati, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 02/28/2026
* USD 620,595.00

Brain-machine interfaces (BMIs) can aid recovery from brain injuries, such as
stroke. BMIs are also powerful research tools for understanding learning in
healthy and injured brains. Sleep is known to play a crucial role in learning
and memory, and recent work has shown that sleep is a vital factor in learning
to interact with a brain-machine interface. This NSF Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) project lays the foundation for a research and education
program that will discover the links between sleep-associated reorganization in
healthy and stroke-injured brains that help in learning a brain-machine
interface skill. It will also test whether stimulating certain phases of sleep
can boost learning. An improved understanding of the science behind
neuroprosthetic skill learning can lead to new insights into how stroke impacts
the brainâ€™s sleep-related learning. The results of this work could be used to
help design sleep-focused rehabilitation programs and BMI systems for those
suffering from stroke. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brain-machine interfaces offer a
powerful technology that merges the computational power of nervous systems with
that of artificial electronic systems. BMI learning lends itself to probing
sensorimotor plasticity in the brain, and recent work has revealed offline
processes in the motor cortex that lead to performance gains while learning a
neuroprosthetic motor task. Furthermore, motor cortical stimulation and
cerebellar deep nuclei stimulation have both shown promise in promoting motor
recovery post-stroke. However, these stimulations have been applied during awake
periods. Whether there is any coordinated offline sleep-related processing in
these regions and whether such offline activity can be optimized to promote
learning of a neuroprosthetic skill remains untested. The research performed
under this NSF CAREER project aims to delineate the offline processes in
cortico-cerebellar areas of rodents during the learning of a neuroprosthetic
task, to understand the neural basis of BMI learning in these regions. The
investigators will perform studies in healthy and stroke-injured rats and focus
on sleep processing that contributes to learning a BMI skill. The investigators
will take a systems-level approach to: (i) characterize the sleep stages and
neural processing in cortico-cerebellar ensembles that help in consolidating a
neuroprosthetic skill in the intact and the stroke-injured brain; and (ii) test
if augmentation of neural processes during sleep in these regions can be used to
enhance learning and recovery of a neuroprosthetic
skill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.