* 2048670
* Group Processes Underlying Deviance in Online Public Spaces
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Yongren Shi, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 262,806.00

This project examines social processes underlying deviance on digital platforms.
New forms of digital communication have fundamentally shifted the arenas and
mechanics of public conversations. Widespread adoption of voting systems and
user-managed communities on social media can create group processes that
normalize and protect societally unacceptable ideas and behaviors. This grand
shift begs for a research agenda on deviance with a new theoretical scope and
empirical relevance. Drawing on linguistic and sociological theory and
computational methods, the project will enhance our knowledge of the mechanisms
and determinants of online deviant behavior and extremism. Findings will serve
the public interest by shedding light on governance decisions that affect
behavior in online public spaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A complete conversation
database of posts and comments from a large online information-sharing and
discussion website will be used to investigate the empirical puzzle of
divergence and polarization on digital platforms. The main theoretical aim is to
understand a transition to deviant ideologies or behaviors within communities in
which non-deviance is the norm and actively enforced by members. The central
hypothesis is that deviant communities create localized conversations and
incentive structures in which cultural meanings of deviant linguistic codes and
extremist behaviors can be formed, shared, and enforced. The project will
explore the conditions and processes of the transition by connecting micro-level
conversation dynamics with macro-level ecological competition. Two specific
questions will be addressed: 1) What conversational dynamics underlie the shifts
in linguistic conventions, normative standards, and cultural interpretations of
deviance? 2) How do inter-community interaction and exclusion contribute to
group deviation and polarization? By simultaneously adjusting the lens at the
conversational level and ecological level, the project aims to offer a set of
middle-range theories explaining the emergence and solidification of deviant,
and in certain cases extremist, behavior in online public spaces. This award is
supported by the Sociology, Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace, and Human
Networks and Data Science â€“ Research Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.