* 2048200
* CAREER: Charge-Programmed Additive Microfabrication Process for Multi-Materials and Multi-Functionalities
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Xiaoyu Zheng, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 01/31/2023
* USD 524,898.00

Additive manufacturing is widely used to construct complex 3D objects made of
metal, plastic, or ceramics from a digital computer model. However, it is
presently difficult to combine different materials in a 3D-printed part to
create a complex device with multiple functionalities. This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) award supports research to address this need by conducting
fundamental research into the development of a multi-material additive
manufacturing process. The research will provide the knowledge needed to support
a new manufacturing process that can rapidly pattern different structural,
conducting, and functional materials in a compact, three-dimensional layout with
high precision and manufacturing speed. Parts made from combinations of
electronic and structural materials in a designed layout are instrumental in the
development of new materials and devices in the energy, healthcare, robotics,
electronics, aerospace, and automotive industries; thus, new manufacturing
knowledge to rapidly print these parts can catalyze new technologies and
capabilities for future products that have large economic and societal benefits.
This research crosses several disciplines, including manufacturing, materials
science, solid and fluid mechanics, and electro-kinetics. This project broadens
participation in STEM by creating interactive learning activities based on 3D
printing for Kâ€“12 and community college students and students with vision
impairments. It will also develop an interdisciplinary course based on additive
manufacturing to train the next generation of scientists, engineering leaders,
and entrepreneurs who will address global challenges through advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current additive manufacturing methods which
aim to create multifunctional materials lack the ability to quickly and easily
exchange, pattern, and deposit multiple materials (including dielectric,
structural, conducting and functional materials) in a complex 3D layout. This
constraint stems from the inherent limitations in toolpaths, sequential writing,
and deposition kinetics in existing 3D printing methods. This research will
provide the foundational and transformational knowledge needed to improve 3D
printing of multifunctional and multi-material devices by creating a continuous
dynamic material-switching interface, controlling multiple materials with
electrostatic charges, and creating a curing zone at the interface of immiscible
fluid flows. The research will address the knowledge gap related to the
mechanisms of the charge-programmed additive microfabrication process that
underpin process speed, efficiency, resolution, feature sizes, and material
properties and structures of the final parts. The research encompasses
analytical modeling, numerical simulations, and experimental studies to
elucidate the effects of fluid flow, kinetics, catalysts, and material
properties. The effort will demonstrate the fabrication of multifunctional all-
in-one devices to validate the new manufacturing approach for use in novel smart
materials, robotics and communication applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.