* 2048210
* CAREER: Resolving vertical trophic linkages between surface and deep pelagic food webs
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Anela Choy, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/28/2027
* USD 514,306.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award is advancing our
understanding of connections between surface and deep water ocean food webs,
which in turn has important implications for carbon cycling in the ocean.
Although marine ecosystems deeper than 200 m encompass Earth’s largest single
habitat, the food web relationships of deep-sea organisms are poorly resolved.
The investigator is evaluating active transport by fishes, squids, crustaceans,
and gelatinous animals that move organic matter from the more productive surface
into deeper waters through feeding and diel vertical migration. She is using a
combination of data on abundance and distribution of species with measurements
of stable isotope biomarkers to understand trophic relationships and connect
community composition and migratory behavior with food-web processes in the
southern California Current ecosystem. The investigator is from a group
traditionally underrepresented in science, and she has designed a comprehensive
educational plan to train a more diverse, inclusive generation of seagoing
biological oceanographers through hands-on field and research experiences. In
addition to providing support for graduate and undergraduate students to
participate directly in this research, the investigator is creating a novel and
cohesive undergraduate curriculum involving a seagoing laboratory course to
teach interdisciplinary field methods to conduct research on pelagic ecosystems
and a seminar course highlighting Native and Indigenous knowledge alongside more
traditional oceanographic research. The overall goal is to broaden participation
in science by combining hands-on interdisciplinary research, mentoring, and
expanding networks of minority and majority
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study centers around Vinogradov’s “ladder
of migrations” as a conceptual framework, with the goal of understanding
cumulative downward transport of organisms and organic matter to the deep ocean
by overlapping vertical migrations and feeding. It is focusing on the role of
micronekton, defined as ~2-20 cm fishes, cephalopods, crustaceans, and
gelatinous animals, as active transporters of surface-derived organic matter
across epipelagic, mesopelagic, and upper-bathypelagic layers in the southern
California Current Ecosystem. One research cruise is sampling deep pelagic
micronekton communities comprehensively and systematically and complements long-
term data collected in the surface waters of this ecosystem. Depth-discrete
MOCNESS tows are sampling organisms to assess micronekton abundance, biomass,
and extent of diel vertical migrations to understand how relative compositions
of taxa drive vertical connectivity. Analysis of bulk carbon and nitrogen stable
isotopes and compound-specific isotopic analyses of amino acids (AA-CSIA) in
organism tissue are providing quantitative assessments of deep-pelagic food webs
and measuring the relative strength and composition of trophic linkages between
surface and deeper water assemblages across distinct environmental
gradients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.