* 2048616
* Infrared Remote Sensing of Cooling Whitecap Foam to Quantify Wave Breaking and Aeration
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Andrew Jessup, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 532,360.00

Wave breaking plays a critical role in air-sea interaction processes in both the
open ocean and the surf zone. Energy and momentum transferred from the
atmosphere to the ocean through wind-wave generation is ultimately dissipated by
waves. The resulting turbulence in the upper ocean causes mixing, and in the
nearshore momentum transfer can force currents. Improved understanding of the
bubble and foam formation processes during wave breaking is needed to better
understand the impacts of wave breaking. The goal of this project is to develop
and utilize a remote sensing technique to study bubble plume formation and
associated wave breaking energy dissipation by exploiting the thermal signature
of cooling residual foam left behind by the breaking process. A large-scale,
outdoor laboratory experiment will be conducted to evaluate the technique for
field-scale breaking waves and explore the effect of wave breaking type,
breaking strength, and bubble distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators hypothesize that the time from when breaking begins to when the
residual foam starts to cool provides a measure of both the bubble plume decay
time and depth, which can be used to determine bubble characteristics and
evaluate existing plume models related to the wave energy dissipation rate.
Prior results indicate that the foam cooling time can be used to map the spatial
variability of bubble plume depth and thus provide the spatially varying bubble
plume volume. This project will use thermal infrared (IR) imagery and ancillary
measurements to investigate and further establish these relationships. The
resulting ability to remotely quantify bubble plume properties and energy
dissipation due to wave breaking will provide a new and transformative tool for
investigating and understanding the air-sea interaction processes driven by wave
breaking in the open ocean and the surf zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.