* 2048989
* Supporting Early Learning of Computational Thinking Using Mixed Reality Technology
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Thomas Brush, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 724,956.00

This project will introduce young children to computational thinking, which
involves breaking down complex problems into manageable pieces, identifying
steps and sequences to solve the problem, and generalizing a solution to solve
similar problems. Problem-solving skills are foundational and cut across
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) domains and
disciplines. The project will research and develop an innovative mixed reality
(MR) learning environment combining visual displays and a robot with
programmable movement. Children in grades K-2 will program the robot to solve
path-finding problems. Hints and obstacles in each problem scenario will be
presented on a computer tablet. The project environment will be designed mainly
for one-on-one use wirelessly and flexibly in either formal or informal
settings. Participating children and teachers will be recruited through
partnerships with schools in communities that have traditionally been
underrepresented in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project design will be
grounded in research on embodied cognition, culturally responsive teaching,
child development, and human-computer interaction, to develop experiential,
inclusive, and playful learning experiences. Three main research questions
include 1) what design elements are critical for an effective MR environment? 2)
how do children’s positive affect and understanding of sequences and symbols
evolve as they participate in the task over time? and 3) what do teachers need
to succeed as facilitators? To promote computational thinking skills, children
will be engaged in path-finding tasks that will require them to guide a robot to
arrive at a destination through the right path. The design of the learning
environment and the research will be interwoven in an iterative cycle of design,
testing, and development. in addition to traditional data collection methods,
sensors will be employed for collection of children’s own movement data. The
effectiveness of the environment on learners' understanding and positive affect
will be examined by comparing the intervention group with a control group.
Teachers will be involved from the start to incorporate their practical insights
and feedback into designs, and the project team will implement teacher workshops
in years 2 and 3 to better understand their needs. The project will disseminate
project research findings and resources widely to researchers, designers, and
educators. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.