* 2048332
* Design and Pitch Challenges in STEM: Merging Entrepreneurship and Mathematics Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Erin Krupa, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,424,834.00

To compete in a continually changing and increasingly technology-focused career
landscape, students will need a deep, conceptual, and applied understanding of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Yet, many students,
especially students from underrepresented populations, perceive STEM to be
disconnected from their interests and career aspirations. New curricular
approaches are needed, especially in mathematics, that increase studentsâ€™ career
interest and engagement in STEM, while also supporting the learning of rich and
targeted STEM content. In this project, researchers will develop and investigate
nine design challenges built within a novel curricular framework for high school
mathematics, the Design and Pitch Challenges in STEM. The Design and Pitch
Challenges framework leverages entrepreneurial pitch competitions to support
rich mathematics learning. Students work collaboratively to 1) build, test, and
refine prototype STEM products; 2) design business plans to demonstrate product
viability; and 3) pitch their products to a panel of judges. To support
implementation, researchers will also build and investigate an online
professional learning network for teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will explore whether and how entrepreneurship, through its flexible and
interest-focused approach to career applications, can be an effective means for
supporting the learning of targeted mathematics content and building career
connections in the mathematics classroom. The project will also investigate how
to best provide ongoing support to teachers through an online professional
learning network while they implement the Design and Pitch Challenges. The
research team will create nine math-focused design challenges, using an
iterative process in the first year, piloting the challenges with about 50-100
local students. In years two and three, the team will test the challenges more
broadly through partners at the non-profit JASON Learning, implementing capstone
events in which approximately 2,400 students and 30 teachers in eight diverse
school districts will engage in school-wide pitch competitions. Once completed,
the materials will be widely distributed through the JASON network and freely
available online. Across these two phases of the study, the research team will
collect and analyze qualitative and quantitative data to understand students'
and teachers' experiences with the challenges and online professional learning
network. This project aims to launch a new approach to the teaching and learning
of high school mathematics through open-ended, entrepreneurial design challenges
that allow students to explore the utility of mathematics while fostering
students' career interest and engagement in STEM. This project is funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.