* 2048602
* NSF I-Corps Hub: Northeast Region
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Tatiana Litvin-Vechnyak, Princeton University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2026
* USD 6,400,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps Hubs project is the development of a regional
network of academic, industrial and government partnerships that will grow the
nation’s capacity to transform scientific discoveries into tangible societal
benefits. The Hub, located in the heart of the Northeast region of the U.S.,
will leverage its proximity to deep technology industries including
pharmaceuticals, nanotechnology, chemistry, energy, and photonics. Serving as a
catalyst to democratize access to opportunities through educational and training
programs, the Hub will translate laboratory discoveries generated at the
Principal, Partner, and Affiliate institutions to spur formation of new
commercial ventures, leveraging the significant volume of federal research
dollars already invested in this region. Built on robust industrial and
government partnerships, the Hub has a proven track record of successful
collaborations and entrepreneurial activities including previous NSF I-Corps
Sites and industry-funded research collaborations. Through a demonstrated
commitment to inclusivity and diversity, the Hub will contribute to America’s
future prosperity and global competitiveness by training the next generation of
innovators from diverse backgrounds. Ultimately, the Hub will contribute to the
growth of America’s technology-driven economy by accelerating the translation of
academic discoveries into the marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Hub
project is based on the development of a Northeast regional network that will
educate, guide, mentor, and support innovators across all participating
institutions, and promote the translation of fundamental scientific and
engineering discoveries into tangible products through the creation of new
commercial ventures. This vision will be realized by leveraging the training
techniques from the I-Corps program to create a comprehensive ecosystem that
supports innovators through the entire ideation and technology venture
lifecycle. Training and mentoring will focus on empowering academic researchers
via I-Corps programming geared towards developing critical thinking around deep-
tech commercialization, customer discovery, and impact creation. Additional
programming, specifically geared toward faculty members, will seek to create
lasting impact by continuing to leverage academic discoveries to benefit society
through entrepreneurial ventures. This approach emphasizes the holistic
programming necessary for long-cycle, deep-tech startups and the sharing of best
practices from different institutions, enabling synergistic learnings and
motivation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.