* 2048235
* CAREER: The exceptional biomechanics of legged locomotion in the microcosmos
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Nicholas Gravish, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 03/31/2026
* USD 607,166.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project combines biological
experiments, mathematical modeling, and physical modeling to reveal the
performance capabilities and constraints of legged locomotion in small
invertebrates. When viewed on a relative scale, the fastest legged animals on
the planet are the smallest of invertebrates. Organisms such as beetles,
cockroaches, and mites are capable of running at speeds of tens to hundreds of
body lengths per second. These remarkable feats of movement at the microscopic
scale are enabled by strong limbs, robust foot attachment mechanics, and
resilient exoskeleton structures that give these organisms locomotor
capabilities vastly different from their larger counterparts. Yet smaller
organisms also have to contend with incredibly complex and unstructured
substrates that can impose step-to-step height variations equal to or larger
than their leg length. This research will develop general principles of legged
locomotion in complex environments which could contribute to the development of
new legged robots that can move more effectively in unstructured environments.
In parallel with the research aims, educational experiences for K-12,
undergraduate, and academic professionals to better integrate living systems
literacy into engineering curriculum will be developed. These activities include
funded summer research experiences for underrepresented students in
collaboration with a local Title 1 high school. At the college level, course
development, hands-on training for undergraduate and graduate students, and
interdisciplinary workshops for researchers in engineering and biology will be
implemented. The overall goal of these efforts is to enable engagement,
communication, and collaboration between engineers and biologists, facilitated
through living systems literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
uses modeling and experiment to develop new geometric and dynamic scaling
principles for legged locomotion in centimeter- and millimeter-scale organisms.
Experiments will be performed with invertebrates that vary in size by four
orders of magnitude in mass (the American cockroach, the Argentine ant, and the
mite). To develop geometric scaling principles between animal morphology and
natural substrates, a new experimental substrate-scanning platform to identify
the three-dimensional topography of natural substrates will be developed. To
study the dynamic scaling principles of force production and acceleration, new
force measurement platforms to measure the ground-reaction forces involved in
microscale legged locomotion will be developed. These experiments will be
supported by physical modeling and computational modeling to elucidate scaling
laws for dynamic and geometric phenomena in legged locomotion. The combination
of experiments, modeling, and theory will improve our understanding of the
biomechanics of microscale legged locomotion. The overall aim of this work is to
contextualize the regimes of legged locomotion across the microscopic to
macroscopic scales. The research and educational aims of this work are highly
interdisciplinary. Graduate and high-school students will receive extensive
training in biomechanics, physics, and engineering. Students will present
results of these studies at robotics, physics, and biology conferences, and the
outcomes will be published in interdisciplinary journals. Thus, the broader
impacts include more focused understanding of legged biomechanics, new
inspiration for legged robots, new understanding of natural substrates, and
training of interdisciplinary scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was
co-funded by the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program in the BIO
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, the BIO Division of Biological
Infrastructure Innovation Program, and the Biomechanics and Mechanobiology
Program in the Engineering Directorate’s Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing
Innovation Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.