* 2048417
* Exploring Key Predictors of STEM/ICT Career-related Outcomes Using the World Smarts STEM Challenge Model that Incorporates Global Engagement and Mentorship
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Adam Hartstone-Rose, International Research And Exchanges Board Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,481,784.00

There is a clear need for a diverse, skilled, and culturally competent science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) and information and communications
technology (ICT) workforce. Further, the STEM/ICT workforce increasingly
recognizes that solutions to the world’s most pressing problems must be
developed collaboratively on a global level. Through this project, IREX, in
collaboration with researchers at North Carolina State University, will engage
high school youth who are historically underrepresented in STEM/ICT fields in a
virtual afterschool program that aims to develop global competence and STEM/ICT
skills. The project will connect U.S. high school students and STEM/ICT industry
mentors in cross-cultural teams with high school students in Ghana via
community-based STEM activities. These teams will collaboratively design STEM
prototypes that address real-world local problems identified in the United
Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals. Twenty-four teams comprised of eight
U.S. youth, eight Ghanaian youth, and two mentors (one U.S. and one Ghanaian)
will be engaged in a 10-week curriculum, the World Smarts STEM Challenge, where
they interact and collaborate through virtual workforce technologies (Slack,
Zoom, and Notion). Slack will serve as the project’s hub, with each bi-national
team having their own collaboration channel where they can chat, share
documents, record videos, have voice calls, and connect over video chat. The
Challenge is designed with a gradual release of responsibility from the STEM/ICT
mentor to empower student leadership. In addition to student-driven virtual
interactions and collaboration, STEM/ICT mentors provide students with on-going
mentorship and two hours of weekly instruction; the mentors offer applied
STEM/ICT knowledge and facilitate connections to other key stakeholders in the
community. A practice-based research partnership will study the virtual cross-
cultural program model for global virtual exchange by measuring its impacts on
career-related outcomes and investigating how the virtual model can be adapted
to a range of STEM/ICT contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
iteratively refine a technology-rich afterschool model that incorporates global
engagement and mentored STEM/ICT team learning to foster U.S. adolescents’
STEM/ICT career aspirations and global competence. The project will engage
diverse mentors and African American, Hispanic, Ghanaian, and female students.
The research team will quantify the impact of the virtual program model by
answering the following research question: To what extent does participation in
a cross-cultural technology-rich team-based STEM/ICT program impact adolescents’
STEM/ICT career interests, self-efficacy, interest, outcome expectancies,
perceptions of contextual supports and global competence? The research methods
will include longitudinal surveys of participants and the hypothesized
relationships and model will be assessed via structural equation modeling.
Program evaluation will employ qualitative and participatory methods to collect
formative feedback on the relevance and inclusiveness of intervention
activities. A summative evaluation will focus on recruitment strategies and the
dissemination workshop. The project will generate new knowledge on the benefits
of virtual afterschool programming that focuses both on global collaboration and
STEM/ICT skills. Finally, the project will create three primary resources: a
World Smarts STEM Activation Kit (planning and logistics focus), a World Smarts
STEM Activity pack (curriculum and content focus), and a World Smarts ICT Guide
(technology use focus) that organizations, teachers, and mentors can use to
adapt their own STEM-focused virtual exchange learning opportunities. This
Developing and Testing Innovations project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports
projects that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and
processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in STEM
and ICT careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.