* 2048164
* CAREER: Synthesis of Novel Two-Dimensional Materials from Metastable Layered Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Michael Naguib, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 364,204.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Atomically -and few atomically- thin two-dimensional
(2D) materials are at the forefront of nanomaterials research due to their
unique properties and morphology compared to their bulk counterparts. They are
usually produced by exfoliating layered materials that are held together with
weak bonds and forces (such as van der Waal (vdW) forces). Controlling the 2D
materials composition tunes their properties and therefore their performance in
applications such as electrochemical energy storage. The goal of this project is
to exploit metastability in bulk layered ceramic materials to synthesize novel
2D materials and heterostructures with unique compositions and study their
behavior as electrode materials for electrochemical energy storage. The
importance of the new 2D materials that are produced in this project extends
beyond electrochemical energy storage to many other fields including
electronics, composites, electromagnetic interference shielding, catalysis, etc.
The research goal is integrated with an educational plan that serves a broad
spectrum of students at different levels (doctoral, undergraduate, K-12) to
strengthen the materials science and engineering education and diversify the
science and engineering workforce by educating and training the next generation
of materials scientists and engineers through hands-on learning
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Unusual properties and
phenomena can be realized by stacking 2D materials of different properties into
vdW heterostructures. In such heterostructures, understanding and engineering
the solid/solid interface is challenging. Another approach to populate this
unoccupied territory in the 2D materials properties space, is to exfoliate new
bulk layered materials to produce novel 2D materials. Most of the known
thermodynamically stable vdW bonded layered materials have been exfoliated
already into the 2D materials. Therefore, novel approaches are necessary to
synthesize new bulk layered materials that can be exfoliated. In this project,
topochemical reactions are utilized to render strongly bonded ceramic materials
into metastable exfoliateable vdW layered materials. To achieve the goal of this
project, three specific aims are pursued. The first aim is to develop
understanding for the formation reaction mechanism of metastable vdW layered
materials. The second is to understand the exfoliation mechanism of these
metastable vdW layered materials. The third focuses on heterostructures of 2D
materials with aim to unveil the role of interfaces between 2D heterostructures
in electrochemical energy storage. In addition to developing a novel family of
2D materials, the understanding and knowledge in this project can be employed to
other compositional and structural materials spaces. Part of the educational
plan in this project involves integrating a new service-learning section into
the Materials Science and Engineering undergraduate course. Undergraduate
students develop new hands-on materials activities to engage and educate middle
school students in materials science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.