* 2048435
* Oligotrophic ocean metabolism from underwater glider observations
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Sara Ferron, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 233,082.00

Aquatic photosynthesis and respiration rates regulate the flux of organic matter
into the ocean’s interior, a process that impacts Earth’s climate by
sequestering carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and that provides most of the
energy necessary to support the requirements of the organisms inhabiting the
dark depths of the ocean. Recent improvements in sensor technology enabled the
estimation of photosynthesis and respiration using accurate measurements of the
concentration of oxygen dissolved in seawater collected by autonomous underwater
vehicles and floats, even in regions of the ocean with low biological activity
such as the subtropical gyres. This project is analyzing data collected in the
North Pacific ocean during 7 years using autonomous underwater vehicles in order
to obtain an unprecedented number of estimates of metabolic rates for a region
of the ocean that is representative of one of the largest oceanic ecosystems.
This novel analysis helps constrain the amount of oxygen produced in the sea and
improves our understanding of how variations in photosynthesis and respiration
influence the flux of organic carbon towards the bottom of the ocean. Two
undergraduate students from the University of Hawaii are supported and trained
as part of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is analyzing
publicly available observations of temperature, salinity, dissolved oxygen,
chlorophyll fluorescence, and optical backscatter collected using underwater
gliders in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre between 2008 and 2014 (&gt;1,000
days of observations). The analyses are used to: (i) quantify in situ rates of
gross primary production and respiration in the mixed layer from diel oxygen
oscillations, and determine their short-term variability and seasonality; (ii)
quantify the net biological oxygen production (both in the mixed layer and in
the lower euphotic zone) and determine its seasonality; (iii) quantify annual
net community production, from which one can infer the net biological flux of
organic C into the ocean’s interior; and (iv) assess how temporal changes in
biomass are linked to changes in metabolic rates by comparing oxygen-based
metabolic rates with optical proxies of phytoplankton biomass (backscatter and
chlorophyll fluorescence). This investigation will better constrain the role of
the ocean in regulating Earth’s climate by improved understanding of the
mechanisms driving the temporal variability of metabolic rates in the
oligotrophic ocean that covers a large fraction of our
planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.