* 2048656
* Lithospheric Dripping in Central Tibet: Underappreciated Factor in Orogenic Plateau Development?
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Peter DeCelles, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 05/31/2024
* USD 443,185.00

The lower part of a continental plate is more dense than underlying
asthenosphere. If it gets thickened as a result of plate convergence, such as
within the India-Asia collision zone, it may become gravitationally unstable and
sink into the deeper mantle as a large sheet or smaller-sized drips. This
project will test the hypothesis that 45-20 million year old elliptical-shaped
basins in central Tibet formed above sinking lithospheric drips, while mantle-
derived volcanic rocks simultaneously erupted along the basin-bounding
topographic bulges. If validated, the lithospheric drip theory would provide an
appealing mechanism to explain the multitude of enigmatic elliptical basins
found in all of Earth’s major orogenic plateaus. In collaboration with the
University of Arizona’s Assistant Dean of Military and Veteran Engagement, this
project will engage three undergraduate-student veterans in geological field and
laboratory research. Military veterans are returning from active duty to college
in increasing numbers and are underrepresented in the Science-Technology-
Engineering-Math workforce. The effectiveness of the student-veteran engagement
program will be assessed, along with which factors influence veteran career
pathways, by delivering entrance and exit surveys. The project will also train
two graduate students and facilitate continued academic, scientific, and
cultural exchange among people and institutions in the United States, China, and
Tibet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the lithospheric drip theory, the
project will test the alternative hypotheses that Cenozoic shortening,
volcanism, and basin formation in central Tibet are manifestations of (i)
southward propagation of regional (&gt;600 km long) thrust systems and
lithospheric thickening followed by lithospheric root removal or (ii) long-lived
(active from Eocene through early Miocene time) ~200-250-km-long thrust belts
and associated flexural loading across central Tibet, with unrelated mantle
processes generating localized volcanic highlands. The hypotheses make distinct
predictions about the temporal-spatial distribution of shortening, age of
shortened basin fill relative to the age of adjacent volcanic rocks, basin
geometries and the nature of their margins, and sedimentary provenance and
dispersal patterns. A combination of geological mapping, basin analysis,
structural analysis and restorations, and U-Pb igneous and detrital zircon
geochronology will be employed to test these predictions. Field research will
include the principal investigators, graduate students, undergraduate student-
veterans, and collaborators from the Institute of Tibetan Plateau Research in
Beijing, and will focus on Cenozoic geology within and between three basins in
central Tibet. The spatial coverage will permit assessment of whether (i)
shortening structures are localized to the basins or extend regionally along
strike, (ii) the basins were previously integrated as long and narrow E-W or
more regional basins, or developed throughout their history as isolated
depocenters, and (iii) maximum basin subsidence and shortening were coeval with
eruption of adjacent volcanic rocks. Ultimately, insofar as Tibet is the world’s
archetypical collisional plateau, project results will have relevance for other
orogenic plateaus worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.