* 2048227
* CAREER: How streamflow ages vary downstream along river courses
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Scott Jasechko, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 01/31/2026
* USD 556,122.00

The time that rain takes to move through a landscape and enter a river regulates
contaminant transport and the movement of nutrients along streams. This time is
influenced by the contribution of younger versus older water coming from direct
rainfall events and groundwater. Estimating the proportion of these waters along
a river system and how these contributions vary through time and space is key to
predicting water quality and evaluating ecosystem health. This project evaluates
how quickly rain moves into rivers by measuring isotope compositions of rain,
groundwater and river water. Specifically, the research aims at quantifying how
the proportion of young versus old streamflow varies from headwaters to lowlands
by collecting water samples and measuring a broad range of hydrologic tracers
and common ions in these samples. Outcomes of the project will advance knowledge
on interactions between surface water and groundwater, the type of water that
contributes to streamflow and the evolution of solute concentrations as water
moves downstream in a river system. Through training of postdoctoral researchers
and graduate and undergraduate students the project will contribute to the
development of a strong workforce in geosciences. The project will also build
collaboration with the Nature Conservancy to enhance research translation for
planners and decision makers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the importance of
understanding the time water takes to flush through a watershed, there is
limited understanding of landscape-scale controls on these transit times.
Furthermore, the relative contributions of young and old water to streamflow in
steep headwaters versus flatter lowlands remains poorly understood. Quantifying
watershed transit times is vital to quantifying biogeochemical cycles and
predicting contaminant fate and transport. This project aims at determining the
contribution to streamflow from young water derived from recent rain events
versus old water derived prior to rain events to better understand how runoff
generation and streamflow sources differ among headwaters versus lowlands. It
further aims at quantifying the relationships between young versus old
streamflow and solute concentrations and their (co)evolution downstream. The
work will conduct intensive monitoring and sampling along a single stream
network in a southern and coastal California Watershed. Samples of
precipitation, river water and groundwater will be collected at high
spatiotemporal resolutions and analyzed for various tracers, including 18O/16O,
2H/1H, Na+, Cl- and 35S. Hydrograph separation techniques will be applied to
assess the contributions of young versus old water to streamflow and quantify
the relationship between these contributions and solute concentrations. The
study will fill knowledge gaps on groundwater/surface-water interactions in
disturbed lands and Mediterranean climates across topographic conditions.
Results obtained will be relevant to other Mediterranean ecoregions around the
globe. The project will support training of a Postdoctoral researcher, a PhD
student and undergraduate students and will provide opportunities to work
closely with scientists from the Nature Conservancy to translate scientific
results into better water policies and plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.