* 2048986
* EAGER: Microscale d34S Analyses in Pyrites to Distinguish Environmental and Biological Drivers of Isotopic Variability
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2023
* David Fike, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 02/28/2023
* USD 98,406.00

Much of our understanding of changes in Earth’s environments and the co-
evolution of its biosphere is based on geochemical signatures within the rock
record. This project specifically seeks to extract deeper insights into the
environmental information preserved in one of the most commonly used geochemical
proxies: the sulfur isotope composition of pyrite, a mineral commonly formed in
marine sediments. It has become apparent that the traditional analysis of the
bulk isotopic composition of pyrite in sediments is inadequate because it
averages environmental information contained within individual pyrite grains.
However, by analyzing a representative suite of individual pyrite grains in
sediments, investigators propose that they can distinguish both the direct
imprint of biological activity and the degree of subsequent overprinting
acquired after sediment deposition. This grain-specific approach can transform
the ability to distinguish between competing biological and environmental
processes that together give rise to the more commonly measured bulk
geobiological signatures. This work will include mentoring of an undergraduate
as part of the Students and Teachers as Research Scientists (STARS) Program,
which offers incoming high-school seniors an opportunity to work within a
laboratory research setting. In addition to gaining experience using cutting-
edge techniques, the students are taught to express the results and significance
of their research orally and in a research
paper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reconstructions of past environmental conditions and
biological activity are often based on stable isotope proxies whose
interpretations are inherently non-unique. In this project, researchers will
develop and refine a new approach centered upon integrating traditional bulk
(cm-scale) measurements of pyrite with micron-scale in-situ analyses in a
petrographic context using secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS). They
hypothesize that acquiring the individual sulfur isotopic values from a
representative population of pyrite grains within each sample will enable a more
rigorous reconstruction of depositional environments and, for the first time,
distinguish between biological controls (i.e., isotopic fractionation during
microbial sulfur cycling) and environmental controls (e.g., impact of
sedimentation rate, organic carbon loading, etc.) that regulate the diffusive
exchange between porewaters and the overlying water column. They seek to
characterize and minimize any offset between the bulk value and the SIMS
average, which could arise from several sources related to grain size,
insufficient sampling density of individual pyrites, intragrain isotopic
variability, or analytical artifacts in SIMS. They will demonstrate the
technical feasibility of this approach and address the theoretical soundness of
the hypothesis by analyzing samples from two contrasting systems: methane-seep
sediments from Santa Monica Basin and mid-Pleistocene sediments from the Crotone
Basin, Italy. In the former, the depositional environment has been stable and
the porewater redox gradient is known, providing a control to investigate
potentially variable biological fractionation and whether textural differences
are diagnostic of different precipitation mechanisms. Samples in the latter
location represent a wide range of depositional environments, exhibit large
variations in the bulk slfur isotope values (-44 to +24‰), and include a wide
range in petrographic textures and pyrite grain size and shape. Specific
outcomes that will make this microanalytical approach more robust include:
developing a mathematical algorithm to predict the sampling size (n) needed to
accurately represent a sample distribution given the bulk sulfur isotope value
and number of textures observed in SEM, refining their protocols to allow for
analysing smaller grains while retaining &lt; 1‰ precision, developing an
iterative ion imaging-sputtering method to incrementally analyze the 3D
structure of grains and isolate any oxidized rims that may contribute to
artifacts. The successful development and testing of this approach will provide
a framework that allows for the unique identification of biological
fractionation during microbial sulfur cycling as well as the degree to which the
associated sediments have been impacted by closed-system processes during pyrite
formation. This transformative framework could be widely applied to a host of
geobiological problems in modern environments and the sedimentary
record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.