* 2048012
* CAREER: Electro-optic Multiplexing for Massive Scaling of Neural Recording
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Maysamreza Chamanzar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 03/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Our perception of the outside world, cognition, and memory are all mediated
through our brain. It is not yet completely known how processing in the brain
gives rise to the richness of our experience. To understand how the activity of
neurons contributes to the transformation of information in the brain, it is
important to record neural signals across different areas of the brain with high
resolution. One of the widely used tools to record neuronal activity is a
needle-shaped implantable device, called neural probe that penetrates through
the tissue and has multiple recording sites to capture the activity of different
neurons in the brain. Given the complexity of brain, the number of recording
channels on the neural probe should be increased so that more signals can be
captured from the central nervous system. However, this comes at the cost of
enlarging the implantable probe, causing severe damage to the brain tissue. In
this project, the researchers aim to break this trade-off by designing a
completely new class of ultrahigh density neural probes but with a very slim
form factor to unravel the neural basis of brain function. This will be enabled
by using light to carry the recorded signals from the brain. This novel scalable
technology offers a unique approach for high-density neural recording that can
revolutionize the design of next generation brain-machine interfaces and also
new therapeutics for mitigating brain disorders such as epilepsy, Parkinson’s
and Alzheimer’s disease. This project provides a unique training opportunity for
a new generation of students in the interdisciplinary field of neural
engineering at the interface of nanotechnology, photonics, electronics and
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this integrative
research project is to design a novel ultrahigh density neural interface
platform by directly recording the electrophysiology activity in the brain and
encoding it into different optical wavelengths using the exquisite electro-optic
properties of graphene. The optical signals will then be densely multiplexed
using on-chip silicon photonic microresonators. This method will massively scale
up the number of neurons which can be simultaneously recorded and will provide
unprecedented sensitivity and signal fidelity. This multidisciplinary research
builds on a host of technological breakthroughs to leverage (i) the exceptional
electro-optic properties of graphene for encoding electrophysiology signals onto
optical signals and (ii) the narrowband resonance of high-quality photonic
microresonators for on-chip wavelength-domain multiplexing of many recorded
neural signals. The proposed method enables simultaneous electro-optic neural
recording from thousands of neurons without the need for any exogenous optical
tags.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.