* 2048413
* U.S.-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: Control Co-Design of Heterogeneous Arrays of Wave Energy Converters
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Ossama Abdelkhalik, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 393,291.00

This project promotes the progress of science and advances national prosperity,
by studying novel approaches to renewable ocean wave energy harvesting. Oceans
are colossal reservoirs of energy. Ocean wave energy converters capture wave
power and convert it to electric power. Despite its potential, this technology
is not yet mature, and the current cost of wave power is high compared to other
renewable energy sources. Wave energy converters are usually deployed in the
form of arrays of identical units. These units are controlled to increase the
efficiency of the array in harvesting power at a lower cost. However, there is a
lack of appropriate science and technology to conceptualize and design for the
deep interdependencies among the several units in the array and the ocean. To
address these challenges, this project establishes collaboration among
researchers in the United States, Republic of Ireland, and Northern Ireland that
aims to generate innovation and enable wave energy converters to produce power
at a lower cost. The project investigates the wave energy converter arrays from
a new perspective in which the array of units is designed and controlled to
change the wave field in a favorable way. The results from this research will
benefit the national economy and society. This project also links education and
research, providing international experience for undergraduate students, and
positively impacts society via an outreach program that aims to raise the
knowledge level among high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In arrays of
wave energy converters, automatic control is one of the most pressing problems
and least studied because of dynamic modelling difficulties. Another challenge
is the need for reactive power in the power take-off units; that is, take-off
units should put power into the ocean at times such that more power can be
harvested at other times. This award aims to connect efforts to address these
challenges analytically, numerically, and experimentally on a fundamental level.
A new modeling approach will be investigated that assumes the surface pressure
as input to the model, instead of the classically used wave elevation. The
impact of simultaneously optimizing both geometry and control, among different
array units, on its collective performance will be analyzed. Nonlinear
hydrodynamic forces will be leveraged for improved performance of this
heterogeneous array. To achieve these objectives, three interlaced approaches
will be developed: optimal control analysis, numerical control co-design
optimization, and experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.