* 2048092
* CAREER: Dynamics of Extreme Locomotion in Biological and Bioinspired Systems: The Effect of Elasticity on Mobility and Mechanical Power Flow
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Aimy Wissa, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 03/31/2022
* USD 614,331.00

Animals such as cheetahs are often thought of as the exemplars of fast movement,
when in fact small animals such as arthropods like trap-jaw ants, click beetles,
and mantis shrimps can achieve accelerations six orders of magnitudes more than
a cheetah. The overall goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
grant is to develop analytical and experimental tools to evaluate the dynamics
of organisms capable of extreme accelerations and applying these principles
towards designing a jumping micro-scale robot, using click beetles as a case
study organism. Click beetles belong to a group of organisms that use latches
and springs to amplify their muscle power output and circumvent the same
actuation limitations that currently cripple micro-robots. The current state of
the art in modeling such organisms lack the proper dynamic considerations that
would allow engineers to implement the appropriate principles to engineered
systems. The techniques developed in this project are beneficial to both biology
and engineering. The modeling approach creates a framework to analyze a diverse
group of organisms that use springs and latches to move extremely fast. These
bioinspired principles enable a design framework for micro-robots to direct
power towards the robotâ€™s components for locomotion and dissipate energy
elsewhere to prevent mechanical failure. The bioinspired nature of this research
makes it an excellent candidate for outreach. Outreach activities include
workshops and summer camps for first-generation undergraduates and low income
and unrepresented high and middle school students to encourage them to pursue
higher education, especially in STEM-related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will advance the fundamental knowledge of the dynamics of ultra-fast
locomotion in biology and bio-inspired systems. Most of the literature studying
these locomotion strategies in biological systems focus on observing the
kinematics only or use overly simplified models for the dynamics. The modeling
approach, namely mobility power flow provides insights into how an organism uses
and augments muscle power output and how it transmits and dissipates this power
for agile locomotion while mitigating damage. In the planned modeling approach,
click beetles or micro-robots are represented as a global structure composed of
substructures on elastic and rigid substrates to model various environments.
Expressions for power transmission and dissipation through each substructure and
at the junctions will be studied through mechanical mobility functions, which
can be derived analytically or measured directly in experiments. The models and
experimentation techniques will create a new pathway to study and design ultra-
fast and small dynamic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.