* 2048454
* Collaborative Research: Continuity and Change in Remote Work
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Phyllis Moen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 03/31/2024
* USD 77,796.00

For millions of U.S. workers, the COVID-19 pandemic has ushered in a new era of
remote work, which has shifted irreversibly the culture and technologies of
work. This project will investigate continuities, changes, and disparities in
remote work and its effects on quality of life. It will study workers’
preferences for remote work, how people adapt to working remotely, and how
remote work affects workers’ well-being. The research will illuminate
inequalities in remote work by considering varied experiences across life-course
stages, educational levels, and demographic backgrounds. This project aims to
provide decision-makers with strategic insights into the expectations and
preferences of the American workforce, and to help employers optimize remote
work arrangements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will field three new survey
waves drawing from a nationally representative survey of 3,023 Americans who
worked remotely in some form after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. The three
survey waves build on a baseline survey fielded in October 2020. Respondents are
drawn from KnowledgePanel, the largest probability-based online panel in the
U.S. The survey combines widely used scales that measure working conditions,
well-being, and worker preferences, with open-ended questions designed to
capture workers’ experiences of working from home and returning to in-person
work. The study will track population trends in remote work across various
subgroups. Researchers will also use multivariate regression models to examine
continuities, changes, and disparities in respondents’ working conditions,
quality of life, and adaptive strategies. The findings will inform sociological
theories of work, health and wellbeing, and social and economic
inequalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.