* 2048381
* Self-comprehension as a window on perception-production relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* William Styler, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 403,727.00

Imagine working for a major American company with branches around the world. You
are on a conference call with speakers from multiple countries with different
native languages. Even though everyone is speaking the same language,
misunderstandings often happen. Given that the common language is often not the
native language for all speakers, the different accents may lead to
communication issues. Many people assume that these misunderstandings happen
because speakers hear sounds quite similarly to native speakers but have
difficulty producing the speech sounds like a native speaker (i.e., their speech
is “accented”), perhaps due to ingrained motor habits and/or less experience
producing the sounds. But another possibility is that nonnative speakers produce
some sounds differently from most native speakers because they actually hear
those sounds differently. This research project seeks to understand how a
particular speaker’s perception of speech sounds (such as the vowel sound in
“ship” vs. “shape”) is related to that speaker’s production of the sounds. This
is a particularly relevant question for second-language speakers, who often have
difficulties with both perception and production. It also has ramifications for
native listeners, who often have difficulties comprehending speech from second-
language speakers or speakers of less-familiar dialects or with less-familiar
accents. Better communication among speakers of a common language who have
different language backgrounds and accents would benefit instructional contexts
with international students, medical care settings, and extension of American
businesses into new markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a novel
research paradigm to test subtle aspects of how people perceive their own
speech. Speakers for whom English is their first (or only) language and speakers
who learned English as a second language will be recorded naming a set of
pictures. Each participant will then hear their own or someone else’s recording,
which they will need to identify. For example, they may hear their own (or
someone else’s) recording of “ship” and must select the intended word from one
of four pictures: ship, shape, log, and lock. If perception is a source of
communication difficulties, speakers of English as a second language should be
relatively better at understanding their own speech (more accurate and faster at
choosing the intended word) than the speech of others because it will match
their mental representations. If they speak inaccurately because of motor
difficulty, then they will find their own speech difficult to understand,
compared with their understanding of native speech. Indeed, this pattern may
also hold for native speakers, albeit at a reduced level, providing more general
insights into the links between representations for speech perception and
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.