* 2048940
* Earth Partnership: Community-Based Research into Tribal-School-University Partnerships that Deepen Indigenized STEM Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Cheryl Bauer-Armstrong, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,323,395.00

This Developing and Testing Innovations project addresses the need for greater
Native representation in STEM education and STEM careers. This project will
foster culturally sustaining learning for Indigenous youth in STEM by enhancing
STEM education. Inter-Tribal, university and local school partners will
collaborate to co-design an Indigenous environmental science curriculum and
provide professional development and pedagogical support strategies for
implementation in middle- and high-school classrooms and community settings.
Tribal communities will guide university and school district partners in
developing and testing place-based, technology-rich field experiences, that
integrate Native language, ecological study, stewardship protocols, and seasonal
practices. Using research-grade mobile technology tools learners will collect
environmental data, test their hypotheses, and share across communities via
digital Indigenous storytelling. In addition to developing, testing and
implementing Indigenized environmental science curriculum, the team will study
the partnership’s curriculum development process, roles, and key concepts to
inform future Indigenous science curriculum co-development efforts. With co-
funding by two NSF programs, this project will advance efforts of the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports
projects that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and
processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers. Co-funding will further advance the
Directorate of Geosciences’ (GEO) efforts related to the application of
Traditional Ecological Knowledge to the geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is the strategic next step in a series of NSF-funded projects that
develop, test, refine, and study Indigenous Earth Science curriculum and
pedagogical support for educators. The efficacy of processes, tools and
activities of this project will be iteratively evaluated throughout the project.
Concurrently, the project will explore larger questions about inter-Tribal,
university and school district partnerships using community-based research
methodology. Three research questions will guide this work. (1) What are the
essential questions and key concepts that drive an effective Indigenized science
curriculum? How can a curriculum value these broader questions while honoring
and responding to the unique history, culture, language, and cosmology of each
Native Nation? (2) What is the process for developing a collaborative, place-
based curriculum in partnership with Tribal Leaders and community members,
university staff, and middle and high school teachers? (3) What interconnected
roles do tribal, university, and school partners play in enacting an Indigenized
science curriculum? In what ways do/can curriculum developers leverage these
various roles? What are the affordances and constraints of this collaboration?
Data will include observations, semi-structured interviews, and focus groups
with tribal leaders and community members, 180 youth and their family members
from the Bad River, Red Cliff, Lac du Flambeau Bands of Ojibwe and Ho-Chunk
Nation, and participating educators throughout the project. Findings will be
disseminated to local, Native Nation, and National audiences. Multigenerational
events will be used to disseminate project resources within local communities;
findings will be shared with the eleven Ojibwe Native Nations and the twelve
Native Nations in Wisconsin; and potentially relevant key concepts will be
shared with other Native Nations to consider for adaptation. The project will
widely disseminate processes for relationship-building and communications for
co-developing Indigenized science curriculum to broadly engage and promote
interest in STEM and STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.