* 2048858
* US GEOTRACES GP17-ANT: Quantifying the Properties of Atmospheric Trace Elements and Their Fluxes to the Amundsen Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Yuan Gao, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2024
* USD 298,762.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of many chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. The
National Science Foundation is supporting a U.S. GEOTRACES sampling expedition
in the Southern Ocean and Amundsen Sea. This three-year project, for the first
time, measures the atmospheric properties of trace elements and their fluxes to
the Amundsen Sea as part of the US GEOTRACES GP17-ANT section. This project will
focus on the measurement of trace elements in atmospheric aerosols, which are an
important source of trace elements to many areas of the oceans. In addition, the
investigators will determine the sources of dust and aerosol particles, and
quantify the amounts of trace metals delivered to the surface ocean, where they
provide essential nutrients to phytoplankton blooms. The new observational data
from this project can be used to support both atmospheric and ocean models for
coupled air-sea interaction simulations and projections, promoting
interdisciplinary sciences. This project will make significant broader impacts
by involving female and minority students in research at both the doctoral and
undergraduate levels. The lead investigator will incorporate the results from
this project into her teachings to promote classroom learning with examples of
real-world research, and she will actively participate in the GEOTRACES outreach
program to contribute to its education activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of this project is to quantify the key properties of atmospheric
trace elements and their fluxes to the Amundsen Sea. The ultimate goal is to
advance the knowledge of the atmosphere-ocean-ice interactions for improved
understanding of the Earth climate system. The working objectives of this
project are: (1) To determine aerosol composition and mineralogy and to explore
the sources of dust and target trace elements, including Fe, Al, Ca, Cd, Co, Cu,
K, Mn, Na Ni, P, Pb, Ti, V, and Zn; (2) To measure particle-size distributions
of aerosol trace elements, aerosol Fe fractional solubility and speciation,
organic/inorganic ligands including oxalate and ammonium, and marine biogenic
tracers including methanesulfonate and non-sea-salt sulfate and to understand
better trace element solubility and processes affecting them; (3) To quantify
total atmospheric fluxes of trace elements by both dry deposition and wet
deposition processes, contributing to understanding trace element distributions
in seawater. Aerosol samples collected on the GP17-ANT cruise will be analyzed
for concentrations, composition and mineralogy by utilizing inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometry (ICPMS), synchrotron-based X-ray absorption
spectroscopy (XAS) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Air mass back
trajectory-based cluster analyses will be performed for different air mass
provinces impacting the study region. Iron solubility and speciation in aerosol
samples will be measured using UV/VIS spectrophotometry and synchrotron-based
XAS. Ion chromatography will be utilized to determine water-soluble organic and
inorganic species of marine origins. Trace elements in size-segregated aerosols
and precipitation will be measured. Atmospheric deposition models will be used
to calculate the deposition fluxes to the Amundsen
Sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.