* 2048507
* REU Site: Culturally Responsive Research in Developmental Science
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Margaret Owen, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2024
* USD 327,848.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits in addition to integrating research and education. Currently, the
majority of developmental research is conducted by and focused on monolingual,
white individuals from middle-to-high income households. To address the critical
need to expand developmental theories to incorporate underserved and
underrepresented populations this project will train students from these
understudied populations to become researchers who can provide rich and needed
perspectives on developmental science. Through participation in the University
of Texas at Dallas’s year-long REU, 30 students (10 per year) from historically
underrepresented groups will learn the necessary tools to conduct high-quality
research with real-world applications with families that are challenging-to-
study, vulnerable, and underrepresented in the developmental science literature.
Thus, the project will advance the field of developmental science by increasing
diversity in both the researchers and the children who are
researched.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be drawn primarily from the
Dallas/Ft Worth area, which compared to other similarly large cities in the
U.S., has few research intensive 4-year institutions of higher learning, and few
opportunities for students to gain high quality, first-hand research
experiences. At least 50% of the students will be enrolled at one of Dallas
College system’s 7 community campuses, and the remaining students will be
enrolled at The University of Texas at Dallas . A large number of historically
underrepresented college students attend the local community colleges and UTD.
In the fall, students will acquire skills needed for culturally-responsive
research by taking an active role in the Play With Me program. Play With Me, a
unique and important aspect of this REU’s research experience, is a free 12-week
parent/child (ages 0-3 years) community-based outreach program created by UTD
developmental scientists and specialists based on playful-learning research and
directed by developmental specialists of UTD’s Center for Children and Families.
With mentorship from UTD faculty, students will formulate new theoretically-
driven research questions within ongoing data sets influenced by their Play With
Me experience. In the spring, a faculty mentor team will guide students as they
collect and analyze data from families recruited from Play With Me. In the
summer, students will learn to disseminate findings to academic (journals,
conferences) and non-academic (newsletters, community outreach) audiences.
Fellows will also participate in brownbag discussions on professional
development, including how to identify and apply to graduate schools, prepare
for the GRE, and identify academic career options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.