* 2048043
* CAREER: Dynamics of Fragile Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Angela Pitenis, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2026
* USD 593,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will develop bio-inspired
models and experimental approaches for soft materials used in biomedical
devices, such as silicone implants, that in operation require the outer surface
of the device to slide against living cells and tissues. Some current designs
may induce inflammation by unintentionally increasing friction, with some
aggressively-textured soft implants linked to cases of chronic inflammation and
even cancers. This project investigates the dynamics of soft material interfaces
guided by the hypothesis that sliding surfaces in nature reduce friction through
a delicate balance of fracturing and rapidly re-healing crosslinks between
macromolecules in aqueous solutions. This work will develop biomedically-
relevant material systems of different polymer network density and structure,
with the long-term goal of creating low-friction interfaces for soft biomedical
devices. This project will train undergraduate and graduate students in
interdisciplinary research across biology, engineering, mechanics, and physics.
These research efforts will be strengthened by engaging students from
underrepresented groups through high school outreach activities, including
hands-on demonstrations and workshops for local science teachers, undergraduate
research opportunities in partnership with minority-serving institutions, and
diversity-focused scientific seminars for graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research efforts address a gap in knowledge
and understanding of lubricity in soft aqueous gels and biotribology using
engineering tools with molecular specificity, materials characterization
techniques, and custom-built instrumentation. The specific research objectives
are: (1) develop new models of aqueous gel networks that fracture whilst
retaining low shear, (2) synthesize new materials and surface architectures
based on hydrogels and weak, self-healing crosslinks to test these hypotheses
with in situ experiments, and (3) develop reliable, responsive, and resilient
biotribological interfaces for multifunctional purposes and (4) design
responsible biodegradable materials by exploring degradation properties and
behavior for sustainability purposes. Establishing and demonstrating the utility
of fragile interfaces to provide robust protection and lubricity will extend the
study of the mechano-dynamics of fragile interfaces into new fields from biology
to chemistry, and medicine using solid mechanics
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.