* 2048681
* NSF/BSF: New Approaches to Understanding and Enhancing Human Learning and Memory Consolidation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Joel Voss, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 742,283.00

This project addresses the human ability to acquire new knowledge and remember
it later, an ability that all-to-often falters. What allows some memories to be
maintained in an enduring and accurate way so they can be retrieved when needed?
Scientists have discovered that a process of memory consolidation transforms
memory storage in the brain. As each new memory is acquired, it is integrated
with existing information in order to be stored effectively. When consolidation
works well, we are each endowed with a large set of memories that we can rely on
daily. To understand it better, we need to observe the brain events that
underlie consolidation. This project uses several state-of-the-art methods to
manipulate brain activity in ways that can clarify the steps of memory
consolidation. New knowledge about the brain mechanisms that underlie learning
and stable memory in the human brain is vital for many applications. Efficient
knowledge acquisition is at the core of education, and also the driving force
for innovation. Many people, especially the elderly, experience difficulties in
learning and remembering that require new approaches to enhance their cognitive
skills. A comprehensive understanding of learning is needed to optimize it in
all these circumstances and allow for practical interventions to improve
learning and memory. This project advances an understanding of how people store
and remember valuable information, particularly with respect to offline
processing accomplished by the brain—both when we are awake and when we are
asleep—over the time period between initial exposure to new information and
later recall. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is spatial memory,
a type of memory of great ecological importance and a prime example of memory
storage, involving two key brain regions, the cerebral cortex and the
hippocampus. The experiments reinforce the link between consolidation and a
specific measure of brain activity known as theta, a slow brain oscillation
apparent and measurable in an electroencephalogram (EEG)– a measure of dynamic
brain activity. Parallel neuroimaging studies measuring the spatial landscape of
brain activity also link memory consolidation with brain connectivity.
Participants learn locations of objects displayed on a screen, and later must
recall these locations. Prior to memory testing, different experimental
interventions that affect memory consolidation are applied: electromagnetic
stimulation, sensory entrainment, neurofeedback training, and partial cues to
reinstate learned information. Subsequent recall of the critical spatial
information is linked to brain measures altered through these interventions,
particularly EEG oscillations in the theta band, hippocampal activation, and
hippocampal-cortical connectivity. This project deepens our understanding of
memory consolidation by linking memory to neural observations of brain rhythms,
activations, and connectivity. The results will animate new perspectives on how
new memories are preserved in the human brain and may lead to new techniques to
enhance human learning and memory in the young and old. This project engages
joint international activities among neuroscientists through the NSF-BSF
(National Science Foundation – Israel Binational Science Foundation)
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.