* 2048669
* Collaborative Research: Fire, ecosystem, and landscape dynamics in Afroalpine environments in a warmer world
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* James Russell, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 519,226.00

Mountain regions are sensitive to climate change, where recent warming has
contributed to changes in species, declines in water resources, and increasingly
intense fires. The interactions between climate change, wildfire, and water
cycles are well-studied in many mountain regions, such as the western United
States, where forest fires are very frequent. Recent events suggest that
wildfire may also be an emerging threat to tropical mountain environments, where
natural fires are thought to be rare. The effects of wildfires on forest
composition and water resources in tropical mountain regions are poorly known.
The goal of this project is to investigate the causes of changes in fire,
vegetation, and flooding in tropical mountains, specifically in the Rwenzori
Mountains National Park, Uganda. This research will improve our ability to
predict the responses of tropical mountain systems to future climate change and
establish a basis for management strategies related to fire in these ecosystems.
The project will provide opportunities for many graduate and undergraduate
students to conduct research, will deliver a short course on climate and
vegetation modeling, and will develop new classroom modules to be used in the
Providence Public School System.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will
investigate the interactions between climate, fire regimes, vegetation
composition, and flooding through analysis of lake sediment cores recovered from
alpine environments in the Rwenzori Mountains, a site famous for its
biodiversity. The project will test the hypothesis that changes in fire regimes
in tropical mountain environments are influenced by temperature change. The role
of changing fire regimes in influencing vegetation assemblages and catalyzing
flood events will also be examined. The project will generate new
paleoecological and paleoclimatological records based on several aspects of the
sediment cores: fossil charcoal and pollen composition, organic geochemical
data, and sediment composition. These analyses will focus on time intervals such
as the mid-Holocene, when temperatures were warmer than the present day, to
investigate how warm temperatures influenced ecosystem dynamics. The results are
expected to contribute to the understanding of ecosystem dynamics and resilience
in poorly-studied Afroalpine environments. This project is co-funded by the
Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.