* 2048894
* A novel time-structured framework to account for the cryptic effects of temperature fluctuations on population dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Brian Helmuth, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2024
* USD 979,901.00

Although it is well established that temperature extremes associated with
heatwaves or cold snaps can have strong and immediate impacts on biological
populations, much less is known about the longer-term effects of these short-
term events. The investigators are filling this critical knowledge gap by
conducting a series of laboratory experiments and developing a new set of
mathematical models to identify how temperature fluctuations influence
population growth and size. Additionally, the mathematical models are being
extended to generate a baseline understanding of how changes in temperature
anticipated under global climate change will likely affect populations around
the globe over the course of the 21st century. This project addresses important
societal needs by cross-training graduate students in biology, statistics,
mathematical modeling, and computer programming. The results of this research
are being integrated into undergraduate courses in biostatistics, mathematical
modeling, and environmental science in order to demonstrate the importance of
quantitative and interdisciplinary STEM training for addressing important
questions in biology. Finally, multiple interactive web modules are being
created to disseminate the results of this research beyond academic circles,
including Northeastern Universityâ€™s K-12 outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current empirical and theoretical approaches do
not account for the cryptic population structure that emerges when organisms are
exposed to variable temperature regimes. The investigators are addressing this
limitation by using marine algae as a model system to (i) establish an empirical
protocol for properly evaluating the effects of temperature variability on
population growth, (ii) develop a novel mathematical modeling framework for
accurately predicting the dynamics of populations exposed to temperature
fluctuations, and (iii) determine species extinction risk under future ocean
temperatures. Overall, this project is expected to yield a new set of empirical
and theoretical tools to better forecast the biological effects of environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.