* 2048263
* CAREER: Chip-Scale, Field-Resolved Detection of Mid-Infrared Light
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* William Putnam, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 03/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

The mid-infrared portion of the electromagnetic spectrum is of fundamental
interest to biological, chemical, and physical science. The mid-infrared (MIR)
consists of electromagnetic waves with wavelengths from around 3 to 20
millionths of a meter. In this spectral region, virtually all molecules exhibit
absorption resonances, and these resonances constitute molecular fingerprints.
Accordingly, for around the past hundred years, MIR light has been used for
sensing, with recent applications ranging from environmental monitoring to
protein characterization. In the past few decades, there have been revolutionary
advances in ultrafast MIR laser sources, that is, laser systems producing brief
pulses of MIR light. Such ultrafast MIR sources offer new, exciting
opportunities for enhancing MIR sensing technologies. The first goal of this
project is to develop novel detectors specifically tailored for ultrafast MIR
laser sources. These detectors will enable the measurement of light fields of
MIR laser pulses in the time-domain. Such field-resolving detectors will enable
MIR sensing with improved resolution, as well as provide novel capabilities to
study the dynamic behavior of MIR absorption resonances. The second goal of this
project is to promote engineering education engineering student retention.
Towards this end, online educational content will be developed for graduate
students working with ultrafast laser technology; novel educational strategies
emphasizing the “we do” component of the gradual release of responsibility
pedagogical model will be explored at the undergraduate level; and outreach
events, promoting engineering and photonics, will be held for local students at
the K-12 level. At all levels, the underlying themes of the research program
will be integrated into the educational efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mid-
infrared (MIR) spectroscopy is ubiquitous in sensing applications across
virtually all scientific disciplines. MIR spectroscopic tools primarily rely on
frequency-domain techniques: in a MIR spectroscopic system, infrared light
illuminates a sample, and the frequency spectrum of the transmitted light is
measured. Absorption resonances are then extracted from the measured spectrum,
and information about the sample is thereby obtained. In contrast to
conventional MIR spectroscopy, at longer wavelengths, ultrafast laser systems
have enabled time-domain spectroscopic techniques. For instance, in terahertz
time-domain spectroscopy, terahertz waves irradiate a sample, and ultrafast
laser pulses are used to measure the time-dependent electric field of the
transmitted terahertz radiation. Such field-resolved measurements can provide
unique, dynamical information as well as dramatically improved resolution
compared to frequency-domain techniques. The goal of this project is to extend
such time-domain, field-resolved detection to chip-scale platforms operating in
the MIR. Specifically, in this project, chip-scale, optical detectors capable of
resolving the instantaneous electric field of incident ultrafast MIR laser
pulses will be developed. These chip-scale detectors will leverage sub-optical-
cycle, strong-field photoemission currents from nanoscale metallic antennas to
sample MIR laser pulses in the time-domain with exceptional resolution. These
field-resolving detectors will provide revolutionary capabilities for future MIR
spectroscopic systems and impact a broad range of scientific, medical, and
industrial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.