* 2048144
* CAREER: FET: A Top-down Compilation Infrastructure for Optimization and Debugging in the Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum (NISQ) era
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2025
* Yufei Ding, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 11/30/2025
* USD 325,999.00

This project sets a comprehensive research agenda focusing on the construction
of a top-down compilation infrastructure for quantum computing. It will develop
theoretical and practical methodologies for enabling high-level algorithmic
optimization, low-level pulse optimizations, as well as whole-system debugging
and analysis. The compilation stack would facilitate automatic resource-
efficient quantum algorithm designs and high-fidelity program executions on
near-term quantum devices. It will benefit major quantum computing applications
such as quantum chemistry and combinatorial optimization and contribute to the
leadership of the United States in quantum information science and technology.
The research findings will be widely disseminated through open-source software
packages, publications in premier conferences and journals, tutorials at
teaching workshops, as well as specialized K-12 programs for exposing the young
generation to the frontiers of quantum information
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate methods
from the classical computing fields such as code generation and optimization,
programming language design and implementation, and compilation techniques, to
address the unique research challenges in quantum programming, optimization, and
debugging. Specific targets include 1) A language and an autotuning compiler to
automate resource-efficient algorithm development in the quantum computing
domain; 2) A pulse-level compilation infrastructure to exploit the abundant
freedom in pulse variation and scheduling towards more effective optimization
and error mitigation; 3) Advanced testing and debugging support via systematic
projection-based runtime assertion and invariant generation for quantum
programming. The success of this research agenda will enable a more complete and
efficient software stack for improving the feasibility of supporting end-to-end
quantum applications on near-term devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.