* 2048018
* CAREER: Advancing STEM Persistence among Graduate Women of Color through an Examination of Institutional Contributors and Deterrents to Mental Health
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Kerrie Wilkins-Yel, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 06/30/2026
* USD 565,045.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of early-career faculty
who have the potential to serve as academic role models in research and
education, and to lead advances in the mission of their department or
organization. This project aims to serve the national interest by addressing the
inequitable representation of graduate Women of Color (WoC) (i.e., Black/African
American, Latina, Indigenous, and Asian American women) in STEM. This continued
underrepresentation of WoC has been attributed, in part, to negative encounters
in STEM characterized by alienating and marginalizing program environments. Yet,
existing efforts designed to broaden participation in STEM have largely focused
on academic and professional challenges that influence STEM persistence, with
little attention to the psychological toll of persisting in STEM environments
rife with systemic oppression (e.g., gendered racism). Research has linked
racism-related stress, perceived discrimination, microaggressions, minority
status stress, and isolation to many negative psychological outcomes such as
depression, anxiety, and stress. Furthermore, increased psychological distress
has been shown to negatively influence academic and research productivity.
Evidently, mental health and distress are crucial, yet unexamined, factors that
can influence STEM persistence. To address this knowledge gap and improve the
representation of graduate WoC in STEM, this project seeks to understand the
psychological toll that results from navigating negative STEM environments. It
will also identify specific institutional factors that either mitigate or
perpetuate the marginalizing encounters that affect graduate WoC’s mental
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project employs a two-phase, multi-
methodological, longitudinal, and experimental approach grounded in well-
established theories from social and counseling psychology. Phase I will obtain
rich insights about the contributors and deterrents to STEM graduate WoC’s
mental health using three complementary studies: a sequential mixed-
methodological nationwide examination of the state of mental health among
graduate WoC in STEM (Study 1); and a series of semi-structured critical
incident interviews with both current graduate WoC in STEM as well as those who
have prematurely discontinued their STEM doctoral pursuits to understand
supportive (Study 2) and unsupportive (Study 3) faculty behaviors that affect
the respondents’ mental health. Phase II will build on the insights gained in
Phase I to design and evaluate an innovative and transformative culturally
responsive wellness intervention for graduate WoC (Study 4). The output of this
research will serve the following educational goals: (1) cultivate awareness and
change among STEM faculty to combat racist and marginalizing encounters; (2)
establish a scalable and sustainable restorative wellness program designed to
promote graduate WoC’s STEM persistence in a manner that is wholesome,
enriching, and centered on thriving; and (3) leverage cross-disciplinary
partnerships with counseling professionals to design an innovative and
culturally responsive graduate curriculum. This effort will increase our
understanding of the ways in which marginalizing STEM encounters negatively
affect graduate WoC’s mental health and, in turn, their persistence to degree
completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.