* 2048985
* Collaborative Research: Engaging Adolescents through Collaboration on Simulated STEM Career Scenarios and Mathematics Activities
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Daniel Heck, Horizon Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Noll
* 06/30/2024
* USD 737,186.00

Employment in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields
and attainment in STEM education need to reflect better the diversity of US
population demographics. This disparity is especially concerning given projected
shortfalls in skilled workers for jobs in STEM fields. This project will lead to
the creation of virtual simulations of peer collaboration in STEM fields,
designed for use by adolescents. Practice with these simulations will help
adolescents build collaborative skills and career interest in STEM fields,
especially those that use mathematics and require strong teamwork. By creating
an innovative simulation to support mathematics collaborative skills development
and STEM career identities, and grounding its use in informal learning
environments that capitalize on youths’ cultural assets, this project will
increase the likelihood that students historically underrepresented in STEM
careers will persist in the STEM career pipeline. The project’s work will result
in three simulation modules, program materials supporting their use in informal
learning environments, and initial research evidence about their implementation
and impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The simulations will feature authentic
performance settings of STEM career scenarios with opportunities for repeated
application of mathematical knowledge and collaborative skills. Simulation
players will interact with virtual partners, receiving feedback to improve
performance and emphasize the value of mathematics and collaboration in STEM
careers. Adapted from an artificial intelligence platform used in healthcare
training, the simulations’ virtual partners and their dialog will be based on
recordings of mathematics collaboration in secondary school classrooms.
Simulation content and supports will be informed by staff from strategic
partners, Morehead Planetarium and Science Center (MPSC) and LatinxEd, that
provide STEM-focused programming to African American, Latinx, and future first-
generation college students. Six African American and Latinx STEM Career
Partners will ground the simulations in authentic mathematics and collaborative
industry practices that appeal to student users. A total of 96 African American
and Latinx adolescents, and adolescents who are potential first-generation
college students will serve as play-testers. An additional 80 participants
enrolled in the strategic partners’ programs will engage in field-testing:
playing each of three simulations, generating user data, and completing a
transfer task of collaborative skills in mathematics and self-report surveys
about their STEM career interests and aspirations. Field-test data will be
analyzed using multi-level models for nested data and repeated measures.
Qualitative data collection will include observations of play and field testing,
and interviews with program staff and industry consultants. Thematic analysis
will inform curricular supports and improve implementation utility and
feasibility. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.