* 2048133
* CAREER: Analyzing the Impact of Collaborative Processes on the Performance of Large-Scale Polycentric Environmental Governance Systems
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Elizabeth Koebele, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2026
* USD 209,811.00

The performance of complex environmental governance can improve through enhanced
collaboration. The research team analyzes the system-wide impacts of
collaborative water governance efforts that have been implemented over the past
2 decades in an increasingly-threatened watershed: the Colorado River Basin
(CRB). Located in the western United States and northern Mexico, the CRB faces
sustainability challenges due to both historical water over-allocation and
continued aridification from climate change. Demands for water now regularly
exceed available supplies, creating negative impacts for the people, economies,
and environments that depend on the Colorado River. Although policy making in
the CRB has become more participatory in recent decades, addressing the roots of
this evolving sustainability crisis requires a deeper transformation in the way
the basin’s diverse stakeholders work together to govern the Colorado River.
Through an assessment and comparison of past and on-going collaborative water
governance processes, this research provides timely lessons for improving
governance of the CRB that are also transferrable to other complex socio-
environmental systems facing resource scarcity challenges. Additionally, this
project engages a diverse team of students in interdisciplinary policy research
and supports outreach and education activities for decision makers, water
management professionals, and the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the development of a synergistic
research and education program, this CAREER project addresses a knowledge gap at
the nexus of two core concepts in environmental governance: polycentricity and
collaboration. Polycentric arrangements, characterized by multiple semi-
autonomous centers of decision-making authority, are assumed to be well-suited
to govern complex socio-environmental systems, in part because they support
diverse, adaptable institutions that can be matched to local conditions. A
polycentric system’s ability to perform, or achieve desired goals at the system
level, however, is often challenged by insufficient coordination among the
numerous actors and entities involved at different scales of governance.
Collaborative governance processes, which have become nearly ubiquitous in the
environmental policy domain over the last 30 years, may help to solve some of
these coordination problems by engaging diverse policy actors in consensus-
oriented deliberation and decision making around shared problems. Though
intuitive, there is a paucity of empirical evidence about the broader impacts of
collaborative governance processes on the performance of polycentric systems.
Guided by the Ecology of Games Theory, this project integrates longitudinal
content analysis of policy documents, elite interviews, and large-n surveys of
policy actors to model and assess how various collaborative processes have
impacted the structure (i.e. connections among actors and forums) and function
(i.e. cooperation, learning, and resource distribution) of the Colorado River
Basin’s polycentric water governance system from 2000 to the present. Addressing
the evolving sustainability challenges in this basin requires enhanced
collaboration among the fragmented entities that govern its water through an
intricate set of interlocking federal, state, local, and tribal institutions.
Comparing the impacts of different collaborative processes on basin-scale
governance over time and in relation to changing social and environmental
conditions provides new practical and theoretical insight into approaches for
solving complex environmental governance challenges across the
globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Decision, Risk
and Management Sciences Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.