* 2048288
* CAREER: Faithful, Reducible, and Invertible Learning in Distribution System for Power Flow
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Yang Weng, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

As the electric distribution grid becomes smarter, new services have become
available, such as community renewable hubs, home energy management with
electric vehicles (EV), and demand response programs. However, these new
services pose significant challenges to grid reliability due to (1) system
unobservability, (2) data quality issues because of low-resolution and bad data,
and (3) highly intermittent energy sources like solar and wind generation and EV
charging. Without solving these problems, power outages and equipment damage can
happen frequently, leading to device malfunctions, expensive maintenance costs,
and unsatisfied customers. The goal of this CAREER effort is to develop the
theoretical foundation of building a rigorous power flow equation in the
distribution grid under unobservability. The intellectual merit of the proposed
research lies in the generation of new knowledge for learning theories,
mechanisms, and architectures. Key advances are (1) designs of deep neural
network (DNN)-based power flow equations that are not only physically reducible
but also convex to the intermediate layer in DNN that represents physics, (2)
creation of a physical-generative adversarial network to boost the robustness of
reconstructing power flow against limited data, and (3) derivation of the
solution for inverting the DNN-based power flow equation based on the physical
DNN for real-time power flow analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts
include a physics-enhanced AI framework to utilities and companies that also
demonstrate a more resilient distribution grid management system due to the
reducibility, faithfulness, and invertibility of our models. The proposed work
will help reduce the cost of managing behind-the-meter resources and emissions
greatly by bridging the gap between physics and learning in distribution grids.
Such interdisciplinary analysis for grid modernization will create a new class
of open-source code on new machine learning methods, supporting a thriving
community of academics and industry collaborators. The integrated education
component will also create a scientific program for K12 students and minorities
to engage in activities related to AI for power systems. To popularize AI among
the utility engineers, the PI plans to deploy the proposed platforms. The PI
will also expand his webinar series to promote communications between academia
and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.