* 2048065
* CAREER: Risk-Sensitive Market Design for Power Systems: Scalable Learning and Pricing
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Subhonmesh Bose, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 01/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

The aggressive integration of renewable resources such as wind and solar exposes
the power system to uncertainty in power supply. One cannot control when the sun
shines or when the wind blows. This NSF CAREER project aims to make electricity
markets meaningfully accommodate such uncertainties in their daily operations.
Current electricity market processes take either a reactive or a conservative
view towards uncertainty. This project will bring transformative change by
adopting a risk-sensitive design paradigm--one that strikes a healthy balance
between the two extremes. The intellectual merits of the project include novel
approaches to combine recent advances from multiple domains including
optimization theory, machine learning and networked markets to enable large-
scale renewable integration in the power grid. The broader impacts of the
project include wide applicability of research outcomes to other engineering
domains, open-source approach to simulation design, an interdisciplinary
curriculum development plan, and community engagement efforts with K-12 students
and the power industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key research outcomes of this
project will include risk-sensitive electricity market clearing formulations,
efficient algorithmic frameworks to compute solutions to these formulations, and
pricing design for market participants derived from these formulations. Some
research tasks target implementable solutions for power systems. Others will
develop new theoretical frameworks that apply broadly to other engineering
context - for example, mechanisms to meaningfully combine historical
measurements and simulated data in decision-making. Research outputs from
computer simulations will be made available via GitHub and Jupyter Notebooks to
make them verifiable and usable by other researchers. Inter-disciplinary course
curricula combining power engineering with modern data science and economics
will be developed. Teaching innovations will enhance classroom engagement and
communication skills. Special attention will be paid to undergraduate
involvement in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.