* 2048283
* CAREER: High bandwidth nano-transistors to understand the kinetic basis for CRISPR/CAS enzymes to enhance their applications for diagnostics and therapeutics
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Kiana Aran, Keck Graduate Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2026
* USD 465,211.00

The knowledge of how biological molecules interact with each other is essential
to understanding their roles in sustaining life. Molecular interactions are
commonly measured using optical techniques and specialized optical labels on the
molecules of interest. Recent advances in modern electronics and nanoscale
materials potentially allow continuous monitoring of molecular interactions in a
more natural state without optical labels and instruments. The goal of this
CAREER project is to develop a single-molecule high-speed nanoelectronic
platform to better understand the function of CRISPR (clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeats)-associated enzymes known as "molecular
scissors". These enzymes allow gene editing and have revolutionized many basic
and applied research areas. The knowledge gained will be beneficial for many
applications in CRISPR engineering, pharmaceutical drug discovery, clinical
diagnostics, and agricultural science. The project will promote early research
involvement and mentorship opportunities to a new generation of engineers and
scientists pursuing a career of interdisciplinary research intersecting modern
biology, nanotechnology and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigatorâ€™s
scientific career vision is to explore the utility of nano-electronic systems to
develop transformative and customizable biosensing platforms for pharmaceutical,
clinical, and environmental applications. As part of this vision, this project
focuses on the integration of CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short
palindromic repeats) with high bandwidth graphene field effect transistors
(gFETs) designed for single-molecule sensing. The platform provides unique
electronic signatures representing the molecular interactions that happen
concurrently between the CRISPR and target DNA/RNA at different timescales. The
CRISPR-Cas system is a family of RNA guided enzymes that is widely used for gene
editing as it is capable of double-stranded DNA binding and cleavage, producing
insertions and deletions (INDELs) at specific loci within the genome in vivo.
The application areas of CRISPR technology are rapidly extending beyond genome
editing, such as targeted gene regulation, in vivo imaging, epigenetic
modulation as well as nucleic acid detection for diagnostic applications. The
goal of this CAREER proposal is to provide a tool to evaluate the enzymatic
activity of newly discovered or engineered CRISPR-Cas enzymes to better
understand their biology and the impact of CRISPR-Cas mutagenesis, guide RNA
modifications as well as genetic variation of the target on their functions.
Successful development of the single molecule high bandwidth gFET for CRISPR
analysis coupled with trained machine learning models, will provide a tool for
detailed analysis of the CRISPR interactions with its target sequence in terms
of binding, cleavage, and release of the target in real-time as well as
identification of the variables most important for predicting CRISPR function.
The information obtained can direct the design and optimization of CRISPR-Cas
enzymes toward enhancing their efficiency and safety in wide range of
applications. The applications of the single-molecule high bandwidth gFET
platform can be expanded for understanding the molecular interactions of other
enzymes beyond CRISPR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.