* 2048265
* CAREER: Elucidating the Interaction Dynamics of Soil Metals with Flavonoids in the Plant Rhizosphere
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Marie Heffern, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 06/30/2026
* USD 669,003.00

Plants must acquire metal micronutrients in trace amounts from the soil for
their growth and survival. The levels of these metals must be regulated to
prevent unwanted toxicity or deficiency. The goal of this project is to untangle
how plants chemically shape the region of soil surrounding their roots, known as
the rhizosphere, to regulate and properly utilize these metal micronutrients.
This research specifically investigates both how interactions of soil copper
with secondary metabolites impact copper availability as well as how copper may
regulate the biochemical function of these metabolites. Central to the project
objectives is the development of chemical strategies and tools that illuminate
metal biochemistry in complex environments. In tandem with laboratory-based
investigations, these studies will be enhanced by the development of a computer-
based undergraduate research course platform aimed at enhancing community
college STEM transfer pathways. Participating students will have the opportunity
to make meaningful contributions to interdisciplinary research while
establishing and building science identity. These combined studies will offer
molecular insight into the metal-associated drivers for plant fitness, providing
new opportunities to harness rhizosphere processes in meeting global challenges
such as the increasing food demands of a growing population and detoxifying
contaminated environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers on
deciphering metal dynamics in the plant rhizosphere and its contribution to
plant-biotic interactions and plant health. While present in soil matter, metal
micronutrients primarily exist in non-available forms that the plant must
mobilize to acquire and utilize. This project seeks to determine how molecular-
level interactions between copper and flavonoids (secondary metabolites secreted
by the roots) in the soil environment impact plant survival and growth via three
objectives. (1) The first objective is to determine how metal binding to
flavonoids impacts flavonoid function in plant-microbe signaling. A combination
of reagent arrays and chemometric analysis will be used to profile flavonoids in
terms of their copper reactivity. Application of this strategy to plant-microbe
models will provide new insight on the influence of metals on flavonoid
perception and specificity in the rhizosphere. (2) The second objective will
probe how flavonoids impact metal bioavailability by developing and applying
imaging systems that differentiate mobile and immobile forms of copper. (3) A
computer-based course-based undergraduate research experience (CURE) platform
will be established as a vehicle for improving the STEM transfer pathway for
California community college students. CURE projects will utilize open-source
data to identify pathways that link metal metabolism and rhizosphere signaling.
Taken together, these studies will test the hypothesis that the metal-
interacting capacity of a given flavonoid may define its function within plant-
soil feedback processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.