* 2048219
* CAREER: Spatiotemporal Behavior of Stimuli- Responsive Soft Materials in Non-Equilibrium Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Lihua Jin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2026
* USD 706,266.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will investigate the non-
equilibrium kinetic processes of stimuli-responsive soft materials (SSMs). SSMs
can change their structures, shapes or functions in response to external
stimuli, such as heat, chemicals, light radiation, electrical fields, or
magnetic fields. Triggered by an external stimulus, a SSM evolves from one
equilibrium state to a new one through non-equilibrium kinetic processes,
including diffusion, reaction, viscoelastic relaxation, etc. The kinetic
processes not only determine the response speeds of SSMs, but also govern how
they spatiotemporally evolve their structures, shapes and functions.
Understanding the response kinetics is a key step to designing programmable
SSMs, and developing emerging techniques, such as 4D printing, self-folding
origami, and self-propelled robots. By unraveling the coupled kinetic processes,
and the interplay of kinetics with inertia and gravity, this grant will achieve
programmable reconfiguration, oscillation and locomotion of SSMs. This grant has
broader impacts in education and technology. It will provide training
opportunities to a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students through
teaching, researching and advising. The research work will be included into
graduate classes, developed into demonstrations for K-12 outreach activities,
and widely disseminated in conferences. The long-term deliverables of this grant
are SSMs with programmed and dynamic stimuli-responses, which will have impacts
on soft robotics, biomedical devices, energy harvesting, and reconfigurable
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this grant is unraveling
coupled non-equilibrium kinetic processes and the interplay of kinetics with
inertia and gravity in SSMs to control their spatiotemporal responses.
Specifically, the grant will (1) unravel coupled non-equilibrium processes to
achieve programmable reconfiguration, (2) utilize coupling of kinetics and
inertia to enable autonomous oscillation, and (3) harness interplay between
kinetics and gravity to attain controlled locomotion. Three model SSM systems,
including photo-thermally responsive shape memory polymers, photo-thermally
responsive hydrogels, and humidity-responsive polymers, will be analytically
modeled by a nonlinear non-equilibrium field theory, computationally simulated,
and experimentally fabricated and characterized. The success of the grant will
advance the field of multiphysics constitutive modeling on predicting
spatiotemporal behavior of SSMs, and provide design guidelines for SSMs to
achieve programmable spatiotemporal reconfiguration, and fast and dynamic
motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.