* 2048168
* CAREER: Interplay between Control Theory and Machine Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Bin Hu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 02/28/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Control and machine learning are two high-impact research areas. Both are
important for managing complex systems such as self-driving vehicles, humanoid
robotics, smart buildings, and automated healthcare. This CAREER proposal aims
at building fundamental connections between control theory and machine learning.
On one hand, control theory provides mathematically rigorous tools for
addressing the robustness requirement of modern safety-critical systems such as
commercial aircraft and nuclear plants. On the other hand, machine learning
techniques have been used to achieve the state-of-the-art performance for many
artificial intelligence tasks in computer vision, natural language processing,
and Go. A rapprochement of control theory and machine learning will
significantly broaden the class of engineering problems that can be solved
efficiently. This proposal aims at reconciling these two areas with a
comprehensive interdisciplinary approach that spans and connects the forefronts
of robust control theory, nonlinear system theory, jump system theory,
supervised learning, reinforcement learning, imitation learning, semidefinite
programming, and non-convex optimization. The proposed research will lay the
theoretical foundation for reliable integration of control and machine learning
in modern safety-critical intelligent systems. The research progress will
promote multidisciplinary collaborations and benefit the researchers from
learning, control, optimization, artificial intelligence, autonomy, and
robotics. In addition, the research will be strongly coupled with educational
developments which will promote students from different departments to develop
solid multidisciplinary proficiency. New course materials resulting from the
research will provide new concepts and ideas to inspire the next generation of
academic and industrial leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal takes an
interdisciplinary perspective on machine learning and control. The proposed
research is centered around two thrusts. The first thrust focuses on tailoring
control theory to unify, streamline, and automate the analysis and design of
machine learning algorithms. Specifically, algorithms in
supervised/reinforcement/unsupervised learning will be modeled as Markovian jump
systems and nonlinear systems which have been extensively studied in controls
literature. The combination of this idea with modern control-theoretical tools
such as stochastic dissipation inequalities will pave the way for a unified
principled approach to the design of high-performance algorithmic pipelines in
machine learning. The second thrust focuses on borrowing recent results in non-
convex learning to push control theory beyond the convex optimization regime.
The recently developed non-convex learning theory will be leveraged to derive
various theoretical guarantees for non-convex optimization problems in control.
The proposed research is expected to advance the state-of-the-art algorithms in
large-scale control and broaden the class of nonlinear/robust control problems
that can be solved with guarantees. The proposed research covers both “control
for learning” and “learning for control,” deepening the connections of control
and learning by showing that the techniques used by each side can be explored to
impact the other side.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.