* 2048655
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cognitive processes underlying variation in human-environment interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Jeffrey Johnson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 11/30/2022
* USD 26,049.00

What factors are most formative in the development of environmental stewardship,
and how do they vary across different cultural and environmental contexts? This
doctoral dissertation project seeks to investigate variation in understandings
of the natural environment and how these understandings shape conservation
efforts. The project, which trains a graduate student in methods of empirical,
ethnographic data collection and analysis, uses cutting-edge anthropological
methods and theory to shed light on underlying cognitive processes driving
shared understandings of environmental resources. The findings of this research
will be disseminated broadly to academic and non-academic audiences, including
NGOs and stakeholders in environmental stewardship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research asks whether different modes
of engagement with marine environments reflect different moral attitudes about
human activity and the natural world, and whether such moral attitudes inform
conservation-relevant decision making. The work is situated in a marine
recreation context that, like many others, is also highly climate-vulnerable,
posing a common dilemma of balancing exploitation against conservation to
preserve recreational activities. The investigators use cultural consensus
analysis and ethnographic methods to explore variation in what is considered
morally acceptable, as well as how this morality informs the way individuals
navigate ethical dilemmas. The research will contribute to a broader, nuanced
understanding of environmental morality as a driver influencing behavior in
socio-environmental systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.