* 2048336
* The Oceanic Fingerprint of the Forced Response to Anthropogenic Aerosols
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Young-Oh Kwon, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 885,724.00

Human emissions to the atmosphere impact our climate in two ways: changing how
efficiently our planet cools via radiation back to space through increasing
greenhouse gases; and changing how much sunlight reaches Earth’s surface via the
impacts of aerosols on atmospheric brightness and cloudiness. More is understood
about the warming effect of greenhouse gases, which act globally, than the
cooling effect of anthropogenic aerosols, which act more regionally (close to
emission sites in the northern hemisphere). Quantifying how much these two
opposing climate drivers are responsible for past change is also challenging, as
our climate system also has natural chaotic fluctuations. The ocean is a major
player in controlling the rate and form of change in Earth’s climate. This
project will exploit the unprecedented global ocean observations from the Argo
array and a large set of climate model runs (which capture a lot of Earth’s
climate chaos) to try to tease apart the fingerprint of aerosols versus
greenhouse gases on our recent past climate. Some of the questions the team will
address are: Has the aerosol effect been over or underestimated in the past? How
has the ocean been impacted? Ultimately the team aims to help improve climate
projections and thus support better mitigation and adaptation actions by the
community. The project will also support and help train a postdoctoral
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anthropogenic aerosols, along with greenhouse
gases (GHG), have caused substantial climate change over the past several
decades, with the former much less understood and quantified. While most
previous studies have focused on surface or atmospheric responses, the
investigators will investigate how the ocean water masses and circulation evolve
due to anthropogenic aerosol forcing in contrast to the background of internal
variability and GHG-forced changes during the historical period and in future
projections. To isolate externally forced signal from internal climate
variability, they will exploit new large ensemble simulations using a single
general circulation model with common external forcing but different initial
conditions. They will focus on comparing the externally forced component and
internal variability, evaluation of the performance of various spatiotemporal
analysis methods in separating those signals and the robustness of their
estimation. The team hopes to develop fingerprints of the ocean interior
response to anthropogenic aerosol forcing found in the model runs, and then
examine how likely it is to detect these fingerprints in the observations,
unforced control runs, runs with other anthropogenic forcing, and runs with
natural external forcing. They will attempt to identify and remove the internal
variability from the observations to test whether the detectability of the
fingerprint of the forced signal can be improved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.