* 2048607
* Collaborative Research: Adverse Multiphase Flow Interactions in Urban Stormwater Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jose Vasconcelos Neto, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,187.00

This NSF grant will investigate Adverse Multiphase Flow Interactions (AMFI),
poorly understood phenomena that occur during intense rain events that are
caused by the entrapment of air within stormwater systems. During rapid filling
events this air is unable to readily escape and compresses, causing operational
issues such as stormwater “geysers” and inlet cover displacements. The frequency
and severity of AMFI is linked to spatiotemporal variability of extreme
rainstorms interacting within the complex networked systems of stormwater
inlets, sewers, and tunnels. Current stormwater design paradigms and tools have
been tailored toward minimizing failures associated with street flooding or with
the discharge of contaminated flows, both of which are linked to gradual changes
in single-phase water flows. In contrast, AMFI failures occur over much shorter
timeframes and involve more complex two-phase flows conditions. This means that
mitigation measures and tools that work well in traditional contexts cannot
anticipate or prevent AMFI failures. Consequently, cities currently allocate
resources to fix AMFI failures without understanding or addressing the root
causes. This lack of system-level understanding and tools for predicting AMFI
creates barriers to increasing stormwater infrastructure resiliency. This
problem is aggravated by rapid urbanization, aging water infrastructure, and the
increasing frequency and intensity of extreme
rainstorms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will put forward an entirely new
methodology to identify causes of AMFI, innovatively integrating three key
components: (i) spatio-temporal inflow variability at system-wide scales using a
high-resolution stochastic rainfall model; (ii) non-dimensional indices that are
predictors of AMFI, derived from state-of-the-art multiphase flow modeling; and
(iii) new methods for efficient system-wide transient modeling to track the flow
impulses that drive AMFI events. The research will examine the relationships
between AMFI and the spatio-temporal structure of rainstorms to isolate the
rainfall time and length scales that are conducive to AMFI formation. Simulated
stormwater inflows will be translated into discrete impulse waves that propagate
throughout the stormwater network, potentially leading to AMFI activation. The
research will assess whether AMFI prediction can be achieved by representing
discrete impulse waves and their interactions. AMFI activation will be modeled
with computational fluid dynamics tools. Conditions for their occurrence will
thus be linked to newly developed non-dimensional flow indices that can be
embedded within simpler 1D system-wide stormwater models. This research will
provide innovative methods for system-wide prediction of AMFI in stormwater,
guiding design practices for increased resiliency to this emerging class of
system failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.