* 2048416
* Collaborative Research: International Coercion, Debt Relief, and Land Transactions
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Jonas Bunte, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Paul Huth
* 12/31/2022
* USD 0.00

National Science Foundation&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal:
2048406/2048416 PI Name: Shea, Patrick/Bunte,
Jonas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 2048406/2048416&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Houston/University of Texas at Dallas&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Patrick Shea/Jonas Bunte&lt;br/&gt;NSF Program: Security and
Preparedness&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: International Coercion,
Debt Relief, and Land Transactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
determine when governments transfer control over portions of their national
territory to pay off loan debts to international creditors. The project will
provide systematic evidence on the domestic and international conditions that
influence the decisions of governments to exchange land for debt relief. The
empirical analyses in the project will be based on a new dataset to be collected
on all land transactions between countries related to debt relief. The results
of this project will contribute to improving our understanding of when the
international debt problems of countries can lead them to make territorial
concessions to other countries. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
and test theory on the different debt relief strategies that governments can
choose to adopt and why land transactions are sometimes selected instead of
other available policies such as austerity or default. A new and more
comprehensive dataset on land transactions for debt relief will be collected for
the period 2000 to 2020. Statistical analyses of the new data set, employing
simultaneous equations, will be conducted to test theoretical propositions. The
results of the project will advance basic research on the management of
international debt, the use of economic leverage by states to gain concession
from states on security issues, and the dynamics of international negotiations
over territorial concessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.