* 2048031
* CAREER: Understanding heterogeneity in lake biogeochemistry across time and space
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Kevin Rose, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 02/28/2026
* USD 899,721.00

Freshwater aquatic ecosystems, which include lakes, ponds, and reservoirs,
provide important services to society, including power generation, recreational
opportunities, and the provisioning of clean drinking water. Additionally,
freshwater aquatic ecosystems are a major component of the global carbon cycle.
Lakes emit a substantial amount of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere, which is
derived from a combination of internal organic matter breakdown and external
inputs of inorganic carbon from surrounding watersheds. Dissolved oxygen, which
is consumed as organisms break down organic matter, is declining in lakes around
the world, threatening the ability of these ecosystems to support the current
diversity and biomass of organisms they harbor. Past attempts to understand
coupled carbon dioxide and dissolved oxygen dynamics in lakes have not accounted
for seasonal variation in light intensity and temperature or water column
heterogeneity, both of which influence gross fluxes of both gasses. This project
seeks to understand how heterogeneity in environmental conditions, in both time
and space, impacts carbon and oxygen balance in aquatic ecosystems, and thus
improve our understanding of the role lakes play in the global carbon cycle.
Together, the integrated research and education plan of this project will
provide educational and training opportunities to a wide range of students and
early career scientists through improved course materials, a large workshop, and
local outreach efforts. This project will also leverage datasets that exist at
many organizations and institutions, and the insights gained via the process of
compiling and harmonizing diverse data sets will be translatable to many other
networks and research efforts. Finally, outreach to citizen-scientists and lake
associations around the world will leverage the power of comparative network
science to understand individual lake conditions in a global
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lakes often exhibit substantial and dynamic
structural heterogeneity, largely driven by thermal stratification. This project
focuses on the production and consumption of carbon dioxide and dissolved oxygen
in lakes, and how heterogeneity in time and space regulate the dynamics of these
critical biogeochemical fluxes. Lakes are globally important hot-spots of carbon
cycling, venting about as much carbon dioxide to the atmosphere as is taken up
by the worldâ€™s oceans. Theoretically, carbon dioxide and dissolved oxygen are
stoichiometrically coupled via metabolic processes, but departures from
expectations based on stoichiometry and partial pressure in the atmosphere
regularly occur in aquatic ecosystems. Understanding what causes these
departures may provide insights into underlying biogeochemical processing in
lakes, and may enable more accurate predictions of continental-scale carbon
dioxide emissions from lakes. This project aims to combine high-frequency sensor
observations, manually collected data, long-term data sets and ecosystem
modeling to understand the dynamics of lake carbon dioxide and dissolved oxygen
across large environmental gradients. Data will be obtained and harmonized from
diverse sources such as the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) and
collaborating scientists and organizations in the Global Lake Ecological
Observatory Network (GLEON).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.