* 2048958
* Engaging Young Black and Latino Students in Data Science Through Water Security
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Upmanu Lall, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Noll
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,364,121.00

Communities of color across the nation face increasing challenges with
affordable access to safe drinking water. Using data science to explore why,
where and how this is happening, and what is being done about it, provides a
powerful vehicle for the engagement of students in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM), and to help develop a digital work force
with appropriate representation from the affected communities. The America’s
Water Education (AWE) project will test whether a data science integrated
curriculum, using visualization, exploration, and modeling/analysis of water
data in an age-appropriate way, can engage young Black and Latino students and
increase their interest in data science. The project will comprise approximately
800 8th through 11th-grade students and their science and mathematics teachers
from the Eagle Academies of Harlem and Southeast Queens, New York. The project
will seek to: 1) increase students’ likelihood of choosing a data science
career, generally, or applied to water security, specifically; 2) improve
students’ science, technology, and mathematics competencies, senses of
confidence, and self-efficacy through an integrated core curriculum, aligned to
co-curricular water security data-rich projects and water exhibitions; and 3)
increase the effectiveness of the academies’ teachers to implement and assess
the project’s integrated middle and high school core curriculum and co-
curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's overarching research question
is: How can middle and high school young Black and Latino students be prepared
to acquire the necessary knowledge/skills in data science and water security so
that, if they choose, they become part of the next generation of data scientists
meeting the needs of the water-dependent society? Student-centered learning
opportunities will involve reliable, adaptable, intriguing, and wholly
accessible data platform technologies as staple tools for water and data
sciences. Students will explore and probe information through inquiry and
questioning by selecting and manipulating the hosted data sets, like publicly
available data and platforms of the U.S. Geological Survey and U.S. Department
of Agriculture. Linking data across science and mathematics with technology will
lead to breakthroughs in their understanding of both data and water security. A
systematic assessment at different grade levels will allow for meaningful
findings to be shared with educators and researchers. AWE’s data platforms and
data sets, along with its curricular and co-curricular educational materials,
will be accessible to teachers and students across The Eagle Academy Network of
Schools and with 750+ New York City and New York State secondary schools;
single-gender schools within the US; and teachers and students in co-educational
settings who are interested in data science and/or water security. Locally
constructed data sets and accessible national data sets will make the content
relevant and interesting across the country. This project is funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in STEM and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.