* 2048691
* Preparing Secondary Teachers and Students for Quantum Information Science
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Karen Matsler, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 02/29/2024
* USD 998,448.00

Quantum information science (QIS) is imperative to economic and national
security, commerce, and technology. Development of a "quantum smart" workforce
needs to begin before college. The logical venue for exposure to quantum might
be a physics course, but numerous K-12 students attend schools where physics is
not offered. Since most students will not major in physics, it is vital to
expose K-12 students to quantum concepts that are relevant to everyday
experiences with credit card security, phones, computers, and basic technology.
This project will provide opportunities for students to learn about quantum,
regardless of whether they take a physics class. This project will also provide
opportunities for secondary educators to learn about QIS and practice teaching
it. Project partners include universities, businesses, and professional
organizations such as Science Teacher Association in Utah and Texas, American
Association of Physics Teachers, Institute for Quantum Computing, and Perimeter
Institute for Theoretical Physics. These organizations will provide support for
participants and presenters, and provide professional growth opportunities. This
project is co-funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT) careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to impact a minimum of 100 teachers and
600 students. The project will support professional development (PD) for STEM
teachers to learn about quantum effects and effective curricular connections
through carefully planned resources with learning cycles appropriate for high
school students. The first summer will involve virtual PD. The second summer
will involve face-to-face (F2F) PD and the third summer will involve F2F local
camps. Teachers will co-teach student camps in Year 2 and then provide local
camps in year 3. The camps will provide opportunities for students to learn
about quantum mechanics and for teachers to increase confidence in teaching
quantum. The camps will be led by educators who have participated in the
workshops, and will provide local opportunities for underrepresented groups. The
project will identify pedagogy appropriate for teaching QIS to high school
teachers or students, and content concepts that are difficult to understand,
through the use of pre- and post-content assessments, confidence surveys, and
participant engagement. Participants will be asked to provide feedback on the
resources and curriculum in the classroom as well as the potential for classroom
implementation and impact on interest in QIS and ICT careers. Results of the
project will potentially inform other professional development models designed
to serve underrepresented groups and reduce potential barriers to implementing
new and complex content in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.