* 2048703
* NSF I-Corps Hub: West Region
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Roger Wakimoto, University of Southern California
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2026
* USD 6,400,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps Hubs project is the development of a model
technology innovation hub in the Western United States that cultivates the
creation of deep technology ventures and builds a robust innovation ecosystem
that is diverse, inclusive, and representative of its population. This goal will
be achieved through education, training, outreach, and the engagement of a
diverse community of innovators, with robust linkages to regional and national
entrepreneurial ecosystems, leading to a strong commercial impact. Trainers and
trained teams are key Hub outputs. Proactive outreach is expected to result in
the recruitment of diverse groups of teams, trainees, mentors, and instructors.
In addition, I-Corps training may help increase the flow and impact of
commercializable technologies, the growth and diversity of the innovation
ecosystem, and the supply of mentors and experts for the training of future
teams. The Hub plans to engage in research and education in lean startup-based
programming, the financing of innovation, and the broader ethics of Technology
Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Through education, training, networking,
community building, and research outcomes related to deep technology ventures,
the Hub seeks to deliver economic, technology, and social impact for the benefit
of the region and the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Hubs project is
based on the development of a comprehensive and inclusive education and training
program for innovation and entrepreneurship in deep technology ventures in the
Western United States. The hub will engage deep technology researchers in lean-
startup and customer discovery methodologies to produce teams that advance to
the national I-Corps program further enhancing the National Innovation Network.
The project will use a framework for team generation and training pipelines
based on best practices developed by the Hub members, further modified to
leverage the Hub regional characteristics, in particular, its distinct, diverse
demographic signature. The hub plans to incorporate inclusivity in its
standardized and integrated approach as well as ethical considerations in team
training. The hub will also explore new approaches that may lead to a creative,
enabling, human-centric, and socially-relevant innovation ecosystem in the
region. In parallel, research is planned to analyze programs for possible
additional refinements in Hub practices as well as to enrich the broader
scholarship and public policy on innovation and entrepreneurship, including a
better understanding of innovation financing. Specifically, the project will
assess differences in programming and funding success for underrepresented
groups and the career paths of scientists and engineers in the general
entrepreneurial ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.