* 2048408
* Collaborative Research: Debt and Insecurity Among Vulnerable Communities During the COVID-19 Crisis
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jason Houle, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 66,064.00

In this project, two questions are investigated: first, how financial
difficulties were distributed within low-income communities before and during
the COVID-19 pandemic and, second, the extent to which social welfare decisions
mitigated or exacerbated debt burdens and which of these decisions were most (or
least) successful in protecting low-income families from serious financial
difficulties. When faced with economic insecurity, many Americans take on debt.
Although access to credit can provide families a resource in times of crisis,
debt is often burdensome to repay for low-income families, and can exacerbate,
rather than relieve, economic strain and insecurity. With the onset of the
COVID-19 crisis, many Americans faced sudden and new sources of economic
insecurity, and official responses to the pandemic were diverse. This study
contributes to understanding the combined effects of debt and official responses
in low-income communities when a crisis strikes. One important goal of this
project is to inform decision-makers about low-income debt and economic
insecurity during the COVID-19 crisis in order to increase the effectiveness of
future interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions are addressed
through linkages of consumer credit, alternative financial services, and state
data sets. Levels of indebtedness in low-income communities are captured with
zip-code level quarterly data on consumer credit, such as mortgages and credit
cards. Alternative financial service use—e.g., payday and title loans—is
obtained from Q1 2019 through Q4 2020. These data are linked to state and zip-
level data that include sociodemographic characteristics, COVID-related
constraints, and state-level social safety net procedures. Analysis involves,
first, description of debt patterns in vulnerable communities in the United
States before and after the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Second, a variety of
statistical models are used to investigate associations between debt problems
and official responses to the pandemic in these
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.