* 2048212
* CAREER: Understanding how knowledge of social networks shapes thoughts, feelings, and behaviors
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Carolyn Parkinson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2026
* USD 588,863.00

Human beings form complex social networks. Those networks are composed of
numerous intense bonds, including those between family members, friends, co-
workers, neighbors, and many others. People are fundamentally interested in
knowing where others sit in their real-world social networks. Discovering
“degrees of separation” and knowing who is especially well-connected consumes
significant attention. The cognitive demands of tracking relationships in such
networks, and calibrating one’s behavior accordingly, are likely to have been a
driving force in human brain evolution. Additionally, the human capacity for
understanding social networks is central to many aspects of everyday
functioning, including interpersonal trust, empathy, and social influence. Yet,
little is known about how the human brain encodes the structure of the social
networks in which it is embedded, or how this knowledge shapes downstream mental
processing and behavior. This project seeks to understand how knowledge of
others’ positions in one’s social network shapes thoughts, feelings, and
behavior. The research considers individual differences in attunement to this
information, and how context shapes representations of social networks. The
related educational and training components of the project include the creation
of mentored research and professional development opportunities for
underrepresented students from community colleges and the development of a new
graduate course focused on advanced methods in social neuroscience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates approaches from social psychology,
cognitive neuroscience, and social network analysis to illuminate how knowledge
of social networks shapes affect, behavior, and cognition. Several studies
examine the social networks of a series of bounded communities. Subsets of
community members complete behavioral and/or neuroimaging experiments that seek
to delineate (1) the behavioral, cognitive, and affective consequences of
knowledge of others’ positions in one’s social network, and (2) how the mental
representation of such knowledge varies across contexts and individuals. One
specific focus is on how perceptions of distance in social networks and network
centrality influences prosocial behavior. The results of the research will
inform broader efforts to better understand social influence and interpersonal
trust. Understanding these phenomena will also inform efforts in the national
security community to mitigate the targeted spread of misinformation in social
networks. This project is supported with co-funding from the Cognitive
Neuroscience and Human Networks and Data Science (HNDS-R)
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.