* 2048182
* CAREER: Partitive Solid Geometry for Computer-Aided Design: Principles, Algorithms, Workflows, &amp; Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Vinayak Krishnamurthy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2026
* USD 554,576.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will establish the
foundations of a new geometric modeling framework – partitive solid geometry –
for the design of complex two- and three-dimensional geometric patterns.
Modeling complex patterns, such as cellular structures, is intrinsic to several
areas of national interest, including consumer products, protective gear for
sports and the military, and curved miniaturized electronics. Making complex
geometric modeling accessible to more designers and engineers is key to
facilitating disruptive innovations in many engineering disciplines, including
the automotive, aerospace, construction, additive manufacturing, mechanics,
thermo-fluids, and acoustics fields. Current tools for generative design and
modeling are highly automated, which makes it difficult for designers to explore
new ideas and ask “what-if” questions. A new representation of geometric solids
is needed that will allow designers to apply their expertise, ideas, and
creativity in designing cellular structures. Such a representation should also
simultaneously support computationally efficient mechanical evaluation, such as
finite element simulation. This research will make complex geometric modeling
available to all, real-time and intuitive to interact with, useful for serious
engineering design, and usable for recreational learning. As a result, novice
and expert designers will be able to creatively apply their knowledge in
applications ranging from the design of new materials to new architectural forms
and safe products. This grant will further enable a new type of learning
mechanism, where younger audiences will be able to easily generate complex
shapes, prototype them as puzzles through 3D printing, and play with the puzzles
to discover basic principles of geometry. This will fundamentally transform the
way children develop their spatial reasoning ability through hands-on design and
prototyping activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will introduce space-
filling shapes as the underlying novel shape representation for partitive solid
geometry, which will enable forward design workflows for the creation of complex
shapes and structures for generative and procedural design. With this
representation, the grant will integrate currently disparate methods such as
implicit modeling, medial axis representations, and Voronoi tessellations into a
single unified methodology for shape representation. Efficient and robust
algorithms will be developed and embedded within interactive software workflows
that will allow users to directly and intuitively create shapes that were not
possible before. Human subject studies will be conducted to investigate how
these new workflows can promote creative thinking in engineering design. A
hypothesis-driven approach will be taken to investigate partitive solid geometry
for designing a wide variety of interlocking shapes, functionally graded
cellular structures, and auxetic materials. User-generated geometric models will
be evaluated numerically and through mechanical tests to discover the
relationship between the input geometry provided by the user and the behavior of
the resulting shapes. A comprehensive education and outreach plan will include
undergraduate internships and a new graduate course. The project will
disseminate a free web-based modeling tool to researchers and the public. The
research will also create a large online encyclopedia of complex geometric
models for the public to use. Through summer camps, the grant will introduce
interactive generative design to K-12 students to promote spatial reasoning
through play-based tangible learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.