* 2048131
* CAREER: Coffee fungi below and aboveground: agroecological experiments for teaching and learning about fungal diversity and ecosystem function
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2026
* Laura Aldrich-Wolfe, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 03/31/2026
* USD 996,899.00

Humans depend on biodiversity, the diversity of life on Earth, for our
sustenance and survival, yet our current management of Earthâ€™s natural resources
has generated rapid losses of biodiversity across many different types of living
organisms. Because agriculture is the largest contributor to this loss, a clear
understanding of the relative importance of different agricultural practices to
biodiversity loss is urgently needed. Fungi play essential roles as decomposers
that speed the return of nutrients to forms that crops can use, as pathogens
that cause plant disease, as beneficial endophytes that live within plants and
protect them from pests and pathogens, and as mycoparasites, fungi that feed on
other fungi and reduce their potential to harm crops. Currently little is known
about the effects of agricultural practices on biodiversity in these different
fungal groups and about how changes in fungal biodiversity may alter critical
functions of fungi. This study will determine the relative importance of shade,
nitrogen fertilizers, and fungicides for fungal biodiversity loss in coffee, a
crop of critical importance to the global economy and to coffee producers,
processors, purveyors, and consumers in the United States. It will examine the
importance of fungal biodiversity for key functions of fungi in an
agroecosystem, particularly the role of fungal diversity in reducing crop
diseases and in improving crop nutrient cycling. This project will provide high
impact, cross-cultural research opportunities for training both U.S.
undergraduate and graduate students to work effectively as scientists in
international settings, as well as disseminating two educational modules to
improve specific learning outcomes in undergraduate biology
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last 30 years, biodiversity ecosystem
function (BEF) research has clearly demonstrated the importance of diversity for
ecosystem function, yet critical gaps remain for fungi. Fungal communities are
highly diverse, their abiotic and biotic interactions are often cryptic and
complex, and the importance of fungal diversity for key ecosystem processes,
such as decomposition and disease regulation, remains to be determined. Coffee
represents an ideal ecosystem to study contributors to fungal biodiversity loss
and their effects on ecosystem function, since resources vary with levels of
shade and fertilization, and fungicides act to suppress fungal diversity. This
project will 1) combine two manipulative field experiments with fungal
metabarcoding to a) determine the relative importance of shade, inorganic
nitrogen, fungicides and leaf litter diversity in structuring fungal communities
and their functional diversity, and b) measure the effects of differences in
functional diversity in fungal communities on ecosystem function; and 2) use
culture-based techniques to identify currently undescribed fungi, link
morphology to DNA barcode, and screen isolates for functional groups. This
CAREER award will advance understanding of the role of fungal diversity in
ecosystem function, particularly the effects of diversity on decomposition rates
and plant disease incidence and severity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.