* 2048142
* CAREER: Transformable and Reconfigurable Soft Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Isuru Godage, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2023
* USD 529,999.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will introduce a novel
systematic approach to combining simple soft robotic modules into sophisticated
cyber-physical systems, capable of performing complex manipulation and
locomotion tasks. Soft robotics has demonstrated the potential for mimicking the
diverse multifunctionality of biological organisms, thereby creating the next
generation of adaptable, versatile, and human-friendly robots. However, much
work needs to be done to enable this development beyond research laboratories.
In a fundamental shift from traditional robotics, this project will explore the
design and modeling of simple plug-n-play modules to achieve complex and
reconfigurable emergent functionalities. Among other societal impacts, the
outcomes of this project would aid in the development of co-robots for factory
automation, wearable rehabilitation systems, and search &amp; rescue and
reconnaissance robots. The project will also support an extensive education plan
that includes undergraduate robotic curriculum development, undergraduate
research internships, and international student exchange program, as well as an
outreach plan that includes workshops and summer academy for local high school
students in Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop a systematic methodology for the optimal configuration of canonical
variable stiffness soft robotic units into sophisticated cyber-physical systems.
To achieve this objective, the research will proceed with two thrusts. The first
thrust focuses on formulating a novel nonlinear bioinspired design philosophy
that harnesses the “strength in numbers” and the art of “assembly”. The central
feature of this approach is the leveraging of a set of simple soft robotic
modules or designs with varying operational complexity and mechanical
properties. The second thrust focuses on finding how to optimally configure
these modules to solve challenging manipulation and locomotion tasks. The
strategy is based on learning and evolutionary computing techniques and
iterative assembly around the goal of minimal design complexity and reduced
control challenges for a given task. Along with research, a third thrust focuses
on integrating research with education at the high school, college, and post-
college levels. Endeavors include incorporating robotics into the curriculum at
the undergrad level within the Engineering program in the School of Computing at
DePaul University. Additionally, outreach activities will also take place to
raise awareness of robotics in the Chicago Public School System high school
students via workshops and annual summer academy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics
program, jointly managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG)
and Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.