* 2048328
* Promoting Engaged and Active Learning in Electrical Engineering through Collaborative Online Lab Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Selahattin Sayil, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2024
* USD 294,097.00

This project will serve the national interest by improving student learning in
undergraduate engineering courses. Specifically, it will implement active
learning strategies to increase the quality of online electrical engineering
laboratories. In response to the pandemic, online learning became the new norm.
However, many challenges remain that must be solved to ensure that students are
engaged online and have hands-on learning experiences. Solving these challenges
is especially pronounced in engineering because of the critical role that
experiential learning in laboratories holds in engineering education. This
project will investigate the effectiveness of collaborative online lab
experiences for electrical engineering majors in an institution in which 60% of
the student population are first generation college students. Thus, by
increasing the effectiveness of online learning at the institution, the project
has the potential to help mitigate the disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on
students from communities with higher levels of poverty. The project aims to
improve student learning in online labs by integrating open-ended design
experiences, facilitating teamwork, creating online learning communities to
overcome feelings of isolation, and incorporating pre-lab simulations and video
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are: 1) to
develop and implement high-impact online lab teaching practices that contribute
to improving online STEM education; 2) to overcome students’ feelings of
isolation in virtual labs; 3) to instill self-reliance, student engagement, and
confidence through virtual labs; and 4) to use the knowledge and expertise
gained from the project to develop an online experiment bank and make it
available to the public through websites, workshops and publications. The
modular format of the labs along with their portability and low hardware cost
will help make the enhanced online labs and associated strategies easily
adaptable at other institutions and in other disciplines. In addition to the lab
designed for higher education institutions, the project will also develop a
separate lab for middle and high school students, with several K-12 STEM
teachers involved in the lab’s development. In this way, the project aims to
design online labs that provide rich learning experiences, not only for
electrical engineering students, but also for K-12 students and teachers. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.