* 2048540
* Collaborative Research: Electoral Systems as Incentive Structures for Interparty and Intraparty Politics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Guillermo Rosas, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2024
* USD 215,304.00

Why does the nature of representation vary across countries, states, and
localities? Despite the fact that most politicians work hard to prove they
deserve re-election, citizens often express frustration with the behavior of
their elected officials. This project develops a new data set based on at least
2750 elections for national legislatures in nearly 150 countries for a 75 year
period. The data will be used to test to what extent the type of representation
citizens receive is a function of the electoral rules used to choose their
representatives. Specifically, the project examines whether electoral rules
explain variation in interparty politics — the number of parties and the variety
of the policies they promise — and intraparty politics — the balance
representatives strike between offering their constituents programmatic policy
or particularistic rewards and constituency service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project tests whether electoral rules explain variation in interparty politics —
the effective number of parties, parties’ locations in the policy space,
congruence between citizens’ preferences and policy — and intraparty politics —
the content of campaigns, the amount of constituency service provided, the
design of legislative institutions, levels of party discipline, and the balance
struck between programmatic policy and pork barrel politics. The effort is
unique in two ways. First, the project compiles a dataset with the details of
the systems used to conduct more than 2,750 elections for national legislatures
in nearly 150 countries for a 75-year-period. Second, it uses simulations to
transparently generate interval-level indicators of the extent to which , on the
interparty dimension, electoral systems encourage voters to express their
heterogeneous preferences for a wide array of offerings and, on the intraparty
front, allow voters to fill legislatures with noteworthy individuals as opposed
to party automatons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.