* 2048028
* CAREER: New Challenges in High-Dimensional and Nonparametric Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Mayya Zhilova, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2026
* USD 213,242.00

Contemporary techniques for analysis of complex high-dimensional data sets give
rise to numerous questions about fundamental concepts in statistics, data
science, and related fields. In this project, the PI will address challenging
open questions in high-dimensional and nonparametric statistics motivated by
practical applications in finance, engineering, and life sciences. The project
is focused on development of new methods of statistical inference for complex
data sets providing high accuracy and explicit theoretical guarantees. This
includes (i) development of a novel framework for statistical inference that
will considerably extend the range of applicability of some of the major
statistical methods; (ii) studies of performance of resampling methods in a
high-dimensional framework; and (iii) studies of intrinsic properties of high-
dimensional models that ensure good performance of the statistical methods. The
educational component of the project includes mentorship of graduate and
undergraduate students, summer camps in statistics and data science for STEM-
oriented high school students, and a workshop/graduate school on high-
dimensional statistics and learning theory for junior researchers. Special
attention will be given to supporting students and researchers from
underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is focused on two
major research themes. The first theme is concerned with establishing non-
asymptotic higher-order expansions for various distances between probability
distributions, with a particular focus on problems and applications in a high-
dimensional non-asymptotic setting. The PI will study characteristic properties
that are crucial for establishing accurate approximation bounds in high
dimensions, such as the normal approximation and bootstrapping and their
relations and optimality properties. Another major theme of the project is
development of a novel framework for statistical inference based on nonlinear
modeling and its applications to nonparametric inference, functional estimation,
and inference for models involving heavy-tailed distributions. The approach
combines both parametric and nonparametric components, which can avoid severe
model misspecification and establish good rates of approximation. The PI aims at
conducting a comprehensive study of the new higher-order approximation bounds
and the nonlinear modeling approach. The project includes development of new
mathematical methods for statistical inference and studies of their connections
with other areas of mathematics, such as high-dimensional probability,
stochastic modeling, and uncertainty quantification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.