* 2048021
* CAREER: Enabling Highly-Mobile Large-Scale MIMO Systems with Machine Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Ahmed Alkhateeb, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 03/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Building efficient communication networks that can enable the emerging wireless
applications is a national priority for the United States and many other
countries around the world. Future wireless communication networks will be
required to provide significantly higher data rates compared to the current
networks and to support highly-mobile low-latency applications such as
virtual/augmented reality and autonomous vehicles. To respond to these
requirements, this project will leverage machine learning to design next-
generation wireless communication systems that can efficiently increase the
number of antennas at the transmitters and receivers, which is essential for
supporting high data rates. This project will also make use of the other sensory
information such as GPS positions and camera images to improve the performance
of the wireless communication networks. On the educational front, this project
will lead to the development of undergraduate and graduate course materials and
will provide opportunities for enhancing the basic engineering skills of
undergraduate students through engaging them into building proof-of-concept
prototypes. Further, the proposed work in this project is expected to have
impact on a number of areas through the technology transfer to industry and the
public release of all the machine learning datasets and algorithmic
implementations developed during the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal
of this project is to enable highly-mobile large-scale MIMO systems in realistic
dynamic environments. To achieve this goal, fundamentally new machine learning
approaches that are capable of efficiently leveraging the prior system
observations and the side multi-modal sensory information will be developed. The
project has several inter-related thrusts: (i) Developing statistical channel
prediction approaches for fast yet robust channel acquisition in dynamic massive
MIMO systems; (ii) characterizing the fundamental conditions under which across-
frequency and across-space channel prediction is feasible; (iii) Designing
robust and adaptive multi-user precoding for highly-mobile massive MIMO systems
leveraging learning-based conditional channel covariance prediction; (iv)
Developing a novel multi-modal learning framework for fast mmWave beam
prediction in line-of-sight and non-line-of-sight scenarios, relying on the
efficient fusion of various sensory data, such as positions, sub-6GHz channels,
and visual data; (v) Investigating the design of efficient multi-modal learning
approaches and algorithms for dynamic mmWave blockage prediction using advanced
visual scene understanding and end-to-end learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.