* 2048214
* CAREER: The success of viral endosymbionts within and between host populations
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Mark Stenglein, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 04/30/2026
* USD 765,354.00

This project has three main goals. First, it seeks to better understand how
viruses shape the biology and evolution of their hosts beyond the typical view
that viruses are entities that make their hosts acutely sick. New evidence has
revealed that viruses are just as ubiquitous in all living organisms as are the
bacteria that form the microbiome. In addition to playing important roles in the
lives of their hosts, some of these viruses might be co-opted to combat diseases
transmitted by mosquitoes and other vectors. Second, this project seeks to equip
budding scientists with the computational skills they will need to thrive in a
new era of big data in Biology. This will increase the competitiveness of these
individuals by arming them with increasingly essential skills for working in the
bioeconomy. This education will take the form of training of individual
students, an existing graduate course, a new undergraduate course that takes
evidence-based measures to foster participation and success of female students,
and three annual workshops. Third, through collaboration with experts in citizen
science and science outreach, this project will engage the public in a
crowdsourced sample collection effort. The citizen scientists will not only
contribute valuable samples and data that would be otherwise unobtainable but
will also make their own inquiries about important scientific concepts relating
to viruses and the nature of science. The educational resources we will develop
will be suitable for use in classrooms or homes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial
endosymbionts can shape the evolution and ecology of their hosts in profound
ways. One goal of NSF is to support basic research, and this proposal meets this
goal by examining viral endosymbionts. Emerging evidence from metagenomics is
revealing that there exists a previously unappreciated group of viruses that
have similar properties, are just as common, and might also play a significant
role in the lives of their hosts. The proposed research focuses on one of these
viruses, a remarkably successful “viral endosymbiont” of Drosophila melanogaster
called galbut virus. Galbut virus is ubiquitous in wild populations of these
fruit flies, and exemplifies two paradoxes associated with vertically
transmitted symbionts. First, despite efficient biparental vertical
transmission, which modeling indicates should drive infection to fixation, only
60% of individual flies are infected. Second, despite a seeming reliance on
vertical transmission, there is substantial evidence that galbut virus readily
jumps into new host species. Proposed experiments combine genetics, genomics,
infection experiments, and crowdsourced field sampling to explore the dynamics
of this fascinating virus within and between host populations. This will
contribute to a more accurate understanding of the evolutionary and ecological
impact of viruses beyond their role as acute pathogens. Broader impacts include
the training of graduate and undergraduate students, 3 annual workshops (2
existing and one new), and a new undergraduate course in computational
microbiology that will be implemented in an evidence-based manner to encourage
participation and success of female students. The proposed citizen-science based
sample collection and outreach program will empower volunteers to make their own
inquiries about the nature and practice of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.