* 2048619
* Production of consensus material for dissolved methane and nitrous oxide
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Samuel Wilson, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2022
* USD 0.00

The goal of this project is to increase the quality of measurements of two
important greenhouse gases, methane and nitrous oxide, dissolved in seawater.
These gases are repeatedly measured every year throughout the global ocean by
many laboratories and it is important that the measurements are consistent and
directly comparable to one another. A valuable component to establishing
commonality and communication between independent laboratories is the use of
consensus material, which is the focus of this project. The production and
distribution of consensus material represents part of a broader and ongoing
program of activity – including workshops, intercomparison exercises, and the
production of standards – which is all designed to assess performance and
improve the accuracy of dissolved methane and nitrous oxide measurements. This
research project will benefit the international research community that is
actively involved in measurements of dissolved methane and nitrous oxide.
Dissemination of the results from independent analysis of the consensus material
will be via publication in the scientific literature. The production of the
consensus material will be filmed and made into a concise movie clip that will
accompany a previous video produced by the lead investigator on the importance
of non-CO2 greenhouse gases in the ocean.

Together, methane and nitrous oxide comprise almost a quarter of the total
radiative forcing budget attributed to greenhouse gases and their current
tropospheric mole fractions and rates of increase are unprecedented in recent
Earth history. Furthermore, both methane and nitrous oxide have a higher warming
potential than carbon dioxide. Despite their critical importance, measurements
of methane and nitrous oxide in the global oceans are much less coordinated than
carbon dioxide. The scientific community is taking steps to improve this
situation and has an overall goal to collectively achieve an accuracy and
precision of less than 1% for methane and nitrous oxide measurements. The
production and distribution of consensus material through this project is a
critical step towards achieving this goal as it will facilitate the evaluation
of existing measurements conducted by independent laboratories. In particular,
the consensus material will be used to evaluate progress that is anticipated to
have resulted from a set of intercomparison exercises that were conducted during
2014-2017 and ongoing contributions to a Best Practice Guide for dissolved
methane and nitrous oxide measurements. Using a two hundred liter reservoir,
consensus material will be prepared using seawater collected near the University
of Hawaii for a range of dissolved methane and nitrous oxide concentrations.
Consensus material will be shipped to requesting members of the scientific
community who will provide their measured values for intercomparison. The work
will be promoted via the US Ocean Carbon & Biogeochemistry program which
maintains a specific website about this effort and related activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.