* 2048676
* Boundary layer dynamics and sediment transport in swash interactions
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Nimish Pujara, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 299,994.00

This project will explore the water motions that result from the wave that runs
down a beach slope as it encounters the next wave coming up. This interaction
will be investigated in the zone of the beach that is wetted and dried by waves
after they break, technically known as the swash zone. Water motion interactions
produced by oppositely moving waves will be studied with laboratory experiments
in a wave flume. Experiments will measure, in detail, flows near the sandy
bottom, where sand becomes suspended in the water column. These processes
determine whether a beach erodes or becomes wider; whether it steepens or
flattens. The study will provide information for future efforts to emulate
beaches with mathematical models. The project will support one PhD student and 6
undergraduate research interns. The interns will be recruited from
underrepresented groups through a program in the college of engineering at UW-
Madison. Undergraduate interns will design demonstrations on ocean waves for
“Science Saturdays,” which are activities geared toward K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will study wave-driven flow
interactions at the swash zone of the beach. Interactions will be studied with
laboratory experiments (in a wave flume) that include successive solitary waves.
Experiments will be designed to measure boundary layer dynamics and sediment
resuspension. Flow interactions determine the accretion vs erosion balance at
the beach and shape the morphology of the beach. The study will propose
parametrizations of sediment transport at the swash zone and provide information
for future validations of numerical models. The project will support one PhD
student and 6 REUs that will be recruited from underrepresented groups through a
program in the college of engineering at UW. Undergrads will design
demonstrations for “Science Saturdays,” geared toward K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.