* 2048930
* Increasing Students' Interest in STEM through the Science of Music
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Victor Minces, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Adrienne Dixson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,499,644.00

To fulfill the country’s industrial and strategic needs, the US education system
needs to engage more youth in STEM professional paths. In particular, there is a
need to engage low-income and minority students, who are underrepresented in the
STEM workforce. A fundamental strategy for engaging students in science and
technology is to create educational experiences that connect to the students’
culture and passions. Music is of widespread interest among adolescents, and the
connections between music and STEM are vast, in particular, the relationships
between musical sound, the physics of waves, and signal processing technology.
With the goal of increasing adolescent interest in STEM, the projects’ team has
been carrying out outreach activities leveraging those connections, and has
created a set of popular web applications for students to analyze and create
sound. Participating in an experience including the web applications has been
shown to increase students’ interest in STEM and intention to pursue a STEM
career. Through this project, the team seeks to formalize these outreach
activities into a curriculum that can be implemented independently by teachers.
For this, the team will partner with the San Diego County Office of Education to
develop a curriculum centered on the web applications and addressing the science
standards for 8th grade. Further, the team will offer in-depth professional
development to teachers and analyze the impact of the curriculum on teachers and
students. Working with teachers and students will help the team improve the
curriculum to maximize the students’ engagement. Additional partners include the
San Diego Unified School District, Compton Unified School District, and
Sweetwater Unified High School District, from where teachers will be recruited,
and the Lawrence Hall of Science, which will be collaborating with the team on
the research design and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to increase students’ knowledge of the physics of waves and engagement with
science, in particular, the project seeks to 1) develop and iteratively improve
curriculum connecting the physics of music with science standards, 2) create a
teacher professional development program and mechanisms of support for the
curriculum to be successfully implemented by teachers serving low-income and
underrepresented students, and 3) investigate the effect of program
participation in students and teachers. To achieve these objectives, the team
will embark on a design-based research program, analyzing how the activities are
being implemented by teachers, collecting data through surveys, focus groups,
and observations, and performing statistical analyses. The role of teacher
engagement in STEM has received little attention in the literature, in
particular how teacher engagement with a STEM subject can be transmitted to
student engagement. By using the science of music as an engaging subject for
both teachers and students, this project will contribute to a better
understanding of how teacher engagement relates to student engagement. On a more
general level, this project will contribute to understanding the potential of
music integration to foster interest in STEM. The in-depth professional
development will reach 80 teachers working in predominantly low-income and
underrepresented communities, serving approximately 8000 students per year in a
sustainable manner; this program has the potential of making a large impact on
the number of underrepresented students pursuing a STEM career. This project is
funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.