* 2048457
* Testing the most striking tropical marine biodiversity gradient on the planet: does it hold for sponges?
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Robert Toonen, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2024
* USD 959,716.00

Coral reefs are among the most species-rich ecosystems on the planet, occupying
only about 1% of the seafloor, but housing more than a quarter of known marine
biodiversity. Sometimes called the rainforests of the sea, coral reefs have
great intrinsic biological, cultural and economic value. Nearly a billion people
across the planet rely on coral reef ecosystems as a significant source of their
diet, and the annual economic benefits of coral reefs are estimated to be around
$9.9 Trillion USD. Thus, the global decline of coral reefs by an estimated
30-50% since the 1980s is of considerable concern as scientists struggle to
understand whether species are being lost before they are even discovered. While
coral reefs are spectacularly diverse, the majority of this biodiversity
actually lives hidden deep within the three-dimensional framework of the reef
itself. This hidden (or cryptic) community of organisms are both dramatically
understudied and fundamentally important for the persistence of coral reefs.
Sponges are a dominant group among these cryptic organisms within the reef which
provide food from the bottom of the food chain and help sustain coral reef
biodiversity. Despite the vital ecological role of sponges on coral reefs,
little is known about their diversity, abundance or species ranges across the
Indo-Pacific. For example, the most striking marine biodiversity gradient on the
planet is described from several of the visibly dominant groups on coral reefs,
including corals and reef fishes. From the global hotspot of species richness in
the Indo-Pacific Coral Triangle there is a sharp eastward decline in species
numbers to more remote oceanic islands in the Central Pacific, such as the
Hawaiian Archipelago. However, no survey to date has evaluated whether the
diversity of poorly known cryptic coral reef species, such as sponges, show the
same pattern as the visible species that dominate the surface of the reef.
Summer training modules introduce at-risk Pacific Islander youth to coral reef
biodiversity to recruit and train a new generation of sponge taxonomists.
Identification guides are being produced to help resource managers in
establishing a baseline of sponge diversity, which allows resource managers to
identify and protect native species, improves detection of alien species
introductions and serves as a tool for monitoring changes in the ecosystem in
response to human impacts. The work is being disseminated widely through
scientific literature, public and professional presentations, popular press
articles, and an educational display about sponges and coral reef biology in
collaboration with the Waikīkī Aquarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This important
knowledge gap is addressed by analyzing an existing backlog of standardized
sampling devices (ARMS) collected from throughout the Pacific Ocean to determine
whether sponges that live largely unseen within the reef framework follow the
same diversity gradient as has been previously reported for fish and corals. By
integrating taxonomy with multi-locus DNA barcoding and metabarcoding, this
project is documenting species richness and biodiversity patterns among the
cryptic sponge community across five ecoregions spanning over 10,000 km of the
tropical Pacific. These collections include many new species and are providing
vouchered DNA barcodes to existing reference databases that currently include
fewer than 1% of sponge species across the planet. Sponges are a rich source for
pharmaceutical development, so discovery of new species also provides
opportunity for exploration of natural products from both the sponges and
culturable microbes associated with them. By examining sponge species occurrence
and diversity along both environmental and anthropogenic gradients in each
ecoregion, the data also address whether coral reef sponges can serve as
indicators of human impacts. Collectively, these results are transforming our
knowledge of tropical Pacific sponge biodiversity, species ranges, and providing
much-needed reference barcodes to global sequence databases. By determining
whether sponges show the same Indo-Pacific richness gradient as reported in
fishes and corals, this project is testing how well generalizations made from
the visible subset of species that live on the surface of coral reefs apply to
rest of coral reef biodiversity. This study is greatly advancing our knowledge
of Pacific coral reef sponges and will ultimately inform the scale over which
vital ecological roles performed by this understudied taxon, such as the
production of nutrients at the bottom of the food chain, are acting across the
Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.