* 2048130
* CAREER: Understanding Nanoscale Interactions at Single-Particle and Single-Cell Levels
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Stefan Wilhelm, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 06/30/2026
* USD 761,727.00

Nanoscale interactions determine nanoparticle safety and effectiveness in
environmental, biological, and medical applications. To better exploit the
potential of nanoparticles for these applications, a fundamental understanding
of nanoscale interactions is required. This project will provide a quantitative
understanding of nanoscale interactions at single particle and single cell
levels by systematically studying inter-nanoparticle interactions, nanoparticle-
cell interactions, and nanoparticle intracellular transport using unique bio-
analytical methods. The potential scientific impact of this project will be in
providing engineering guidelines for the design of safer and more effective
nanoparticles made possible by a deeper quantitative understanding, and thus
better control, of nanoscale interactions. Core educational impacts are based on
bionanotechnology engagement of Native American and other underserved high
school juniors in rural Southwest Oklahoma via year-round research-integrated
education and outreach activities to inspire successful careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The safe and effective use of nanoparticles in
environmental, biological, and medical applications requires a better
quantitative understanding of nanoparticle interactions with biological media
and systems. This project will establish a new research paradigm to
systematically study the mechanisms and kinetics of nanoscale interactions based
on unique label-free and in situ quantitative bio-analytical methods at single
particle and single cell levels via three research objectives. In Objective 1,
inter-nanoparticle interactions will be quantified. Nanoparticle-cell
interactions will be assessed in Objective 2. In Objective 3, nanoparticle
intracellular transport will be determined with unique spatiotemporal
resolution. These quantitative and mechanistic studies have the potential to
inform the engineering of nanoparticles that efficiently overcome biological
barriers for safe and effective biological and medical applications. This
research will additionally enable a better quantitative and mechanistic
understanding of nanoparticle environmental interactions and associated
ecological effects. The scientific vision will be integrated with the engagement
of Native American and other underserved high school juniors in
bionanotechnology via a unique program termed Bionanotechnology Engagement for
Native Americans in Oklahoma (BE4NANO). In partnership with local Native
American tribes, public high schools, a technology center, and university
allies, there will be two primary educational objectives to (i) engage these
students in bionanotechnology via year-round activities, and to (ii) create
academic and social support networks for these students within the institution.
Through BE4NANO, high school students will be inspired to consider careers as
scientists and engineers. In addition, the PI will provide support and
encouragement to maximize success, thereby increasing the number of Native
American students in college science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
programs and retaining these students in their programs of study. Students will
be empowered to engage and inspire the next generation of BE4NANO participants
within their underserved communities, creating a positive and inclusive feedback
loop to sustain this holistic research-integrated education and outreach
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Nanoscale
Interactions Program within the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems (CBET) Division and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.