* 2048303
* Nearshore plume dynamics: Airborne observations and modeling of surf-shelf exchange
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* C. Christopher Chickadel, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 695,977.00

This project advance understanding of the nearshore environment by examining
possible modifications to rip currents by warm and cold waters along a coastal
strip. The project will examine such modifications also caused by different
types of winds and waves. Research will scrutinize data already available and
results from a mathematical model. Analysis will place rip-current behavior in a
framework that considers different forces that modify the currents. The study
will provide helpful information for surfers and swimmers, and for coastal zone
managers to determine the fate of pollutants in the beach zone, from behind the
breaking waves to the coastline. In general, the study will benefit society by
improving safety in the beach zone. It will support one early-career scientist
and a post-doctoral scholar.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will study
nearshore buoyant plumes related to rip currents and the corresponding flows.
The study will explore the connection between buoyant waters and rip currents,
and how the connection may change with different stratification conditions and
forcing agents: wind, waves, and density gradients. Research will combine
infrared airborne and in-situ observations (in hand) with idealized COAWST
numerical modeling. The study will seek to determine the relative influence of
plume buoyancy contrasts in a) driving rip currents and b) establishing cross-
shelf exchange of mass. By determining such relative influence, the study will
expand knowledge on bathymetrically related rip currents. This work seeks to
place numerical results in a dynamical framework that considers the parameter
space of Froude and Simpson non-dimensional numbers. As Broader Impacts, the
study will address the influence of buoyancy effects on rip currents, which has
been neglected before. Also as Broader Impacts, the study will include training
of one post-doctoral scholar and one undergraduate student, and support for an
early-career scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.