* 2048877
* Intrinsic Complexity of Random Fields and Its Connections to Random Matrices and Stochastic Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Hong-Kai Zhao, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2022
* USD 26,024.00

Scientific computing together with effective use of data plays a more and more
important role in many science and engineering applications. Modeling and
understanding uncertainty or randomness inherited in these application is of
utmost importance. Random fields are commonly used for modeling of space (or
time) dependent stochastic processes in science and engineering problems, such
as image and signal processing, Bayesian inference, data analysis, uncertainty
quantification, and many other applications. It has the flexibility and
generality to model randomness with spatial structures or vice versa. This
project will characterize the intrinsic complexity of a random
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the purpose of analysis as well as modeling and
computation in practice, a separable representation or approximation of a random
field in the form of separating deterministic and stochastic variables is very
useful. This project will characterize the intrinsic complexity of a random
field by providing accurate and computable lower bounds on the number of terms
needed in a separable approximation of a random field for a given accuracy. This
characterization can be related to the well-known notion of Kolmogorov n-width
in information theory. It can reveal the intrinsic degrees of freedom (or
richness) of a random field. It is also useful for an estimation of the
intrinsic complexity of a system that is modeled upon a random field in real
applications. For example, the investigator will study the intrinsic complexity
of the solution space for partial differential equations that involve random
material properties and develop efficient numerical methods that can explore low
dimensional structures in these systems. By regarding a set of random vectors as
the discrete sampling of a random field and vice versa, the investigator will
also study the question of random vector embedding and explore its connections
to random matrix theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.