* 2048914
* Collaborative Research: Biodiversity and resilience of corals and their microbiomes in response to ocean deoxygenation
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Julie Meyer, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/29/2024
* USD 873,302.00

The world’s oceans are facing the threat of deoxygenation—events of low
dissolved oxygen insufficient for marine life and healthy ecosystems—which is
accelerating along with other global crises including climate change and ocean
acidification. The pace of these changes can lead to rapid shifts in the
structure of marine communities due to changes in the distribution, abundance,
and diversity of species. This collaborative project is among the first to
examine the consequences of deoxygenation on coral reefs, which are sentinel
ecosystems for studying ecological responses to global change because of their
importance to human society, sensitivity to stress, and intricate relationships
among their inhabitants. Specifically, the research team investigates why and
how some coral species are more tolerant than others and the role that bacteria
associated with the corals have in such tolerance. This predictive understanding
is important to support conservation and management efforts by identifying
stress-tolerant coral species and establishing indicators for assessment of
hypoxia stress. The project provides training for multiple undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. Findings from this project are
disseminated through undergraduate and graduate courses taught at the University
of Florida, a teacher training program at the Bocas del Toro Research Station at
STRI in Panama, a workshop in Panama to build a community of scientists and
informed practitioners, and webinars, toolkits, and other resources communicated
through established networks of coral conservation and management practitioners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the responses of coral reefs to ocean
deoxygenation is limited to a few post hoc assessments of how unanticipated
hypoxic events have impacted macrofauna. This project employs a predictive
approach to examine the resilience of coral reef communities to ocean
deoxygenation by examining both corals and their associated microbiomes.
Complimentary manipulative laboratory and field experiments and surveys along
natural gradients of hypoxic stress are being used to answer the following three
fundamental questions about how variation in the tolerance of corals and their
microbiomes predicts the resilience of reefs to deoxygenation: (1) How does the
physiological response of the coral to hypoxia predict community shifts in the
microbiome with deoxygenation? (2) To what degree do corals and their
microbiomes show evidence of acclimatization to reduced oxygen, and how do these
functional shifts confer increased resistance to subsequent hypoxic stress? (3)
How are the feedbacks between coral hosts and their microbiomes apparent in the
recovery of coral communities from hypoxia and patterns of community structure
at the seascape scale? This project aims at developing a mechanistic and
predictive understanding of coral reef community responses to ocean
deoxygenation by examining stability and resilience at two levels of ecological
organization: the assemblage of coral species at the reef scale, and the
assemblage of microbes at the holobiont scale. Moreover, this study examines how
those responses are coupled by feedbacks at the colony scale through coral
physiological responses and microbial functional
shifts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.