* 2048612
* NSF I-Corps Hub: Great Lakes Region
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Mostafa Kaveh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2026
* USD 6,798,385.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps Hubs project is the development of a regional
network and programming that accelerates the translation of federally-funded
research into products/services that benefit society and create economic growth.
This I-Corps Hub will address the challenge of low entrepreneurial ecosystem
density in the Great Lakes Region by implementing more structure and formal
systems amongst the geographically dispersed Hub institutions to replicate the
rapid flow of information and opportunities that exists in higher density
entrepreneurial ecosystems. Deep technology researchers from across Hub member
institutions will be recruited to explore commercial opportunities for their
scientific discoveries and identify potential pathways to market. The Hub will
connect these projects to the people, organizations, and resources needed to
complete the development and scale the impact of the discoveries. Beyond the
direct economic and commercial impacts, the I-Corps Hub will strive to develop
an entrepreneurial mindset in the scientists and engineers who participate. As
these researchers pursue careers in academia, startups, industry, or government,
they will use this mindset to maximize the impact of their contributions in
basic research, as well as in the development of new industries and government
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Hubs project is based on the
development of a deeper and more data-driven understanding of the inputs,
environment, and outcomes associated with innovations coming from federally-
funded research. Specifically, the goal is to address the relationships between
the characteristics of academic researchers (e.g., demographics, prior
experience, I-Corps experience) and entrepreneurial outcomes; the elements of
the programming that lead to positive experiences and outcomes; the factors that
impact the engagement and success of underrepresented populations; and the
institutional outcomes resulting from the development of an I-Corps ecosystem.
This assessment of impact at an individual and institutional level may
contribute to the successful scaling of I-Corps as authorized through the 2017
American Innovation and Competitiveness Act and ensure that there is a clear and
inclusive path for more diverse groups of faculty, students, and staff. The Hub
plan is to create and share innovative curricula, regionally and nationally, to
motivate, enable and support researchers throughout the “discovery to impact”
journey. The Hub will become an exemplar for translating the Great Lakes
region’s $12.3B in research spending into deep technology ventures, thereby
increasing investment capital into the region, providing employment
opportunities for STEM graduates, and attracting experienced entrepreneurs to
grow these new ventures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.