* 2048067
* US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE and GP17-ANT: Sources and Rates of Trace Element and Isotope Cycling Derived from the Radium Quartet
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Matthew Charette, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2024
* USD 887,327.00

The goal of the GEOTRACES program is to “identify processes and quantify fluxes
that control the distribution of trace elements and isotopes (TEIs) in the ocean
and to establish the sensitivity of these distributions to changing
environmental conditions”. This ambitious objective requires coordinated
seagoing field work for collection of samples to measure many elements
simultaneously across the earth’s major ocean basins. However, these
comprehensive global concentration maps for trace elements cannot be properly
interpreted without concurrent measurement of radioactive tracers like radium
isotopes that can provide time scales of their ocean input. In this project, the
investigators will measure the abundance and distribution of radium isotopes in
the Southern Ocean between the southern tip of South America and Antarctica,
including a detailed characterization of the Antarctic coastal marine
environment. The project will support a postdoctoral research associate and
involve two undergraduate student researchers in post-cruise
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main motivation of the proposed research is
to utilize the quartet of radium (Ra) isotopes (224Ra, 223Ra, 228Ra, 226Ra) to
enable source identification and flux quantification of TEIs during the
forthcoming US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE and GP17-ANT expeditions. Measurement of Ra
isotopes will allow the team to address several key questions related to ocean
margin and benthic boundary processes and their role in supplying and
transporting TEIs to marine ecosystems including: (1) What are the rates of
lateral transport of TEIs from the Antarctic and Patagonian continental margins
out to and including the high nutrient low chlorophyll (HNLC) Southern Ocean?
(2) What are the TEI fluxes associated with Antarctic glacial meltwater? and (3)
What are the time scales of TEI transport associated with Pacific-Antarctic
Ridge neutrally buoyant hydrothermal plumes? Boundary inputs are considered to
be the dominant source of many key TEIs to the ocean including iron, however,
TEI concentrations must be coupled with input and transport rates to determine
their effect on marine biogeochemical cycles. The wide range of Ra isotope half-
lives (3.66 days to 1600 years) allow for the quantification of TEI transport
processes on time scales relevant to ocean mixing processes. The proposed
coupled Ra-TEI measurements will allow the full value of the distribution of
numerous TEIs as measured by GEOTRACES PIs to be
realized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.