* 2048020
* CAREER: Automated Design of Decentralized Robust and Explainable Swarm Systems (ADDRESS)
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Souma Chowdhury, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 05/31/2026
* USD 516,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to
identify and test new scientific principles to design swarm robotic systems with
dependable collective behavior. Motivated by observations of phenomenal
cooperative behavior in nature, large teams of simple robots promise
unprecedented task efficiency and resilience benefits over sophisticated
standalone systems. These beneficial capabilities are fundamental to the future
of disaster response, environment monitoring, military operations and space
exploration, and to the continuing scientific leadership of the U.S. in these
domains. However, most existing approaches to designing the behavior of mobile
robots that operate as large collectives suffer from two key limitations: the
lack of predictable performance guarantees at the swarm level and the inability
to adapt to different uncertain environments and scales of operation. This award
supports theoretical research to concurrently tackle these limitations by
leveraging machine learning tools combined with rigorous engineering design
approaches that enable systematic analysis and tailoring of how knowledge
representation and the physical design of individual robots influence their
collective behavior. These theoretical contributions will be reduced to practice
by designing and testing new small aerial and ground robots for swarm
applications with broad societal impact in the areas of time-critical emergency
response and pollution clean-up. Outreach efforts engaging local emergency-
response stakeholders will allow understanding of potential barriers to
transitioning such swarm-robotic technologies to practice. This
multidisciplinary project will also enable novel experiential learning
environments and diversity initiatives for engineering students at the
intersecting fields of design and robotics, and facilitate advanced skill
development in these fields by enriching the graduate curricula and organizing a
new workshop at a flagship Robotics conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this research is to investigate the central hypothesis that
dependable swarm systems can be computationally designed via imitation learning
of individual agent behavior from provably-optimal expert solutions and
concurrent tailoring of agent morphology. Here "dependability" encompasses the
generalizability, scalability and mathematical explainability of the ensuing
collective behavior, which will be analyzed in the context of decentralized
swarm robotic systems, comprising palm-sized wheeled robots and multirotor
drones, that are tasked to provide target search and collective transport
operations. To accomplish this goal, the following three key fundamental
contributions are envisioned in this research: 1) develop learnable scale-
agnostic representations of the individual agent's knowledge that regulates its
task-planning processes embodied by novel Bayesian search and graph-theoretic
models; 2) identify hybrid imitation learning approaches for adapting the
individual agent behavior over varying environments, while minimizing the
deviation of the ensuing collective behavior from provably-optimal offline
solutions; 3) develop computational methods based on novel constrained policy
gradient and co-evolution approaches to concurrently design agent morphology
along with the learning of agent behavior, such that the ensuing morphological
complexity optimally facilitates the necessary behavioral adaptations. These
contributions will provide an increased understanding of "dependability" and the
"interplay of form and behavior" that is expected to impact a broad range of
multi-agent and decentralized systems beyond swarm robotics, such as various
cyber physical systems. The integrated education plan involves the creation of
1) new experiential learning programs for engineering students, including
underrepresented minorities, based on swarm computer games and conservation-
focused drone flight experiments, and 2) a new graduate course and conference
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.