* 2048583
* NSFGEO-NERC: Scattering of ocean surface gravity waves by submesoscale turbulence
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* William Young, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 596,824.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (UKRI/NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
investigators and component of the work. Random scattering, refraction and
focusing of ocean surface gravity waves by submesoscale currents results in
spatial modulation — or patches — in the wave field. Within these patches the
significant wave height may vary by as much as 30% on horizontal scales of 10 to
100 km and time scales of a few hours to a day. As a result, patches pose a
major challenge for the modelling and prediction of surface gravity waves and of
their impact on the ocean circulation. Patches affect the wave-breaking rate,
and climate-relevant air-sea interaction such as gas exchange rates, aerosol
production and wind-stress coupling to the ocean. Patches are likely important
contributors to sea-state bias errors that complicate altimetric inference of
currents. The project will contribute to improving the performance of
operational surface gravity wave models by including the statistical effects of
unresolved currents, consequently removing errors related to delayed swell
arrival. This will improve predictions of wave activity with naval, commercial,
and recreational applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply
kinetic theory, and a new version of generalized Lagrangian mean theory, to
demonstrate the effect of submesoscale currents on waves and the reciprocal
effect of waves on submesoscale currents. New statistical models of the
scattering of surface gravity waves by submesoscale turbulence will be
developed. These models will in turn be used to explain the main features of
patch variability, including a recently discovered relation between the power
spectrum of significant wave height and the submesoscale kinetic energy
spectrum, and to develop a parametrization of surface gravity wave scattering by
submesoscale turbulence that will be incorporated into WAVEWATCH III. Spatial
and temporal fluctuations in significant wave height are reflected in other
properties of the surface gravity wave field including the Stokes velocity, and
hence the wave-averaged vortex and Stokes-Coriolis forces which control the
forcing of currents by surface gravity waves. The hypothesis that the
interaction between waves and mean flows is strong on patch time and space
scales will be investigated and new modeling tools will be developed and
tailored to these scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.