* 2048683
* The Effects of Group Closure and Organizational Network Ties in Closed Populations During a Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Katie Corcoran, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2024
* USD 258,719.00

In this project, the prevalence of COVID-19 related health information and
misinformation and social distancing and isolation practices within closed
religious communities is examined. Past research identifies closed religious
communities as high-risk sites for the spread of infectious diseases, which can
have outsized impacts on public health. This study examines whether group
closure and cohesive organizational network ties are associated with an
increased prevalence of health misinformation and a reduced prevalence of social
distancing and isolation practices. Findings provide information valuable for
informing health interventions within these communities and public health
decision making more generally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
COVID-19-related behaviors in closed religious communities are studied through
combining four sources of data. First, published scribe reports by
congregational members are analyzed for COVID-19 related information and social
distancing and isolation content. Second, data are collected from congregational
directories. Third, COVID-19-related official instructions are gathered and
tracked over time. Fourth, county health district data on COVID-19 incidence
over time are collected. These data sources are integrated and analyzed to
identify factors associated with COVID-19-related health information and
misinformation and behaviors and inform theories within the sociology of health,
social networks, and sociology of religion subfields. This project is jointly
funded by the Sociology Program, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Human Networks and Data Science Program
(HNDS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.