* 2048470
* Features and implications of nitrogen assimilation trait variability in populations of Prochlorococcus
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Sallie Chisholm, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 595,865.00

The marine bacterium, Prochlorococcus, is a central part of the food web in the
subtropical open ocean, one of the largest biomes on the planet. Like plants on
land, Prochlorococcus and other phytoplankton are capable of photosynthesis,
harnessing light to convert carbon dioxide into sugars and other organic matter.
This matter feeds all the life in the sea. Akin to terrestrial plants,
Prochlorococcus requires additional nutrients or “fertilizer” to grow and
photosynthesize. Among these nutrients, nitrogen is often scarce across much of
the sunlit ocean. Thus, understanding the means through which nitrogen is
obtained and used by Prochlorococcus has important consequences for
understanding how the nitrogen and carbon cycles are coupled in the ocean. Not
all Prochlorococcus cells have the genetic capacity to use all sources of
inorganic nitrogen, i.e. nitrate, nitrite, and ammonium. Some can use all three,
some the last two, and some only ammonium. Cells that can use nitrate must
sequentially transform it to nitrite and then to ammonium before they can make
the building blocks for proteins. The genesis of this project derives from the
observation that some Prochlorococcus cells release nitrite into the seawater
during growth on nitrate. This project examines this feature of the physiology
of these cell lines, and asks whether cells that release nitrite can support the
growth of other cells than cannot use nitrate, in effect creating a cross-
feeding situation that could make the system more robust. Understanding the
drivers behind the coexistence of cells with different ways of obtaining
nitrogen, a key currency in the ocean, will provide important insights on the
flow of nitrogen in marine ecosystems. This project also sheds light on the
structure of interactions between microbes and provide the broader scientific
community (for instance, those studying diverse microbiomes related to human
health and disease or agriculture) a new perspective on how microbes form
beneficial partnerships. This project supports immersive laboratory-based
research experiences for undergraduate students, who design and execute
experiments directly related to the overall project goals. The project further
supports the work of the investigators to engage with the general public on
topics related to phytoplankton, photosynthesis, and the ecosystem services
provided by these marine organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the low-light
adapted LLI clade of Prochlorococcus, the focus of this project, nearly all
cells possess the downstream half of the nitrate assimilation pathway (for the
assimilation of nitrite). Only a fraction of LLI cells, however, have the
complete nitrate assimilation pathway. Incomplete assimilatory nitrate
reduction, with concomitant nitrite release, has been observed for LLI cells
during growth on nitrate as the sole nitrogen source. Further, the nitrite
released by cells growing on nitrate can support the growth of Prochlorococcus
that can use nitrite but not the more oxidized nitrate. Overall, within a group
of closely-related Prochlorococcus, there is genotypic and phenotypic diversity
related to the production and consumption of nitrite, a central intermediate in
the nitrogen cycle. The investigators propose to further develop Prochlorococcus
as a model system to explore nitrite cycling within populations and provide new
insights on how trait variability and the selection of complementary functions
facilitates robustness and/or resiliency in microbial populations. The
overarching hypothesis is that the population level assembly of distinct
functional types of Prochlorococcus emerges through interactions that are
mediated, in part, by cross-feeding of nitrite. To address this broad
hypothesis, the investigators are focusing on the following objectives: 1)
assessing the physiological underpinnings of incomplete assimilatory nitrate
reduction and nitrite release through in-vitro biochemical characterization of
nitrite reductase enzymes and transcription profiling of cells subjected to
light and temperature stress, 2) examining the nitrite production and
consumption rates of Prochlorococcus strains across environmental gradients such
as light, temperature, and nutrient availability in order to constrain the
environmental parameters that modulate nitrite cycling, and 3) determining the
frequencies and activities of nitrogen assimilation genotypes within laboratory
and field populations, under varying environmental conditions and perturbations.
Outcomes from objectives 1 and 2 help to constrain the tradeoffs associated with
incomplete nitrate reduction and the release of nitrite (a valuable commodity to
nitrogen limited cells) to facilitate modelling and interpretation of how
partnerships between nitrogen assimilation genotypes are structured. These
insights help to direct experiments in Objective 3, which aims to examine
controlled laboratory co-cultures and field populations in order to produce
quantitative data on the emergent features of Prochlorococcus populations where
interactions are mediated by the cross-feeding of nitrite. These data are being
used to develop an improved understanding of how interactions mediated by a
common public good might give rise to emergent properties of populations,
including resilience to perturbation and greater population-wide efficiency in
nitrogen assimilation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.