* 2048713
* On the Sources and Consequences of the Great Seasonal Moderation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Bart Hobijn, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 293,000.00

This project will analyze the sources and consequences of the declining seasonal
fluctuations in the U.S. labor market. The first contribution of this project
will be to document the magnitude of seasonal flows in the U.S. labor market and
show how much they declined over time. The second contribution will be to
identify the sources of these seasonal flows and account for why seasonal
patterns in the U.S. labor market have moderated over the past four decades. The
final contribution will be to show that these flows matter for long-run outcomes
and trends in the labor market, such as the declines in the natural rate of
unemployment and labor reallocation. The project will improve the understanding
on the role of seasonal flows in labor markets, and will have potential
implications for labor market policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will construct time series of seasonal flows for the aggregate economy and for
different demographic groups using unsupervised machine learning techniques. The
research will use detailed longitudinal information on individuals’ labor market
status. Identifying seasonal flows and documenting the decline in these flows
will be useful to assess how these seasonal flows affect the labor market such
as the natural rate of unemployment and business dynamism. Understanding the
heterogeneity in incidence of seasonal labor market flows will help improve the
labor market outcomes of those who make up these
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.