* 2048051
* CAREER: Aqueous Multiphase Assembly of Membraneless Synthetic Cell Structures: Research, Education and Outreach
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Nick Carroll, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2026
* USD 404,551.00

Cells communicate between compartments to organize the reactions that support
life. Synthetic cells also need to be able to communicate in order to exhibit
useful traits, such as sensing other organisms and responding to external cues
in specific ways. The cues might be small molecules, or they might be proteins,
RNA, or DNA. This project will explore using bioinspired aqueous multiphase
systems to create synthetic membraneless cells programmed to express and display
messenger proteins, and communicate using protein signals. The project will also
support training and education of Native American students. A partnership with
Navajo Technical University (NTU) will deliver a cross-institutional synthetic
biology course and a funded UNM summer research internship for NTU students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to create aqueous multiphase membrane
free synthetic cell systems capable of chemical communication by exchange of an
expressed protein messenger between sending and receiving synthetic cells.
Testing of these concepts will take place in a cell-free protein synthesis
system. Transcription and translation reagents will induce synthesis of a
fluorescent messenger protein in sender cells and transferred to receiver cells.
Success will provide a proof-of-principle that thermodynamic control mechanisms
enabled by genetically encoded biomaterials can drive chemical communication
between membraneless synthetic cells. Design rules for control of signaling and
biological activity within hierarchical, aqueous multiple phase systems will be
developed. Membrane free synthetic cells could be used to produce biomolecules,
deliver drugs, monitor the environment, or enhance tissue
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering Program in ENG/CBET and by the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.