* 2048425
* Research-PGR Robust organ patterning by OFPs, TRMs and SUNs in plant morphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Cecilia McGregor, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,499,995.00

Fruits and vegetables feature shapes that highlight the culinary use of the
product. For example, globe tomatoes are large and round, and are often used for
slicing on sandwiches and burgers. Salad tomatoes tend to be small and oval
shaped and eaten as snacks. Carrots and beets come in a wide variety of shapes
and sizes, some of which are used for canning and juicing, some for the consumer
market, and others for the food service market. The proper produce shape and
size is also critical for growers and producers in order to efficiently harvest
and process the products into soups and sauces. In many cases, the shape of the
product determines its market class and is therefore closely connected to the
price farmers obtain for the product. The continued improvement of crops for
better yield and higher quality relies extensively on recreating the same shape
of the produce. Off types and varieties that produce shapes that are not
commensurate with the market class will not likely yield a commercially
successful product, no matter how high it yields. Understanding the molecular
aspects of shape and the application of this knowledge to other crops, will
enable breeders to select for the desired morphology early in the breeding
cycle. This knowledge would save time and efforts in other crops and thus would
benefit societies across the world. Moreover, phone apps will be developed in
collaboration with undergraduate computer science students to enable growers and
breeders to evaluate produce quickly and accurately.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
recently discovered OFP-TRM-SUN regulon has emerged as an important paradigm in
the variation in shape of produce ranging from fruits to grains. Proteins from
these families are associated with microtubules that are thought to affect cell
division leading to altered organ shapes. Still, much remains to be learned
about this regulon and whether it extends to root crops. OFP, TRM, and SUN are
members of multigene families, yet the role of most members in organ morphology
is not well understood. To address these questions, the project plans to map
modifiers of tomato sun and ovate in tomato; extend the regulon to carrot and
table beet, and investigate the role of SUN in watermelon; discover the function
of other members of the OFP, TRM, SUN family; and testing cell growth and
geometry parameters by OFP-TRM-SUN. Combined, this information would lead to
detailed mechanistic and fundamental insights into the regulation of
organogenesis in plants and this knowledge will provide ample opportunities for
crop improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.