* 2048347
* Developing a Biomanufacturing Platform for the Site-Selective Functionalization and Structural Diversification of Cytochalasan-Based Carbon Skeletons
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Elizabeth Skellam, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/29/2024
* USD 309,779.00

Fungi can synthesize small molecules with complex structures using a number of
highly coordinated enzymes. These molecules are difficult to make synthetically,
and they can aid in crop production or have beneficial human health effects.
This project will identify fungal enzymes that efficiently modify more than one
substrate in a predictable way. Also, enzymes will be engineered to expand the
range of substrates. A biomanufacturing platform to synthesize bioactive
molecules at lower costs will be the end result. In this project, students will
be trained in core STEM technologies, with a focus on commercial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cytochalasans are phytotoxic, cytotoxic and
actin-binding natural products. Produced by fungi, over 400 variants have been
described. The structural diversity is partly explained by the flexibility of
the enzymes that introduce and modify functional groups. These enzymes
structurally rearrange the core carbon skeleton in a site-selective manner,
often on more than one substrate. Genome mining will be used to identify
cytochalasan tailoring enzymes. Overproducing strains will be characterized
chemically. Transcription factor over-expression will be investigated. Targeted
gene knock-out will confirm the function and scope of the enzymes. The enzymes
will be engineered to expand their substrate range. Synthetic biology and
metabolic engineering tools will be used to generate a biomanufacturing platform
for large scale production and functionalization of cytochalasan-based carbon
skeletons. This project will generate fundamental knowledge on how to
effectively engineer enzymes and metabolic pathways for efficient and rapid
structural diversification of bioactive molecules with commercial
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.