* 2048840
* The Role of Cyclonic Upwelling Eddies in Southern Ocean CO2 Flux
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Eric Lindstrom, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,097,509.00

Abstract: Williams&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 1: Characterization of the role of
eddies in wintertime air-sea carbon dioxide (CO2) fluxes in the Indian sector of
the Southern Ocean pairs two autonomous sailing vehicles called Saildrones will
take place during austral winter 2021.The Saildrones will carry sensors to
directly measure atmospheric and oceanic concentrations of CO2 (pCO2),
atmospheric pressure, and wind speed to allow calculation of air-sea CO2 flux at
5-km resolution and with similar accuracy to an underway ship-based
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;To broaden participation in physical and chemical
oceanography, robotics, and data science, PI Williams and Graduate Student will
develop and deliver a Saildrone-focused lesson plan for USFâ€™s Oceanography Camp
for Girls (OCG), a hands-on three-week summer camp for 8th grade girls from the
Tampa Bay, FL area. Since 1991, OCG has broadened participation by recruiting
diverse young women and is recognized by NSF as a model STEM
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: The surface following floating platforms
will carry sensor suites to directly measure atmospheric and oceanic
concentrations of the greenhouse gas CO2 (pCO2), atmospheric pressure, and wind
speed allowing direct calculation of air-sea CO2 fluxes at a resolution and an
accuracy similar to that of underway ships. The overall objectives of this
project are to determine the relationship between wintertime pCO2 variability
and the presence and structure of eddies, and to use these relationships to
create a better representation of mesoscale variability in Southern Ocean CO2
fluxes. An ability to inform data from the SOCCOM autonomous float array in
crossing surface tracks will also be explored.The overall objectives of this
project are to determine the relationship between wintertime pCO2 variability
and the presence and structure of eddies and to use these relationships to
create a better representation of mesoscale variability in Southern Ocean CO2
flux.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.