* 2048350
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Technologies of Transaction in Moral Economic Framework
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Angela Reyes, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 04/30/2023
* USD 25,200.00

This doctoral dissertation project investigates collaboration between industries
that typically operate outside the sphere of traditional finance. It focuses on
the financial obstacles encountered by these industries, as well as how
alliances among non-traditional industries allow these to be overcome.
Specifically, using linguistic and cultural anthropological approaches, the
research examines what role digital currency plays in facilitating financial
market access among marginalized workers, as well as what beliefs and
experiences most directly shape moral and economic notions of value within these
transactional spaces. Research findings will be broadly disseminated to
professionals, policy makers, and researchers in relevant fields and will
include public outreach efforts to support the well-being of marginalized
communities. Additionally, the research contributes to the training of a
U.S.-based graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a combination of in-
person and digital ethnographic fieldwork at corporate offices and within the
broader community of financially marginal individuals, as well as semiotic,
social network, and other methods of data analysis, the project examines the
economic, political and ethical motivations of this collaboration as well as its
material and symbolic impacts. The researcher will conduct digital archival
research to trace the financial and moral discourses that have shaped the
margins of the finance industry and conduct interviews with users of alternate
forms of financial transaction. The research builds on multiple anthropological
literatures to provide a fresh perspective on how moral, monetary, and meaning-
making practices interact in the creation and discernment of
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.