* 2048562
* Mapping Informal and Alternative Housing in the United States: A Big Data Approach for Examining Spatial Inequality.
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Mary Sullivan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 07/31/2024
* USD 359,208.00

Many Americans live in two distinct community forms: (1) informal subdivisions
(ISs), where residents use incremental self-building for housing development
that does not adhere to formal land planning and housing construction practices
and (2) manufactured home communities (MHCs), where the dominant housing model
is manufactured, low-cost factory-built housing that provides the single largest
source of unsubsidized affordable housing in the United States. Although these
communities provide a major source of affordable housing and low-income home
ownership, case study research suggests that they are spatially marginalized and
exposed to concentrated forms of economic, social, and environmental
vulnerability. Due to the difficulty of identifying their location across a
broader geography, there is currently no systematic data on their total number
or location, nor are there national-level analysis of the spatial inequalities
they face. This project uses big data and machine learning to produce more
robust and refined measurements of the characteristics of all U.S. neighborhoods
(formally planned suburbs, ISs, and MHCs). This allows documentation of the
location of ISs and MHCs nationwide and modeling of policy and market factors
that explain patterns of uneven development, segregation, and environmental
inequalities across neighborhood types. The databases and publications generated
by this project have the potential to generate knowledge needed to develop more
equitable housing policies as well as to support further research. The
dissemination plan allows knowledge sharing with the public, local planners, and
other stakeholders and policymakers through local community engagement
workshops, a series of regional webinars, and an easy-to-use publicly available
data mapping and visualization dashboard. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study builds
on geographic theories of socio-spatial peripheralization and uneven development
by examining the nature, causes, and consequences of the proliferation of ISs
and MHCs and their relationship with the uneven spatial distribution of poverty
and vulnerability in the United States. The project uses Python programming
language, a national dataset of building footprints, and supervised and
unsupervised machine learning methods to identify the distinct dimensions of
neighborhood morphology (the size, shape, orientation, and other arrangements of
buildings) in ISs, MHCs, and formally planned suburbs across the country. In
doing so, it produces more robust and refined measurements of the
characteristics of all U.S. neighborhoods, as well as a first-time national
level database of ISs and MHCs. This dataset enables the examination of the
relationship between segregation by neighborhood types and spatial inequalities,
including residential segregation by race, income, and tenure as well as
exposure to various types of environmental risk. Project findings contributes
to: (1) methodological advancements in the spatial study of neighborhood
morphologies, (2) theoretical advancements in scholarship on peripheralization,
uneven development, and suburbanization of poverty and (3) empirical
advancements in the documentation and analysis of informal housing relative to
social vulnerabilities and environmental hazards. The study allows users of the
research products to analyze neighborhood morphologies; examine social,
economic, and environmental impacts of uneven community development; and
identify policies that can ameliorate these impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.