* 2048389
* Role of the Southern Ocean Meridional Overturning Circulation in the Oceanic Distributions of N2O
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Mark Warner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 381,199.00

Nitrous oxide, N2O, is a trace atmospheric gas whose natural concentrations are
being affected by the activities of man. Its atmospheric concentrations have
increased at the rate of approximately 0.7 parts per billion (ppb) per year from
pre-industrial levels of 270 ppb to over 325 ppb at present. This trace gas both
acts as a greenhouse gas and contributes to the depletion of ozone in the upper
atmosphere. The ocean is a significant source of N2O to the atmosphere –
contributing nearly ¼ of the annual global input to the atmosphere. N2O is
produced within the ocean by the biologically-mediated processes that affect the
oceanic distribution of this compound. However, measurements of the
concentrations of N2O in the world oceans are relatively sparse. In order to
better model how the N2O concentrations may change in response to changes in the
climate, it is important to monitor the current distributions of this trace gas
in the ocean and to determine the rates at which the concentrations are
changing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past decade, an analytical method for
measuring the N2O concentrations from seawater samples collected for measurement
of the anthropogenic tracers (i.e. CFC-11, CFC-12, and SF6) has been developed.
Preliminary measurements of N2O concentrations have been made on several GO-SHIP
hydrographic sections. One component of this proposal is to finalize these data
sets by ensuring they are reported on the same calibration scale and that they
have undergone the same steps in the final processing of the data. These N2O
data will then be merged with the hydrographic data and made available for the
broader scientific community via the Climate and Carbon Hydrographic Data
Office. This research will specifically focus on Southern Ocean, where only a
few previous measurements of N2O has been made but is an important region for
setting the concentrations of trace gases within the deep and bottom waters of
the ocean. We propose to analyze dissolved N2O from five surveys into and within
the Southern Ocean. This will allow the Southern Ocean influence of air-sea
exchange and of in-situ production of N2O to be characterized, and will allow
the N2O of Southern Ocean water masses to be quantified. These will provide
critical endmember information on the production rate estimates in the adjoining
basins, thus improving our understanding and monitoring of the ocean’s likely
changing N2O cycle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.