* 2048498
* NSF I-Corps Hub: New York Region
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Tamera Schneider, CUNY City University of New York
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2026
* USD 6,400,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps Hubs project is the
development of a highly collaborative network of university partners and
affiliates serving the New York region by providing innovation infrastructure,
training, and research for the National Innovation Network (NIN)
entrepreneurship ecosystem. Led by City University of New York (CUNY), Columbia
University, and New York University along with six other affiliated schools, the
New York Region I-Corps Hub creates and maintains a culture of innovation
dedicated to deep technology entrepreneurial educational training and
acceleration programs. New York’s vibrant entrepreneurial ecosystem evolved from
strategic investments in innovation and entrepreneurship by academic,
governmental, and private entities in the region. This technological advancement
has been, and continues to be, the basis for long-term sustainable economic
growth. The New York Region Hub will leverage its strong, effective network
infrastructure to nurture and produce opportunities for innovation and
entrepreneurship across the region. The Hub will maintain and build upon its
leadership and accomplishments, especially with virtual programming and
training, to continue to strengthen the NIN. The New York Region Hub will
enhance national innovation capacity by extending the reach and benefits of the
NSF I-Corps program to diverse communities of innovators in fundamental science
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Hubs project is based on the
development of a structured portal for accessing the New York region’s unique
combination of world-class universities, venture capital investment resources,
and one of the nation’s fastest growing deep technology startup cultures. The
New York region I-Corps Hub has one of the most diverse and experienced teaching
teams within the National Innovation Network, comprising entrepreneurial
innovators from startups, network schools, business development units, and New
York City’s investment community. The New York Hub is poised to leverage its
leadership in the development and utilization of internet-based training tools
and approaches. It will continue to lead the nation in supporting and producing
affiliates who will generate inclusive deep technology I-Corps teams and expand
participation at all levels to members of underrepresented groups. The New York
Region Hub will serve as a repository for technology innovation development data
and outcomes. It will expand its research conducted on entrepreneurial
ecosystems and its potential to impact policy and practice at the national
level, particularly on deep technology ventures. By using its data to develop
innovative, original models, the New York Region Hub will influence how
entrepreneurship is encouraged and brought to fruition throughout the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.