* 2048883
* Transforming Preschoolers’ Spatial Orientation: Leveraging New Technologies for Learning in Early Childhood Classrooms and at Home
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Ashley Lewis Presser, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,499,760.00

The development of spatial orientation (SO) skills – the ability to identify the
position of objects in space – is a strong predictor of math skills and later
school success and academic achievement. However, even with the increasing
evidence in the importance of SO skills for children, they are rarely included
in kindergarten and primary school curriculum. This puts children at a severe
learning disadvantage; children who lag behind their peers in school-entry
mathematical skills are at high risk to continue to do so. Thus, fostering SO
skills before children enter formal schooling provides them with a sound
foundation for later mathematical learning. In this project, a team of learning
scientists from the Education Development Center and Digital Promise Global, and
public media producers from WGBH Educational Foundation, will develop and
research a preschool mathematics curriculum supplement. It will leverage digital
touch-screen tablets and augmented reality technologies with other hands-on,
developmentally appropriate spatial learning activities. These activities are
aimed to increase preschoolers’ SO learning and STEM identity, particularly for
underrepresented and underserved groups. The project will engage 39 teachers, 50
families, and approximately 585-780 preschool children in SO classroom and
family SO learning activities. In addition, the project will generate a new
augmented reality tablet app, a digital teachers’ guide for preschool
classrooms, a digital family guide, and a validated SO assessment for preschool
students. Findings from this study will illuminate the potential for this
approach on preschoolers’ SO learning. The study will also add to the literature
on how to design digital activities that foster learning and knowledge that the
field can capitalize on for other domains and age groups. Through this work, the
team seeks to broaden the participation of young children, parents, and
preschool teachers in robust math and technology learning experiences that
increase STEM identities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a design-
based research approach to develop and test a spatial orientation (SO)
intervention. The research questions are focused around 4 areas: 1) Usability
and Comprehensibility: What design elements or scaffolds within the learning
activities (classroom and home) ensure usability and comprehensibility? 2)
Instructional Supports: What instructional activity elements or teacher and
caregiver scaffolds are associated with successful engagement in SO activities
with preschool children? 3) Potential for Augmented Reality: What aspects of the
augmented reality digital activities increase preschoolers’ ability to
understand SO concepts? 4) Student Learning and STEM Identity: Does engagement
in these instructional activities lead preschool children to increase their SO
knowledge and STEM identity over time and in comparison to students who do not
experience the intervention? And do additional SO learning experiences at home
increase preschoolers’ SO knowledge and skills? Researchers will collect data
from children (assessments, observations), teachers (observations, interviews,
and surveys), and advisors (recommendations). Data from teachers’ interviews
will be analyzed through qualitative data analysis software, and student
learning task data will be analyzed quantitatively. Student and classroom
observation data, and teacher surveys, will be analyzed with quantitative and
qualitative software. In addition to documents based on the research, the
project will generate a learning blueprint and a conjecture map to inform the
development team. To ensure ongoing quality of the project activities, external
formative and summative evaluations will seek to document the project’s
adherence to the proposed plans for research and development, successes, and
challenges in developing and implementing a technology-infused intervention, and
contributions of knowledge to the field. This project is funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.