* 2048987
* Engaging Native American Students in STEM Career Development Through a Culturally-Responsive After-School Program Using Virtual Environments and 3-D Printing
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Nicole Colston, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,497,659.00

The project will develop and research an after-school program that is designed
to increase the STEM career interests and motivations of Native American middle-
school students. Students will use digital technologies, including virtual
reality (VR), augmented reality (AR), and 3D printing, to solve spatial design
problems presented through the project’s culturally responsive, problem-based
learning education modules. Through a generative co-design process involving
after-school educators, community members, and students, the project will
incorporate historical and contemporary cultural knowledge in the development of
learning environments that are relevant to Native American students. The target
audiences for this project are middle-school students and after-school educators
from three Tribal Nations in Oklahoma. The project will advance the
infrastructure and capacity for after-school STEM programs in three Tribal
Nations, the Pawnee, Citizen Potawatomi, and the Chickasaw Nations. Over 250
Native American students will be served in after-school programs that are
facilitated by educators prepared through summer professional development
programs. The project will create technology centers and an inclusive curriculum
to support the community-defined hackathons where family and Tribal citizens are
exposed to new workplace technologies (VR, AR, 3D printing) in a way that
prioritizes the practices, knowledge, skills, and values of each Tribal Nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project research will focus on the impacts of the after-
school programs on Native American youth and variables relevant their STEM
career development. The project research plan draws on contemporary indigenous
scholarship about the role of personal and science identity development on the
career attitudes of Native American. Mixed methods will be employed in this
research. Qualitative data from observations, focus groups, narrative program
reports, and career life assessment approaches will explore the program impacts
on youth STEM identity and engagement. Pre-post quantitative measures will
assess student interest, motivation, spatial learning, and STEM identity. The
project will make its research findings, after-school curricular resources, and
a digital artifact repository available online for other Tribal Nations and
after-school programs. The knowledge and insights gained from this research will
provide evidence for the usefulness of project resources and will add to the
knowledge base on developing culturally responsive programs that are co-created
with the community. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.