* 2048453
* SBIR Phase I:  PolyBrickâ„¢: Polymer-regolith composite landing pads build from in-situ lunar materials
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Jeffery Greenblatt, EMERGING FUTURES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2022
* USD 255,916.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enhance exploration and commercial
development of the Moon and, eventually, solar system, by lowering the risk of
damage to surface and orbital infrastructure from ejected lunar dust during
rocket landings and launches. This activity is in the area of material
processing/manufacturing in space, and focuses on the space infrastructure
(civil works) market sector, similar to roads and airports on Earth. Creating a
viable, cost-effective solution to mitigate lunar dust will lower the cost of
accessing the lunar surface and accelerate the development of lunar surface
infrastructure that is necessary for all aspects of sustainable commercial space
development, including mining, manufacturing, construction, habitation, power
generation, communications, and in particular, transportation. Facilitating
lunar exploration will expand scientific knowledge of the solar system. It will
also enhance commercial development that will expand economic opportunities by
opening new areas of the economy in space, with inevitable spin-off benefits for
life on Earth. In the long term, the capacity to create new areas for habitation
on the Moon and throughout the solar system will have profound impacts on human
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project proposes building lunar landing pads to address the problem of
surface dust ejected during rocket landings and launches, which can otherwise
damage both nearby and distant infrastructure, including those structures
located the other side of the Moon and in orbit. To minimize transport costs
from Earth, surface infrastructure must be constructed from local materials as
much as possible. Instead of using high-energy processes to harden regolith,
this approach will bind it with a high-performance polymer created from lunar
volatiles co-located with water-ice in polar regions. This solution reduces
mass, cost, and technical risk by leveraging anticipated water-ice mining
operations and utilizing discarded volatiles from their operations to produce
high-quality polymers. The approach may be sustainable, producing enough
material annually to replace worn-out sections of landing pads. Phase I will
focus on converting raw volatiles into polymer precursors, fabricating/testing
candidate composite materials, and elaborating the concept of operations,
through a combination of research, modeling, and laboratory experiments.
Information gathered during Phase I will narrow the range of candidate polymers
for further consideration, identifying chemical synthesis pathways for more
extensive development, and highlighting areas of improvement to maximize
commercial success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.