* 2048678
* Collaborative Research: How do selection, plasticity, and dispersal interact to determine coral success in warmer and more variable environments?
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2024
* Kirstin Meyer-Kaiser, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 10/31/2024
* USD 433,539.00

Coral reefs host thousands of marine species, help protect coastlines from storm
damage, generate tourism, and house fish used for human consumption. However,
corals are vulnerable to increasing water temperatures, which can lead to coral
death. One way for reefs to survive in warming oceans is for corals that are
well-suited to warmer waters to repopulate reefs that have less temperature-
tolerant individuals. For this strategy to succeed, however, the more
temperature-tolerant corals need to be able to disperse to and survive in these
different environments. This project takes advantage of reef systems in the
Pacific nation of Palau that naturally experience a wide range in temperatures
across short geographic distances. Using cutting-edge ecological and genomic
techniques, the team of investigators is directly testing whether young corals
from Palau’s warmest reefs can successfully be carried by ocean currents to
Palau’s currently cooler reefs and subsequently survive and thrive in these
habitats. Given the relevance of this research for the local ecology, the team
is disseminating results to the Palauan government through a written report in
conjunction with Palauan scientists who are interning with the team, and to the
Palauan people through public presentations. As part of this work, the
investigators are maintaining a blog and are organizing a music-lecture series
combining dance, music, and science to promote awareness of the coral reef
crisis across English and Spanish-speaking communities in the US. Results from
this project are informing restoration and conservation practices of the Coral
Conservation Consortium as well as other efforts
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major question in evolutionary biology is how
plasticity and adaptation interact to influence survival under novel
environments. Understanding these processes is increasingly important as rising
temperatures associated with climate change influence species globally. For
marine organisms with pelagic larval phases, including reef-building corals, the
post-settlement period constitutes a critical bottleneck for adaptation and
plasticity, with the added complexity that the conditions experienced and time
spent as larvae can incur carryover effects. This project leverages reefs in
Palau that span a steep environmental gradient to study how environmental
variation drives selection and plasticity and to examine if dispersal between
reefs limits success across habitats due to carryover effects. The investigators
are testing the overarching hypothesis that corals from warmer and more variable
environments are adapted to warmer temperatures and exhibit increased
plasticity, but that dispersal between reefs incurs a fitness cost. The team
integrates field and molecular techniques to: 1) investigate the degree of
selection occurring on warmer and more variable reefs, 2) test whether corals
transplanted to more variable environments improve their thermal tolerance
through developmental plasticity, and 3) examine whether delays in metamorphosis
required for dispersal across reefs comes at a fitness cost due to carryover
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.