* 2048770
* Advancing Our Understanding of Intraseasonal United States Severe Convective Storm Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Vittorio Gensini, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 474,682.00

Severe thunderstorms and associated hazardous weather are often concentrated in
time, where outbreaks of severe weather are clustered over short periods on the
order of days to weeks. The frequency of favorable weather patterns for severe
thunderstorms suggests the connection to large scale weather patterns. This
award will allow for further study of the physical mechanisms that drive
intraseasonal variability in severe convective storms. The outcomes from this
award will be based on the potential for improvement in the prediction of severe
weather outbreaks at the subseasonal scale, which is relevant to stakeholders in
the agriculture, aviation, and insurance sectors of the economy. Outreach will
be conducted to improve public understanding of science, and education and
training will take place through the inclusion of multiple graduate and
undergraduate students in the project. Students at the US Naval Academy will
also be involved in the project as collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will conduct a study to advance community understanding of the
physical mechanisms that drive observed intraseasonal variability in severe
convective storms and their associated hazards. The researchers hypothesize that
extremely active and inactive episodes of severe convective storms in the
continental US may result from the projection of intraseasonal teleconnections
onto synoptic and mesoscale severe weather parameters. The three sources of
forcing for US weather variability are the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO),
Atmospheric angular momentum (AAM) or Global Wind Oscillation (GWO), and the El
Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO). The following science questions will be
addressed through the use of reanalysis data, historical records of severe storm
activity, and compositing techniques: 1) What are the physical pathways by which
the intraseasonal frequency of severe convective storms is modulated by the MJO
and GWO, what fraction of intraseasonal severe storm variability is explained by
the MJO and GWO, and at what time lags does the modulation pathway tend to be
strongest and weakest? 2) What observational evidence, taken from Rossby wave
packet tracing and composites of synoptic- and mesoscale variables known to be
associated with severe weather in the U.S. physically supports intraseasonal
severe weather variability? 3) How does the modulation of severe weather events
and favorable environmental conditions vary by geographic region, by time of
year, by diurnal cycle, and by phase of ENSO and how does the time lag
identified in question 1 vary with any of the above factors? 4) How common are
intraseasonal Forecasts of Opportunity, null events, and extended periods with
little-to-no severe convective storm activity and on what do they
depend?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.