* 2048554
* Collaborative Research: Kelvin-Helmholtz Instabilities at a Kuroshio Seamount (KHIKS)
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Eric Kunze, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 141,911.00

Wind-driven western boundary currents, such as the Kuroshio in the western
Pacific, transport large amounts of heat, salt and momentum northward,
contributing to the ocean overturning circulation and the climate system heat
balance. How western boundary currents vary in time and space, and how they lose
energy to their surroundings, are long-standing questions. Unlike the Gulf
Stream in the Atlantic where topographic features are rare, the Kuroshio
frequently interacts with ridges, islands and seamounts. Energy is thus
extracted from the large-scale flow through turbulent mixing, particularly in
settings with large shear in horizontal velocities. These are known to support a
variety of shear instabilities, such as Kelvin-Helmholtz (KH) or Holmboe,
whereby small perturbations in the flow amplify, to become important mechanisms
for turbulence generation. Although KH shear instability has been widely studied
in idealized laboratory experiments and numerical simulations, direct
observations in the ocean are rare and mostly confined to estuaries and sills.
Consequently, the generation, evolution and decay of KH-like billows in high-
Reynolds-number oceanic flows, their modulation by background flow and decay
into turbulence are under-observed in the open ocean. The project is a
collaboration with Taiwanese scientists, using their available ship-time, to
measure high-resolution temperature, salinity and velocity finestructure of
primary KH-like billows and evolution in the lee of a seamount in the path of
the Kuroshio. Several moorings will also be deployed to gain longer-term spatial
assessment of variability in the seamount vicinity. Turbulent dissipation and
mixing within the observed KH-like billows will be assessed, to determine their
roles in turbulent fluxes of heat, salinity, mass, and nutrients, modification
of Kuroshio and local water-masses, and energy dissipation in the Kuroshio, of
relevance to the gyre-scale circulation. This project supports two early-career
scientists in their transition to observational oceanographers. International
collaborations will provide shiptime and access to Kuroshio waters of global
scientific importance. Activities within the summer program for UW undergraduate
students are included, along with educational visits to K-12 classrooms, and
outreach at UW and local science centers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Shear
instabilities with Kelvin-Helmholtz (KH)-like characteristics will be measured
in the lee of a seamount in the path of the Kuroshio east of Taiwan. The
finescale 3-D (vertical, along- and across-stream) density structure will be
resolved to 10-m horizontally and 1-m vertically using towed CTD chain surveys,
augmented with shipboard ADCP and echosounder. Such detailed measurements in
such high-Reynolds-number oceanic flows are unprecedented, and will elucidate
their kinematic structure, dynamic evolution and associated turbulence, to offer
guidance for realistic numerical model simulations and laboratory experiments. A
moored array of ADCPs and temperature sensors will provide additional time-
series profiles of (i) shear and stratification upstream of the seamount, (ii)
high temporal and vertical resolution of 3-D velocity and echosounder images on
the seamount summit, and (iii) 3-D along- and across-stream time- series
profiles of velocity fields in the lee of the seamount. Turbulent dissipation
and mixing from multiple estimation methods and direct microstructure
measurements will help determine the role of these flow/topography interactions
on water-mass transformation and dissipation of a western boundary current.
Scientifically, understanding the dissipation of the balanced circulation and
the sources of diapycnal mixing in the ocean remain among the most pressing
challenges in physical oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.