* 2048430
* Towards a process-based understanding of different eruptive regimes at persistently degassing volcanoes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jenny Suckale, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2024
* USD 302,617.00

Not all volcanic eruptions are rare. Many volcanoes around the world erupt on a
regular basis, sometimes multiple times a day, sometimes every few days or
weeks. Most eruptions at frequently active volcanoes are relatively mild by
volcanic standards, but they tend to vary surprisingly in explosivity and
duration and this variability makes it difficult to reliably assess when and
where they might pose a threat to human life or property. The goal of this
proposal is to better understand what happens inside frequently active volcanoes
prior to eruption and why different types of eruptions can occur. This research
approaches these questions by developing mathematical model that can be tested
against existing observational data from samples erupted at these volcanoes. The
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine recently identified
the development of these kinds of models as one of the three grand challenges in
modern volcanology and our proposals aims to tackle this challenge. By doing so,
the researchers will enlarge the toolbox available in modern volcanology. To
extend the reach of our research to K-12 classroom, they will participate in an
existing professional development program for high-school teachers. Given that
the research probes forces and waves in the context of volcanic systems, the
work is ideally suited for integration into the physics curriculum at the high-
school level, which is aimed at understanding cause and effect in system models.
This proposal also supports the education of a graduate student working at the
interface between volcanology and applied mathematics and provides research
opportunities for historically disadvantaged students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this proposal is to underpin the existing typology of eruptive behavior
at persistently degassing volcanoes through an improved identification and
quantification of the various processes that can trigger instability in the top
few hundred meters of the plumbing system. The researchers will achieve this
goal by developing multi-scale, multi-physics models of volcanic conduit flow
that can be tested against crystalline-scale data. While the primary focus is on
basaltic volcanoes like Hawaii, U.S., and Stromboli, Italy, volcano, the work is
also relevant for persistently degassing volcanoes with more silicic
compositions like Mount Erebus, Antarctica, and Karymsky Volcano, Kamchatka. Our
proposal integrates two existing model approaches, (1) the exchange flow model
focused on understanding the long-term stability of persistently active
volcanoes and (2) the slug model that prioritizes understanding short-term
eruptive behavior. Combining these seemingly contrasting points of view could
provide a more comprehensive basis for understanding the variability in eruptive
behavior than either model can in isolation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.