* 2048991
* Spatial Temporal Analysis of Multi-Subject Neuroimaging Data for Human Emotion Studies
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Tingting Zhang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 12/31/2022
* USD 110,687.00

This interdisciplinary research project will develop new statistical methods to
analyze multi-subject, stimulus-evoked functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) data collected from a psychology study of human emotion. The project will
increase understanding of how human brain circuits associated with emotions
function in a context that combines social support with externally generated
emotional stress. Ultimately, the project will contribute knowledge of how the
brain uses social support via the social regulation of emotion. This knowledge
will facilitate future research in this area. The results of this research will
assist clinical researchers interested in the neuropathology of many
neurodevelopmental and affective disorders affecting children and adults. The
project will provide the opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students
(especially those from underrepresented groups) to participate in advanced
statistical and multidisciplinary research involving human brain data. Project
results, including scientific findings and developed software, will be made
publicly available using public repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
statistical models and computational methods to be developed will address
typical challenges in analyzing fMRI data, including massive data size, complex
spatial and temporal properties, and a weak signal-to-noise ratio. The new low-
rank multivariate general linear models for multi-subject, stimulus-evoked fMRI
data feature the brain activity's common properties shared across different
regions, subjects, and stimulus types, and they require fewer parameters than
nonparametric methods to characterize variation in brain activity. As such, the
new approaches to fMRI data analysis are characterized by simultaneously reduced
model parameters, increased estimation efficiency, and sufficient model
flexibility. This project will develop new nonconvex optimization algorithms to
address the computational challenges in analyzing fMRI data. Applying the
developed methods to a fMRI study of human emotion, the investigators will
examine the difference in brain responses to negative emotional stimuli under
different social contact conditions and identify the association between
emotion-related brain functions and concomitant affective feelings under
different social contact conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.