* 2048407
* Mitonuclear interactions and coevolution in the dynamic plant mitochondrial tRNA pool
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Daniel Sloan, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 12/31/2023
* USD 559,796.00

Basic biological functions depend on direct molecular interactions between gene
products. Although the intimacy of such interactions has led to highly coevolved
and integrated sets of genes, some systems demonstrate remarkable lability,
essentially swapping gene products as “interchangeable parts” or rewiring entire
networks of molecular interactions. This project will use the diverse pool of
plant mitochondrial transfer RNAs (tRNAs) and the associated network of tRNA-
processing enzymes as a model to understand how molecular systems respond when
one gene is lost and functionally replaced by another. The research will provide
training at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels in
bioinformatics, molecular genetics, and evolutionary biology. It will also be
coupled with outreach efforts and programs for first-year undergraduates to
broaden access to career opportunities in computational
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In some plant lineages, including the angiosperm
genus Silene, there is an ongoing process of tRNA gene loss from the
mitochondrial genome and functional replacement by import of nuclear-encoded
tRNAs from the cytosol. These replacements amount to exchanging bacterial-like
(mitochondrial) genes for archaeal-like (nuclear) genes that are separated by
billions of years of evolution. It is not clear how these changes occur without
disrupting the essential functions of mitochondrial translation systems because
the maturation and charging of tRNAs depends on specific interactions with a
number of nuclear-encoded enzymes (e.g., aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases). This
project will use genomic, transcriptomic, and experimental approaches to
investigate how tRNA-processing enzymes change in amino acid sequence and
subcellular targeting in Silene species with different histories of recent tRNA
gene loss/replacement. The work will distinguish between two alternative
hypotheses: 1) that existing mitochondrial enzymes have evolved to act on
cytosolic tRNAs as new substrates, or 2) that cytosolic enzyme networks have
been retargeted to the mitochondria, maintaining their functional relationship
with the newly imported cytosolic tRNAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.