* 2048788
* Collaborative Research: Exploiting Geomagnetic Records to Describe Past and Present Ocean Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Robert Tyler, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 283,001.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electrically conducting ocean
generates electric currents and associated magnetic fields as it flows through
the Earth’s magnetic field. These electric currents vary in time with changes in
the ocean’s electrical conductivity and velocity, and can be detected remotely
by land and satellite magnetometers. There is therefore an opportunity to
recover ocean flow and conductivity variability from magnetometer data.
Extracted signals are very useful, as they represent depth integrals of
conductivity and conductivity transport, which can stand as proxies for heat
content and heat transport over the measurement durations – quantities that have
been hard to measure with other methods. Magnetometer data come from hundreds of
land magnetic observatories (some with hourly data extending back a century) as
well as from modern satellite magnetic surveys. The proposed work will extract
past ocean variability from long, land geomagnetic observatory records, develop
forward models for predicting the oceanic magnetic fields, and ultimately
develop data assimilation strategies for both land and satellite observations.
This project will examine both fundamental components of ocean electrodynamics
and exploit a new data type for monitoring and understanding ocean variability
and steric sea-level changes. The electromagnetic field modules in the model
used here will be made publicly available. Workshops will be organized to
introduce students and early career scientists to analysis of geomagnetic
observatory data and its connection to oceanographic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extracting oceanic signals from magnetic data
is challenging because the signals are relatively weak and a priori knowledge of
the signal is required. This proposal demonstrates method feasibility with
preliminary work on a century of ocean tidal variability extracted from the
Honolulu geomagnetic observatory data. These independent data confirm a trend
toward increasing tidal amplitudes previously found in Honolulu tide gauge data
that has been attributed to ocean warming. The Honolulu series will be
thoroughly analyzed to optimize the extraction of ocean tidal signals. The
methods will be extended to extract other predictable ocean signals there, such
as inertial oscillations and interannual oscillations. Similar methods will be
applied to geomagnetic observatory data from other locations. Extensions will
include canonical-correlation multivariate analyses of data from multiple
locations as well as from satellite data and geomagnetic field models.
Additional tasks will involve the development and use of forward models to
calculate the magnetic (and electric) fields given tidal and circulation ocean
model flow. Extracted signals represent depth integrals of conductivity and
conductivity transport, useful as proxies for heat content and heat transport
over the measurement durations – quantities that have been hard to measure with
other methods. Thus, in addition to addressing fundamental components of ocean
electrodynamics the proposed work will be useful in exploiting a new data type
for monitoring and understanding ocean variability and steric sea-level
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.