* 2048785
* Collaborative Research: Foraminiferal Ecological Response to Ocean Conditions in the Northwest Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Claudia Benitez-Nelson, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 377,418.00

Foraminifera are tiny, shelled protists that live throughout the ocean. The
chemical composition of their shells varies as a function of the ocean
conditions during growth. Fossil foraminifera, which are common on the seafloor,
are used to reconstruct past ocean conditions and Earth’s climate history. New
data show that the mix of foraminifera species present in the Northeast Pacific
Ocean is changing rapidly in response to ocean warming events, commonly referred
to as marine heat waves. This study will improve our ability to use temperate
and high-latitude species in paleoclimate research. It will also help quantify
how modern climate change is modifying the species present in this region. The
study will include collecting specimens in plankton nets and sediment traps. It
will quantify the species present during the sediment trap deployment and will
compare the composition of their shells to ocean conditions when they grew. A
small number of specimens will be grown in the laboratory and additional
specimens will be used for genetic analyses. This project will help show how
modern ocean conditions impact the mix of species present in this region and how
growth conditions influence the composition of their shells. This project will
support two graduate students at Oregon State University (OSU) and multiple
undergraduate students at OSU and at the University of South Carolina.
Foraminifera shells from this research project will be imaged on a MicroCT
scanner to generate 3D images. Those images will then be made available to the
broader community for research and teaching purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will improve the utility of temperate and high-latitude planktic
foraminifera in paleoclimate research and quantify the effects of modern climate
change on foraminifera assemblages in the Northeast Pacific Ocean. The main
objectives are to expand our knowledge of the ecology and environmental controls
on the geochemistry of temperate and higher-latitude foraminifera species,
quantify their response to modern changes in oceanographic conditions
(specifically marine heat waves), and constrain foraminiferal geochemical
signatures as they sink to the seafloor. This will be achieved through a
significant field-based and laboratory effort that includes newly collected
plankton tows, short-duration ship-based culture experiments, assemblage data
from archived plankton tow samples, and the deployment of two moored sediment
traps. The proposed multi-pronged sampling strategy will provide critical
samples needed to understand the biogeochemistry and ecology of foraminifera in
this important ocean margin region, increase their utility in understanding past
oceanographic conditions, and lay the groundwork for understanding how high-
latitude species will respond to future climate change. Highly controlled
culture experiments will quantify trace element incorporation dynamics and
mechanisms responsible for intrashell trace element variability in temperate to
polar species. The results of these experiments will offer important information
that can be used to interpret the geochemistry of fossil foraminifera in
temperate to high-latitude regions, broaden our understanding of the controls on
trace element incorporation in high-latitude and temperate foraminifera species,
and improve their utility in paleoceanographic reconstructions. Sediment trap,
plankton tow, and cultured specimens will be analyzed for their trace element
and isotopic composition. Live captured specimens will be analyzed to determine
their genotype and microbiome. Foraminifera and sediment trap samples not used
by the PIs in this project will be archived at the OSU Marine Geological
Repository for future studies by the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.