* 2048874
* Mixed Reality Based Interactive Cybersecurity Education for Middle School Students
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Chien-Chung Shen, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 01/31/2024
* USD 390,400.00

Individuals and organizations around the world are turning to information and
communication technology (ICT) to help manage all aspects of life and
businesses. ICT companies are at the same time continuously developing new
approaches to advance online safety, security, and privacy. The shortage of
cybersecurity professionals creates risks for both national and homeland
security. These risks are exacerbated by the lack of diversity among
cybersecurity professionals. Cybersecurity education programs that meet the
needs of a more diverse group of students and can be easily implemented by
educators are needed. These programs need to expose students to cybersecurity
starting in the middle-school years when they begin to solidify their academic
and other identities. By enhancing the knowledge of cybersecurity and positive
motivation, such programs could lead to potential future interest in
cybersecurity careers, thus creating a pipeline for a robust and diverse
cybersecurity workforce. This project will formulate, design, and prototype
innovative mixed-reality (MR) learning content to make cybersecurity concepts
concrete and engaging for middle school students. The work will be guided by an
interdisciplinary team of scholars from the University of Delaware and involves
partnerships with the Delaware Chapter of the Computer Science Teachers
Association, local schools and districts. The project is intended to directly
impact 10 middle school teachers and approximately 350 students including
students with disabilities through the design, pilot, and implementation
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is guided by three goals: (1)
iteratively design a set of concrete and interactive MR activities addressing
key cybersecurity concepts (e.g., steganography, phishing, and firewalls) with
teacher and student input throughout the design process; (2) increase student
knowledge of key cybersecurity concepts, understanding of the importance of
cybersecurity, and interest in cybersecurity careers; and (3) produce a set of
design principles for MR activities in computing. MR activities will be
iteratively refined based on observations, teacher interviews, and student
survey feedback. Short pre-pilots will test the usability of the materials and
provide teachers a classroom context to evaluate success. A final pilot will be
conducted in middle school classrooms utilizing a pre/posttest design with
assessments of student cybersecurity learning and motivation. Based on the wide
attention on cybersecurity in the workforce, this work will help create new
models for K-12 cybersecurity education while exposing students to new and
emerging technologies. The research instruments, assessment tools, and outcomes
of this work will be disseminated through workshops, publications,
presentations, and a web portal. This project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports
projects that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and
processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.