* 2048841
* State-Run Lotteries, Consumer Bias, and Optimal Policy
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Dmitry Taubinsky, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/29/2024
* USD 186,765.00

The average American household spends $665 per year playing state-run lottery
games. Lottery revenues are valuable to state and local governments. However,
critics have claimed that state-run lotteries do not serve the public good,
because lottery purchasers are overly optimistic about the chance they will win.
This project seeks to answer the following question: should states run lotteries
such as Mega Millions and Powerball, and if so, how should such lotteries be
structured? The answer depends on a series of larger questions in behavioral
economics. How much of lottery consumption is driven by entertainment and other
normatively acceptable preferences versus ignorance, innumeracy, and other
behavioral factors that a social planner might want to mitigate? Do lower-income
people spend more on lottery tickets, and if so is does this enhance the welfare
consequences of offering lotteries (because it reflects consumer surplus for
people with higher marginal utility) or does this decrease the welfare
consequences of offering lotteries (because it reflects exploitation of
behavioral bias)? The goal of this project is to study state-run lotteries by
building on recent advances in behavioral public economics. The first step is to
collect new empirical data and analyses that identify a set of statistics that
determine optimal lottery policy. The second step is to use the empirical
parameters to simulate the welfare effects of lotteries and different design
choices. This will provide the first benefit-cost analysis of state-run
lotteries that theoretically and quantitatively considers the alleged behavioral
biases at the heart of the policy discussion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
studies optimal lottery policy through the lens of optimal taxation, where
lotteries are a taxed good whose consumers may be subject to behavioral biases.
The project starts with a derivation of new sufficient statistics formulas for
optimal pricing and attributes of a government-provided good. The key parameters
of the welfare formulas will be estimated using lottery prizes and sales data
and a large new nationally representative survey. The prize and sales data allow
estimation of how lottery demand varies with ticket prices, jackpot amounts and
smaller prizes. The new survey will generate a nationally representative dataset
of how lottery expenditures vary with income, and how they vary with measures of
innumeracy and poor statistical reasoning. These empirical moments permit
estimation of a structural model of lottery demand, which will be used to
examine the welfare consequences of eliminating or restructuring state-run
lotteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.