* 2048220
* CAREER: Grammatical change and reconstruction
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Don Daniels, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2027
* USD 260,603.00

Understanding the abstract, cognitive principles that underlie language change
has long been a topic of linguistic research. However, the bulk of work on
language change has focused on major world languages--in large part because they
tend to have long written histories. In addition, studies employing comparative
reconstruction have concentrated on identifying and recreating the words and
sounds of undocumented proto-languages. This project broadens the empirical
basis for theories of language change by examining change in less studied
languages and language families, thereby taking on the challenge posed by
languages that lack written records and, in some cases, that have previously
remained understudied or entirely undocumented. It also shifts attention from
identifying the words and sounds of proto-languages by developing methods for
reconstructing grammar, and it applies those methods to less-described languages
in order to further broaden our understanding of language
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s primary methodological contribution
to theories of language change is to develop research practices for
reconstructing distributional restrictions. The project focuses on the
distributional properties of cross-linguistically rare structures, including
flexible word classes; suppletive roots for verbs of transfer that index the
person and number of the recipient argument; and a focus construction that marks
tense on nominal constituents. In the pursuit of these goals, the project
engages team members to document previously undocumented languages. The project
also provides training opportunities for indigenous researchers to prepare them
for documenting understudied and endangered languages. All of the language
documentation resulting directly from this project are to be stored securely in
a language archive, and made freely available to community members, linguists,
and any other interested parties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.