* 2048234
* CAREER: Surfactant impact on laminar drag reduction of realistically-textured superhydrophobic surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Paolo Luzzatto-Fegiz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Drag-reducing coatings have been investigated to reduce the large pressure
differences that can arise in microfluidic devices and in micro-cooling
applications, as well as to enhance control in chemical or biological analysis.
Superhydrophobic surfaces is a promising type of drag-reducing coating, which
uses a combination of microscopic texture and hydrophobicity to retain a thin
coating of air bubbles when submerged in a liquid, like water. However,
surfactants, which are naturally present in the environment or in many working
liquids, can drastically curtail the achievable drag reduction through a
mechanism that is highly sensitive to the details of the coating texture. This
project will use simulations, theory, and experiments to investigate drag
reduction phenomenon in laminar flow microchannels with superhydrophobic
surfaces in the presence of surfactants. The project will encompass several
educational activities, including university course developments, an
undergraduate research program, a hands-on activity for local junior high school
outreach events, and a K-12 learning activity targeting the Next Generation
Science Standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to predict
superhydrophobic drag reduction in laminar flow with surfactants, as a function
of texture geometry, bulk flow properties, surfactant type and concentration.
This will be achieved by examining superhydrophobic surfaces of progressively
increasing complexity, using a combination of numerical simulations, theory, and
experiments. The numerical simulations will enable precise control of surfactant
properties and concentration and solve the equations for the transport of mass,
momentum, and surfactant in the fluid interior and along the airâ€“water
interface. The results will be used to develop tractable theoretical models,
which will yield insight about how flow properties and texture geometry affect
the resulting drag. The theoretical models will also be used for rapid drag
reduction predictions. In the experiments, superhydrophobic surfaces will be
placed in a microfluidic system, and confocal microscopy will be used to measure
velocity fields near the air-water interface. The experiments will validate the
simulations and theory. This three-pronged computational, theoretical, and
experimental investigation will advance our understanding of surfactant effects
on drag using superhydrophobic surfaces in realistic laminar flow conditions and
lead to reliable prediction and mitigate strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.