* 2048087
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research Experience in Biological Mechanisms
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Mark Peifer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 413,808.00

This REU Site award to the University of North Carolina (UNC), Chapel Hill, NC,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2021-2023. The goals of the program are to inspire, train, and enhance diversity
in the next generation of biological researchers by extending the research
opportunities of UNC to talented undergraduates who attend other institutions.
It is anticipated that a total of 30 students will be trained in the program,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities or from groups
underrepresented in biological research: underrepresented minority groups,
first-generation students, community college transfer students and students with
disabilities. Students will be selected by the program leadership team who will
take into consideration an applicant’s interest in biological research and the
potential for the program to enhance a student’s path toward graduate studies.
Students will learn how research is conducted, executed and communicated, and
many will present the results of their work at regional or national scientific
conferences. Assessment of the program will be done through the online SALG
URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine
their career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of this REU program is
biological mechanisms, with a focus on the cellular and molecular pathways that
underlie biological processes. Research areas include biochemistry, cell
biology, developmental biology, genetics, molecular biology, and microbiology
and span a variety of experimental systems from bacteria to flies to mice.
Students will conduct research on ongoing projects in the laboratories of UNC
faculty where students will experience the excitement that comes from making
discoveries that advance knowledge. Students will work alongside bench mentors
(postdoctoral fellows and graduate students) and faculty. The research
experience will be enhanced by training in responsible conduct of research and
by weekly journal clubs, weekly professional development workshops, and a
learning community of students. Professional development events will prepare
students for entry into and successful completion of graduate programs. An end-
of-program symposium will highlight student research accomplishments. More
information about the program is available by visiting
https://www.med.unc.edu/oge/stad/sure/ or by contacting the PI, Dr. Miriam
Braunstein (miriam_braunstein@med.unc.edu), or the Program Director, Dr. Debra
Ragland (debra_ragland@med.unc.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.