* 2048947
* Collaborative Research: Caution and Reference Effects
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Pietro Ortoleva, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 269,624.00

Understanding how we make decisions is essential to predict economic outcomes
and to design optimal policy. Decades of research documented how people often
deviate from rationality and tend to do so following specific behavioral
patterns. Three of these patterns have been widely documented and are of
particular importance in economics: the endowment effect (where the act of
ownership increases the value that people associate to a good), loss aversion
(the tendency to avoid losses over achieving equivalent gains), and the
certainty effect (a bias towards risk-free options, in violation of Expected
Utility theory). All three phenomena have been shown to play prominent roles in
many contexts, including investment, medical, and educational decisions. In this
project, the research teams introduce a new approach to study all three
phenomena jointly as stemming from one single intuition: it suggests that all
three can originate from the fact that individuals are sometimes unsure of what
they prefer and act with caution. This approach makes novel predictions about
the relationship of these phenomena and offers a novel tool to organize existing
empirical evidence. The team will also conduct also conduct an experiment to
test the new predictions of this theory. The results of this project may give us
new insights into how to encourage people to save for retirement and protect
their health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team wants to
demonstrate that all three phenomena above (the endowment effect, loss aversion,
and the certainty effect) are captured jointly by the Cautious Utility model. In
this model, the individual has a set of utility functions—as if unsure of which
one to use—and adopts the most pessimistic one to evaluate each option. The
project shows that the Cautious Utility model is characterized axiomatically
from imposing a (known) weakening of the independence axiom of Expected Utility
that rules out the opposite of the certainty effect. It then shows that this
model implies loss aversion and the endowment effect—ruling out the opposite.
This establishes a strong theoretical link between these phenomena. They will
also show how this model can be used to organize existing empirical evidence,
including observations at odds with leading alternative models. Finally, they
plan an experiment that tests the critical novel predictions of the Cautious
Utility model on the empirical relationship between these
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.