* 2048373
* Collaborative Research: Direct determination and model analysis of elemental stoichiometry of phytoplankton in the Oregon Coast
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Curtis Deutsch, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2024
* USD 471,806.00

The ratio of carbon:nitrogen:phosphorus (C:N:P) in marine organic matter is used
to study biochemical cycling of nutrients in the ocean. The cycling of nutrients
is a process thought to be controlled by phytoplankton. Despite variability in
individual measurements of the C:N:P in various parts of the ocean, the global
plankton C:N:P averages out to a relatively constant value through ecosystem
processes. What the important processes are and how the average ratio of these
elements is maintained in the ocean has only been examined in modeling
exercises. However, the assumption of a constant ratio of C:N:P in phytoplankton
is most likely violated in real life, leading to uncertainties in model outputs.
Laboratory experiments have shown that there is a large range of possible C:N:P
ratios in phytoplankton, but no direct measurements of naturally growing
phytoplankton in the ocean have been made to support the laboratory findings. In
addition, no current models of phytoplankton cell biology have been tested with
field data to determine if is possible to predict changes in the C:N:P ratio
given environmental conditions. Through a direct measure of phytoplankton this
study will examine the spatial variability in C:N:P across the Oregon coastal
upwelling system to the nutrient-poor waters offshore. Using laboratory
techniques, researchers will selectively remove phytoplankton from the suspended
particles and apply newly-developed, high-sensitivity analyses to determine
phytoplankton specific C:N:P. Through a direct measure of phytoplankton we will
examine how environmental conditions affect C:N:P in the sampling region. This
C:N:P data will be incorporated into a model that predicts C:N:P in
phytoplankton under a range of environmental conditions. Success in this
endeavor will provide a predictive model for the phytoplankton C:N:P and
eliminate the need to make assumptions about a fixed C:N:P in phytoplankton.
Results from the proposed research will be used in undergraduate and graduate
teaching. Also, relevant science will be disseminated to underrepresented and
underserved audiences, through collaboration with The Science &amp; Math
Investigative Learning Experiences Program (The SMILE Program) of Oregon State
University (OSU). This proposal will support the development of two teacher
training workshops that give teachers hands-on experiments that can be used in
their classrooms. The proposed research will provide training for a graduate
student and several undergraduate students. We have been successful in
recruiting under-represented students and will continue the practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the reliance on biogeochemical models to both
predict and hindcast ocean productivity and in turn, model reliance on C:N:P
assumptions, it is critically important to determine the drivers of
phytoplankton C:N:P variability and the extent to which the stoichiometry is
flexible in natural oceanic systems. By combining field efforts and numerical
modeling we propose to 1) measure and describe the variability in phytoplankton
specific C:N:P across a large gradient in nutrient availability (Oregon Coast to
offshore), 2) combine observations with a mechanistic phytoplankton model to
attribute the role of environmental factors and community composition in
generating the observed plankton stoichiometric variability, 3) evaluate the
contribution of phytoplankton C:N:P to that of marine particles, and 4) include
a mechanistic representation of phytoplankton stoichiometry in a high-resolution
regional ocean model (ROMS) to interpret observations and explore their regional
implications. Success in this endeavor will provide the oceanographic community
with phytoplankton specific C:N:P data that will allow us to test and improve
phytoplankton physiology based ecosystem models, improving the predictive
capability of biogeochemical cycles, and ecosystem responses to future climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.