* 2048632
* Collaborative Research: Cold Tongue Mixing
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Deepak Cherian, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 03/31/2026
* USD 138,492.00

This project will examine temporal and spatial variability of diapycnal mixing
of heat within the oceanic cold tongues of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans
through multi-year time series measurements of dissipation of temperature
variance, and through post-analysis of high temporal and spatial resolution
ocean models. Temperature variance dissipation is measured using ChiPods,
instruments developed by PI's lab at OSU that make high-frequency turbulence
measurements to derive key parameters of ocean mixing. The Chipods will be
deployed on moorings in the equatorial Pacific and Atlantic oceans where they
will make continuous measurements of turbulence over four years. The project
includes two early career scientists and educational components at the
undergraduate student level both in basic engineering construction and through a
new program aimed at increasing racial and ethnic diversity in ocean sciences
through an experiential learning activity targeting US and West African
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cold tongues of the equatorial Atlantic
and Pacific Oceans stand out as regions of cool tropical sea surface
temperatures that take up anomalously large amounts of heat. Shear-driven
turbulence moves heat well below the mixed layer and away from the surface. The
rate of diathermal heat transport is determined by mixing, which can be measured
directly using ChiPods deployed on moorings. The proposed work focuses on
resolving long-term mixing signals in the equatorial cold tongues. This will
allow evaluation of the role of mixing in interannual to decadal-scale
processes, help determine the extent to which mixing influenced the Pacific cold
tongueâ€™s heat uptake during the warming hiatus, quantify how much heat is fluxed
down to the deeper ocean, and quantify related model biases. ChiPods will be
deployed at three equatorial mooring sites, two in the Atlantic and one in the
Pacific. Analyses will be aimed at better understand intermittency of turbulence
and its effect on seasonal, interannual and longer-term variations in vertical
turbulent heat flux, particularly associated with tropical instability
waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.