* 2048188
* CAREER: Mobile Underwater Communications Networks Supported by Autonomous Surface Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Aijun Song, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 05/31/2026
* USD 362,590.00

Autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) represent a critical innovation in ocean
exploration. However, wireless communication and networking capabilities among
AUVs remain primitive, hindering marine technologies’ advancement. This CAREER
project utilizes mobility to address challenges in underwater wireless
communications and networking. Equipped with multiple modes of communication
devices, autonomous surface vehicles (ASVs) are used to serve as communication
base-stations for expanded coverage and enhanced data rates. This project
develops new learning-based solutions by integrating knowledge from robotics,
digital communications, networking, and machine learning. The proposed network
contributes to ocean technologies as a flexible, low-cost facilitator, enabling
effective sampling, exploration, and management of the ocean resources. An
underwater robotics competition for K-12 students will be launched following the
successful regional MATHCOUNTS initiative. The outreach activities will
strengthen the STEM competitiveness in the state of Alabama. The project’s
overall goal is to support ocean science progress and the development of the
future blue economy workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project envisions an
underwater mobile multi-modal communication network with a fleet of ASVs and
AUVs. Fundamental research issues are to be explored within this mobile network,
for example, understanding how the mobile acoustic channel fluctuates in the
micro-scale of tens of milliseconds and investigating the optimal ocean sampling
strategy for given spatial correlation properties. The gained insights will help
develop innovative signal processing techniques at multiple layers, from channel
modeling to system optimization. Three research thrusts will be launched,
including 1) mobile acoustic channel modeling, 2) mobile adaptive acoustic
communications, and 3) integrative sampling, communications, and navigation.
Research evaluation will be conducted in both numerical simulations and field
experiments. The developed techniques will demonstrate how the science insights
advance our abilities to precisely model the acoustic channel, reliably
communicate, and effectively sample in the ocean. The project outcomes are
expected to facilitate research of the next frontier, distributed adaptive ocean
sampling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.