* 2048324
* Collaborative Research: Estimating Subglacial Effective Pressure with Active-source Seismic Data
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Atsuhiro Muto, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 233,040.00

Many Antarctic glaciers are discharging ice to the sea and contributing to
global sea-level rise at an accelerating pace. However, future rates of ice
discharged remain uncertain in part because of incomplete characterization of
processes occurring at the ice-bed interface. In particular, ice-bed interface
processes depend sensitively on the subglacial effective pressure, N (overburden
pressure minus basal water pressure), but limited knowledge of how N changes in
space and time have inhibited the realistic incorporation of N into ice
discharge estimates. N has only been directly measured in a few locations.
Marine-acoustics researchers have proposed a seismic-wave propagation theory
that relates N of water-saturated granular sediments, similar to the subglacial
tills that are prevalent under Antarctic glaciers, to the seismic-wave
reflection characteristics. This project will conduct novel lab experiments to
constrain and test the theory, then investigate how N varies in space and time
in Antarctica from the existing active-seismic data with the insights gained
from the experiments. The outcome of this work could be applied to a large
volume of existing and future active-seismic data, allowing for the possibility
of increased mapping of N both in space and time. This could in turn lead to
improved understanding of glacier and ice-sheet dynamics and ultimately reduce
uncertainties in future projections of sea-level rise originating from the
Antarctic Ice Sheet, or any other ice mass underlain by till.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Subglacial effective pressure, N, is one of the key parameters
required for estimating glacial motion but is notoriously hard to measure.
Common techniques for estimating N have been the labor-intensive practice of
measuring it directly from boreholes and connected moulins or inferring it from
surface-velocity inversions. This project will test, calibrate and implement the
theory of seismic-wave propagation that relates N of water-saturated granular
sediments, developed for marine sediments, to subglacial conditions. A large-
diameter ring-shear device will be used to shear temperate ice over a range of
known till types at controlled N values, simulating subglacial slip over a
deformable bed. The ring shear will be outfitted with an acoustic signal
generating/sensing system that will allow continuous measurements of the seismic
reflection amplitude of the ice-bed interface. These data will be used to relate
reflection amplitudes directly to N in a situation where porosity and grain-size
distribution can be measured. Till types will include end member fine- and
course-grained tills, as well as a synthetic till generated to replicate
Whillans Ice Stream. Even if N is found to only have a second-order effect on
reflection amplitude and that porosity is the dominant factor, the experiments
will still provide a much-needed constraint for interpreting existing active-
seismic data in terms of porosity. The findings from the experiments will be
used to reanalyze existing active-seismic data to investigate how N varies with
space and time. Specifically, this work will reanalyze seismic data collected on
Whillans, Kamb and Rutford Ice Streams where grain-size distributions are known
from subglacial sediment-core samples. The results of this project could provide
a novel technique to greatly increase our understanding of subglacial hydrology
and dependency of ice flow on subglacial effective
pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.