* 2048345
* I-Corps: Intelligent Software Quality Monitoring and Improvement Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2021,03/31/2022
* Marouane Kessentini, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an intelligent software maintenance technology that focuses on
improvement of the software and systems that underpin our national
infrastructure and drive our economy. It is estimated corporations are spending
over $300 billion per year globally, paying down “technical debt” on addressing
issues related to maintaining legacy systems or dealing with bad software. By
adopting the proposed technology, software development teams will avoid critical
bugs that, in turn, will avoid financial loss. The proposed technology will help
chief technology officers (CTOs) and chief information officers (CIOs) - not
only developers - carry out several critical activities including: gaining
actionable insight into the state of their code; accurately estimating the scope
and cost of code cleanup; and assessing code quality trends and how to repair
these code quality issues. By carrying out these activities, the proposed
technology will decrease the time, cost, and risk of code cleanup while
improving team performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based
on the development of an intelligent refactoring bot that may be easily
integrated into any project repository. The bot may be customized to monitor the
quality in the repository after a number of pull-requests. The bot analyzes the
changed files to identify refactoring opportunities using a set of quality
attributes. It will then find the best sequence of refactorings to fix the
quality issues, if any. The developer is able to review the recommendations in
the generated pull-request. The initial proof-of-concept of the proposed
interactive refactoring software was tested on 12 large-scale, open-source, and
industrial systems with a total of 37 developers from industry. The technology
reduced the amount of time that developers spent to understand existing large-
scale source code by an average of 47%. Existing refactoring products, when
tested on the same systems, were able to reduce that time by less than 24% on
average. In addition, the technology was able to detect and fix an average of
92% of existing design defects in these systems. In contrast, existing
refactoring products were able to only detect an average of less than 76% of
these defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.