* 2048285
* CAREER: Hierarchical Structures and Tunable Mechanics of Polyelectrolyte Complex-Interpenetrating Network (PEC-IPN) Hydrogels
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Samanvaya Srivastava, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2026
* USD 363,226.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogels are water-laden polymer
networks with applications in diverse areas including drug delivery, cell and
tissue engineering, bioadhesives and tissue sealants and biosensing. This
project will create novel types of self-assembled hydrogels composed of two
interweaving polymeric networks, with one containing permanent linkages and the
other comprising reversible linkages held together by attractive electrostatic
interactions among oppositely charged polymers. These new materials will feature
complex, hierarchical nanoscale structures and unique elastic, flow and adhesive
properties, with relevance in development of the next generation of wet
adhesives and tissue sealants. Furthermore, the planned experiments will advance
our fundamental understanding of the assembly of charge-containing polymers and
the mechanisms through which reversibly-linked networks support the slow, in-
situ growth of permanently linked networks. In the broader context, this project
will further the understanding and appreciation of polymeric and adhesive
materials, polymer physics and chemistry, and advanced material characterization
techniques to high school, undergraduate and graduate students through hands-on
experiments and demonstrations, new courses and course modules, and regional
research symposia, thus motivating the next generation of polymer scientists. In
parallel, development of tutorials and interactive software data analysis tools
for soft material characterization techniques will contribute to educate and
expand the user base of these techniques and serve the broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creating hydrogels with controlled cohesive and
adhesive properties, during and after curing, remains a challenge. This project
will institute design paradigms for creating polyelectrolyte complex-
interpenetrating network (PEC-IPN) hydrogels featuring orthogonally tunable bulk
and interfacial strengths and toughness. Fundamental studies of self-assembly of
oppositely charged block polyelectrolytes into polyelectrolyte complex (PEC)
networks will elucidate their hierarchical structure, chain dynamics and
mechanical properties, and the evolution of these physical attributes upon
inclusion of small molecule or polymeric additives in PEC hydrogels.
Crosslinking of diverse chemically crosslinkable monomeric and polymeric
precursors, incorporated in PEC hydrogels, will be demonstrated as routes to
create PEC-IPN materials with controlled network microstructures. Furthermore,
the proposed studies will reveal the enhancements in bulk elasticity and
toughness of PEC-IPN hydrogels that emerge from stress dissipation in the self-
assembled PEC domains constituting the PEC network. Consequently, PEC-IPN
hydrogel adhesives with tuned bulk and interfacial mechanical properties will be
developed, targeting potential applications as robust underwater adhesives and
tissue sealants. Concurrently, this work will contribute towards establishing a
knowledge base for PEC self-assemblies, analogous to the existing base for
traditional amphiphilic block polymer assemblies. The proposed research will
thus develop a family of versatile self-assembled PEC-based materials that rival
yet are distinct from amphiphilic block polymer assemblies and expand the realm
of their applications such as micellar drug and gene delivery
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.