* 2048262
* CAREER: Principled and practical secure compilation using WebAssembly
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Deian Stefan, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2026
* USD 364,109.00

Building secure computer systems today is hard: a single bug in the source code
that programmers write or in the compilers they use to generate machine code
could expose systems to attack. Secure compilation is a principled approach to
building systems with end-to-end security guarantees from the start. When
compiling code, secure compilers ensure that the security properties of high-
level code are preserved down to the machine code level. Unfortunately, the gap
between the theory of secure compilation and practice is huge. In particular,
existing real-world industrial compilers are not secure compilers. The goal of
this project is to bridge this gap by extending the industrial WebAssembly
bytecode into a unifying principled and practical abstraction for secure
compilation. To this end, this project will develop (1) novel techniques and
principles which will serve as foundations for end-to-end secure systems and (2)
new tools that will allow programmers to build new secure systems and verify the
security of existing ones. The results of this project could make hundreds of
millions of users safer: end-to-end security guarantees can prevent exploits in
widely-used systems, from web browsers to next generation cloud platforms. The
project will also contribute to the education of both college and high school
students, and train the next generation engineers how to build end-to-end secure
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes a principled and practical
approach to building secure systems by turning WebAssembly into a secure
compilations intermediate representation (IR): a target IR for secure compilers
from high-level languages and as a source IR for secure compilers to machine
code. Turning WebAssembly into a secure compilation IR requires addressing
research challenges on two fronts. First, WebAssembly currently does not expose
any abstractions for reasoning about high-level security properties, like
memory-safety or constant-time. This makes it hard to build secure compilers to
WebAssembly. Second, existing compilers of WebAssembly are not proven to
preserve any security properties at the machine code level; bugs in compilers
and microarchitectural details could both undermine WebAssembly's security
guarantees (and thus the security of the systems that rely on these guarantees).
This project tackles these challenges by (1) developing secure compilers of
WebAssembly to native platforms, (2) extending WebAssembly with new abstractions
(e.g., for memory-safety and constant-time) that make it possible to build
secure compilers to WebAssembly, and (3) building secure compilers from high-
level languages to WebAssembly that preserve properties like memory-safety and
constant-time end-to-end. The project will yield both new innovations in formal
reasoning and advances in practical secure systems
building.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.