* 2048752
* Collaborative Research: Wind turbulence over shoaling surface waves and their impact on air-sea fluxes
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Tetsu Hara, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 363,399.00

This project will investigate the exchange of momentum and energy across the
air-water interface at the sea surface using a wave-following Large Eddy
Simulation (LES) in combination with flow visualization tools in a wind-wave
facility. The overall objective is to better understand modulation and possible
enhancement of drag coefficient due to shoaling waves. The results will
contribute to the development of accurate parameterizations of sea state
dependent air-sea fluxes, which can be incorporated in the ongoing coupling
efforts for atmosphere-wave-ocean weather and climate models (storm surge models
in particular). The project includes linkages with education and outreach
initiatives at the University of Rhode Island and University of Delaware. These
include training for graduate students in science education pedagogy, effective
outreach strategies, and science communication; summer fellowships in Research
Education for Undergraduates (REU); Laboratory visits for schoolchildren and
other groups; and open houses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In coastal waters
both observational and modeling studies show that the drag coefficient is
significantly enhanced by shoaling waves as waves slow down and become steeper.
However, the existing models significantly underestimate the shoaling wave
effect. This project will investigate how the shape of shoaling waves is
modified by wind forcing and how that wave shape alters the wind (turbulence)
field above the wave. The PIs hypothesize that coupled interaction between wave
shape and wind forcing enhances the drag coefficient over shoaling waves. To
test this, they will combine high resolution laboratory observations and large
eddy simulation (LES). The LES results will be validated against observations
and extended to investigate the impact of shoaling waves on scalar
fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.