* 2048902
* Estuary plumes as drivers of inner continental shelf benthic community structure and function
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Ming Li, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,097,772.00

In the coastal ocean, nutrient-rich river or estuary waters mix with less-
enriched marine waters creating plumes, regions that are very productive and
important for fisheries and nutrient cycling. The location and size of these
estuary plumes are highly dynamic because of seasonal changes in weather, winds,
and ocean currents. The amount of nutrients carried by plumes – and thus their
impact on the coastal ocean – also changes seasonally. This project is studying
how the plume of the nation’s largest estuary, the Chesapeake Bay, changes over
the course of the year and what those changes mean for food webs and nutrient
cycles in the coastal Atlantic Ocean. A model of water movements is being
developed to predict how river flow, winds, and currents converge to cause
seasonal changes in plume size, location, and composition. Research cruises
spanning the area of the plume within the coastal ocean are collecting material
within the plume as well as the animals living under and on top of the
sediments. In parallel, experiments conducted on the ship are investigating how
the animals and the chemical reactions in the sediment are affected by materials
within the plume. By combining this modelling, measurements of bottom animal
biomass and biodiversity, and nutrient experiments, this project is determining
how estuarine plumes drive coastal food webs and productivity. Broader impacts
include benefits to natural resource management through a better understanding
of the linkages between plume dynamics, food webs and fisheries. Doctoral
students, a postdoctoral scholar and undergraduate students are being trained in
modeling, experimental and field research methods. Increasing diversity in STEM
fields is occurring through a partnership with a community college (College of
Southern Maryland) to recruit summer interns for research experiences. Outreach
activities include the development of age-appropriate educational materials for
the public and the use of these materials at ‘in person’ or virtual outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal is to determine how the
magnitude and reactivity of organic matter inputs and environmental conditions
associated with spatially and temporally dynamic estuarine plumes affect inner
continental shelf benthic communities. The project is analyzing the role of
organic matter deposition, both labile and refractory, as a driver of benthic
community structure and sediment-water biogeochemical flux rates. An integrative
approach that combines hydrodynamic modelling, field observations and shipboard
experiments is linking benthic responses to seasonal changes in plume
characteristics. Specifically, a calibrated hydrodynamic model is being used to
establish the history of plume-driven conditions and to quantify particle
transport and deposition on the inner shelf. A survey of water-column
conditions, organic matter pools, and benthic and epibenthic community
composition at a fixed station grid are generating empirical measurements of
benthic taxonomic and functional composition, biodiversity, and biomass. These
measurements are being used to estimate secondary production and assess how it
varies seasonally. Sediment-water nutrient fluxes and organic matter-specific
nutrient assimilation rates (labile, refractory) by benthos are being quantified
using experimental core incubations. Hydrodynamic plume reconstructions are
coupled with observational and experimental data to test hypotheses regarding
the stimulation of benthic biomass, biodiversity, and secondary production by
plume particulate organic matter inputs both seasonally and spatially.
Statistical models that account for feeding mode, past exposure to plume
influence, lability of deposited organic matter, and physical forces (e.g.,
temperature, salinity, bed stress) are being developed to predict benthic
responses to simulated plume conditions and, potentially, inform understanding
of plume dynamics more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.