* 2048436
* Carbonic acid dissociation and calcite solubility in seawater of non-standard major ion composition
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Richard Zeebe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2024
* USD 352,057.00

The process of ocean acidification occurs through a series of chemical
reactions, beginning when carbon dioxide that has been dissolved in the ocean
reacts with water to produce carbonic acid. The chemical break down of carbonic
acid represents a critical step in the process of ocean acidification.
Additionally, the solubility of the mineral calcite is essential for the
stability and dissolution of minerals affected by ocean acidification. This is
important because carbonate minerals like calcite will dissolve as the oceans
become more acidic, therefore, this has significant implications for organisms
that build carbonate shells. This project will provide fundamental insight into
carbonic acid dissociation and calcite mineral solubility - phenomena of wide
interest to researchers within and beyond the field of chemical oceanography. It
will address an important gap in data availability and understanding of major
seawater chemical interactions within the carbonic acid system. Such information
is needed to provide the public, scientific leaders, and policymakers with a
better understanding of the consequences of unabated carbon emissions for ocean
chemistry and marine ecosystems in the open ocean, estuaries, coral reefs, and
more. The project integrates research and educational activities on ocean
acidification and climate change by introducing this information directly into
secondary school, college curricula, and scientific journals. The project
fosters education for undergraduate and graduate students from the ethnically
diverse population at the University of Hawaii, while conducting cutting-edge
research at the same time. In addition to supporting, educating, and mentoring
graduate students, two undergraduate students from the Global Environmental
Science program at the University of Hawaii will be supported each year. The
project will work with a local TV broadcast to produce a TV episode on ocean
acidification. The investigators will also coordinate various public educational
activities and outreach events at institutions and in collaboration with local
schools, educational centers, and Museums in Honolulu. The project results on
ocean chemistry and climate will capture the attention of oceanographers, a
broad scientific audience, and the general public
alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dissociation of carbonic acid and calcite
precipitation in ionic media such as seawater are ubiquitous phenomena in the
marine environment and are critical to numerous processes in solutions ranging
from brackish waters to brines and to applications from ocean acidification to
carbon sequestration. Carbonic acid dissociation and calcite solubility in
dilute solutions, simple NaCl media, and seawater at constant major ion ratios
(including Na, Mg, Ca, K, Cl, SO4) is relatively well understood and the
stoichiometric dissociation constants/solubility products are well known.
However, there is a significant gap in the fundamental understanding of the
thermodynamics of carbonic acid dissociation and calcite solubility in non-
standard seawater solutions, particularly for complex solutions and varying
concentrations of Mg, Ca, K, and SO4. Accurate thermodynamic data for such
solutions are presently missing. Yet, the data is critical for numerous modern
marine systems, including marginal seas and estuaries, sediment porewaters,
certain anoxic basins/hydrothermal environments, sea ice brines, cell
compartments in marine organisms, etc. Moreover, the ocean's major ion
composition has varied substantially in the past. This project will accurately
measure carbonic acid dissociation in seawater solutions of non-standard major
ion compositions, determine calcite solubility for the same solution
composition, and derive and implement critical parameters for chemical
speciation models (ion-pairing models, Pitzer models, etc.) based on the
measurements. Acid-base titrations under controlled laboratory conditions will
be conducted to determine the first and second stoichiometric dissociation
constant (K*'s) of carbonic acid in aqueous solutions of varying ionic strength,
temperature, and composition (Mg, Ca, K, and SO4), as well as measurements of
calcite solubility for the same solution composition. From the data, parameters
to improve existing chemical speciation models will be extracted, allowing
computation of K*'s and calcite solubility over a wide range of compositions.
The implications and applications of the project results are very broad and
relevant to chemical oceanography, marine biology, geochemistry,
paleoceanography, physical chemistry, medicine, and
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.