* 2048223
* CAREER: Learning and Leveraging the Structure of Large Graphs: Novel Theory and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Gautam Dasarathy, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Fowler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 225,913.00

From genetic interaction networks and the brain to wireless sensor networks and
the power grid, there exist many large, complex interacting systems. Graph
theory provides an elegant and powerful mathematical formalism for quantifying
and leveraging such interactions. Unsurprisingly, many modern tasks in science
and engineering rely on the discovery and exploitation of the structure of
graphs. Unfortunately, there is a stark disconnect between the purported
capabilities of data-driven algorithms for graph analytics and their real world
applicability. Specifically, the following key challenges emerge for existing
algorithms: (i) Reliance on large number of expensive experiments/measurements;
this is prohibitive in the large systems typically encountered in science and
engineering. (ii) Reliance on the availability of curated and labeled datasets;
this is untenable outside a narrow set of disciplines. (iii) Design for worst-
case scenarios; this lack of adaptivity to structure unique to the problem
severely impairs their statistical and computational efficiency. In response to
the above challenges, this research program will close the loop on traditional
machine learning systems where data acquisition and learning algorithms are
designed separately. The project will devise several novel compressive,
adaptive, and interactive algorithms that efficiently exploit structure in the
problem. These will be complemented by foundational advances to the theory of
learning and leveraging structure in graphs. The methodological advances will
have impact on diverse areas such as resilient cyber-infrastructure, robust
neuroimaging, and intervention design for pandemics. The research activities are
tightly integrated with a comprehensive education, mentoring, and outreach plan
that will increase awareness, access, and inclusion in STEM, especially with
respect to data-driven methods in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical contributions of this project are
organized into two interrelated themes: (1) Learning the structure of graphs
from compressively and interactively acquired data. The research in this theme
will reveal new and interesting tradeoffs between the cost of data acquisition
and statistical accuracy. These will be complemented by minimax optimal
algorithms that achieve various points in the tradespace. (2) Leveraging the
graph structure to accomplish efficient inference. The research in this theme is
unified by the general problem of level set estimation on graphs and will result
in foundational contributions to the theory of nonparametric learning, meta-
learning, and sequential decision making. The research themes feature extensive
experimental validation, collaboration with domain experts, and translational
activities with the view of driving meaningful and long-term impacting on
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.