* 2048204
* CAREER: The Role of Classical Cryptography in Quantum Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Urmila Mahadev, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2026
* USD 291,817.00

In recent years, intriguing connections between classical cryptography and
quantum computing have emerged. Quantum algorithms have been crucial in
developing leading cryptographic assumptions, such as learning with errors, and
concepts such as no-signaling have been used to build classical cryptographic
protocols. In the last couple of years, a series of papers revealed another
surprising, entirely different facet of this relationship: it was shown that
classical cryptography could be used to address fundamental questions in quantum
computing, such as whether quantum computers can be classically verified, or
whether uniquely quantum properties, such as the inherent randomness in quantum
computations, can be classically controlled. This project seeks to explore the
ways in which classical cryptography can be used to harness the power of quantum
computers. The interface between quantum computing and classical cryptography is
largely unexplored, and the results mentioned above only hint at the potential
impact of this field. This impact could span several areas, including both
theoretical and experimental physics, complexity theory and of course
cryptography and quantum computing. A major step in realizing this impact is to
recruit both students and more senior researchers to the area. It will take
significant effort to make quantum computing more approachable to computer
scientists, and the investigator seeks to focus on making progress towards this
goal, through education, mentoring and interdisciplinary collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will build on recent work which has shown
that classical cryptography can be used to verify quantum computations, both
generally and in more restricted settings. The properties of these protocols are
not yet fully understood, and one objective of this project is to gain a better
understanding of the extent to which cryptographic techniques can be used to
characterize quantum machines. While the work on verification clearly shows that
classical cryptography is useful in testing quantum devices, the connection
between cryptography and quantum computing seems to have many more facets, as
demonstrated by recent work which shows that cryptography can be used as a means
of employing quantum computers for useful tasks. To do so, classical
cryptography is used to leverage quantum properties, such as the inherent
randomness generated in quantum computations. The second aspect of this project
focuses on further exploration of this connection: can new, classically
impossible primitives be built by combining uniquely quantum properties and
classical cryptography? The study of these two general directions will yield
insight into the power and limitations of quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.