* 2048319
* Thermal stress and differential recovery of coral reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Robert van Woesik, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 06/30/2024
* USD 707,779.00

Coral reefs are the world’s most diverse marine ecosystem that provide
invaluable goods and services for millions of people worldwide. Yet, coral reefs
are experiencing thermal-stress events worldwide and their communities are
changing. While coarse-grained climate models predict that few coral reefs will
survive the 3ºC sea-surface temperature rise in the coming century, field
studies show localized pockets of coral survival and recovery, even under high
temperature conditions. Quantifying recovery from thermal-stress events is
central to making accurate predictions of coral reef trajectories into the near
future. This study examines the differential rates of coral recovery following
thermal-stress events, globally, and determines the extent to which regional and
local conditions influence recovery. This research is taking advantage of the
recent progress in spatio-temporal analyses. One of the most transformative
aspects of this work is determining where coral recovery rates differ from
expectations, and how those differences relate to regional and local conditions.
The research is of relevance to all persons that live and work near coral reefs.
What happens to reef corals has cascading consequences on other reef-associated
organisms and influences whether coral reefs can keep up with sea-level rise.
This project is increasing scientific capacity by training a post-doctoral
scholar and a PhD student in big-data analysis and making these analysis
techniques broadly available. High quality and free online tutorials are
supporting standards-driven instruction for high school math, science, and
computer teachers in R, a programming language and software environment used for
statistical computing and graphics. The project is producing large-scale data
and computational resources, which are benefitting diverse users such as
students, scientists, resource managers and the broader public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current rapid rate of climate change threatens coral
reefs. Quantifying recovery from thermal-stress events is central to making
accurate predictions of coral-reef trajectories into the near future. Coral
populations in different geographic regions and under different local conditions
vary in their capacity to tolerate or recover from thermal stress. However, how
and why coral responses differ remains poorly understood. There is a clear need
for accurate predictions of coral trajectories following thermal-stress events
and for determining which interacting factors most influence coral recovery.
This study is characterizing the relationships between the rates of coral
recovery, frequency and intensity of thermal-stress events, geographic location,
habitat, and local conditions that slow or enhance coral recovery. Four
approaches are being used to analyze coral recovery: (i) a binary approach, (ii)
a meta-analysis approach, (iii) an inverse-problem approach, and (iv) a state-
space approach. Spatial and temporal differences in rates of coral recovery are
being quantified by capitalizing on the latest developments in spatio-temporal
analyses within a Bayesian framework. Observed outcomes of coral recovery are
being compared with predicted outcomes to identify areas where recoveries are
either higher or lower than expected, and to assess context-dependencies of
coral recovery in relation to local and regional conditions. The most
transformative aspect of the study is the identification of localities with
greater than expected recovery rates, which could guide future conservation
decisions by enabling managers to target coral reefs with specific
characteristics for protection from human disturbances by designating them as
potential refuges as the oceans continue to warm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.