* 2048278
* CAREER: Understanding the electrochemical properties of physical hole defects on functionalized B/C 2D materials for the 2e- reduction of O2 to H2O2
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Michael Groves, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 02/28/2026
* USD 422,198.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Michael Groves at California State University-Fullerton (CSUF) will be
utilizing computational modeling to investigate alternative mechanisms for the
synthesis of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Hydrogen peroxide is an environmentally
friendly oxidant that is used in many applications including water treatment,
textile and wood-pulp bleaching, the electronics industry, and personal
protective equipment sterilization. Currently, industrial production of hydrogen
peroxide is dominated by the environmentally destructive anthraquinone process.
One approach of specific interest is based on using electrochemistry and two-
dimensional (2D) nanomaterials composed of carbon and boron, whereby physical
hole defects and functional groups in these structures promote hydrogen peroxide
synthesis. Under this award, the Groves research team will model the ability of
acidic functional groups to produce hydrogen peroxide when the size of adjacent
physical hole defects is varied. Physical systems will be prepared to validate
quantum chemical predictions derived from the computational studies. This
project will be integrated into Dr. Groves’ senior chemistry laboratory course
as one of several educational experiments performed over the semester, providing
students a course-based research experience. These new teaching practices, as
well as a flipped classroom instruction approach, will be assessed in this
senior lab setting to determine their impact toward improved student success.
Additionally, this course is a part of a scientific outreach program
particularly directed at elementary/middle school students through CSUF’s Kids 2
College program, with hands-on demonstrations that borrow from Dr. Groves'
research project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Michael Groves of California State
University-Fullerton is investigating processes for H2O2 synthesis. A particular
focus is the computational quantification of the electrochemical properties of
physical hole defects on functionalized boron, carbon, and boron-carbon 2D
materials for the two-electron reduction of oxygen (O2) to hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2). This project has the potential for a much broader impact on 2D materials
and electrochemistry by testing the hypothesis that the acidity of functional
groups (alcohol, carboxylic acid, sulfonic acid) can be modified by adjacent
physical hole defects in graphene, borophene and hybrid materials, and that this
will influence the electrochemical reduction of O2 to H2O2. The newly developed
Grand Canonical Potential Kinetics framework is being used for this project to
ensure that the density functional theory calculations properly describe
electrochemical conditions. First, an evolutionary algorithm, enhanced by
agglomerative clustering, whereby each restart will search in a unique region of
the potential energy surface, is being employed to determine the morphology of
these carbon/boron 2D materials as a function of physical hole defect size. As
global minimum candidates are identified for each physical hole size and
material, the acidity of all combinations of two functional groups from the set
(alcohol, carboxylic acid, sulfonic acid) will be determined. The most acidic,
least acidic, and two structures with intermediate acidities for each material
will then used to calculate the barriers for the electrochemical reduction of O2
to H2O2. Experimental collaborators at the University of Manchester are working
alongside the Groves team to synthesize promising candidates to support the
development of structure-activity relationships. Finally, Dr. Groves will be
incorporating this project into the senior physical chemistry laboratory as an
extended course-based undergraduate research experience (CURE). This CURE,
flipped classroom instruction and a service-learning activity where students
present interactive experiments to 1400 local underrepresented 6th grade
students over the course of the project, are three potentially high-impact
practices being developed under this award that are designed to improve student
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.