* 2048213
* CAREER: An Integrated Research and Education Plan to Navigate Tradeoffs in the Design of Sustainable and Resilient Water Reuse Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Sherri Cook, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2026
* USD 414,981.00

This project will address a critical barrier to reliable access to safe water:
the lack of widespread adoption of water reuse strategies. This barrier stems
from an inability to upgrade, re-design, or integrate wastewater and drinking
water treatment approaches without compromising public health or incurring
unacceptably high financial or environmental costs. The research plan will
generate a foundation of data, understanding, tools, and processes to advance
widespread adoption of sustainable and resilient water reuse strategies. It will
create a comprehensive assessment framework that integrates sustainability and
resilience principles to help identify hidden barriers and important tradeoffs.
It allows for the integration of wastewater and drinking water process models by
establishing an expanded set of variables through experimentation and modeling.
It characterizes the safe operating space of existing and novel water reuse
technologies as well as demarcates a decision space that accounts for the
stakeholder data that will be collected to improve understanding of diverse
perspectives. Finally, the project will develop effective new teaching
approaches via a rigorous multi-year, iterative effort to improve decision-
making skill sets and retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan starts
by building an understanding of the scope of reuse options by evaluating the
performance of a portfolio of technologies to (1) elucidate the safe operating
spaces of existing and novel water reuse technologies across a landscape of
possible designs and operational conditions. Next, it expands beyond technology
performance to (2) establish a comprehensive, quantitative assessment framework
and integrates it with reuse process modelling and stakeholder perspectives in
an adaptable decision-support model. Finally, it takes advantage of the
integrated decision-support model by conducting a scenario analysis to (3)
identify salient features and characteristics of sustainable water reuse
applications, and seeks to leverage this insight to elucidate drivers, barriers,
and levers of change. The applicability and adoption of the proposed research
efforts will be enhanced by improved stakeholder engagement and engineering
student training. The research objectives are combined with integral education
and outreach objectives to: (1) improve communication and understanding of
diverse perspectives, and (2) foster an ability to navigate uncertainty and
tradeoffs. Outreach efforts include soliciting and incorporating input through a
series of workshops, case studies, and online surveys from a diverse range of
stakeholders (public consumers, industrial consumers, engineers, researchers,
regulators, and utilities). Education efforts include evaluating different
approaches to improve understanding of uncertainty and tradeoffs, in multiple
contexts, by developing and assessing the effectiveness of undergraduate
environmental engineering teaching modules and by developing a “wicked problems”
card game.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.