* 2048884
* Partnership to Provide Technology and Cyber-security Experiences to Alabama Black Belt through Mobile Application Development
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2025
* Li Jiang, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,995.00

While job growth in STEM fields, specifically in information technology and
cybersecurity, has been consistently on the rise, diversity in these workforce
fields has not grown at a comparable pace. This Developing and Testing
Innovations (DTI) project will advance efforts to better understand and promote
practices that increase minority high school students' motivations and
capacities to pursue STEM careers. This project will engage students in hands-on
field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and mentorship
experiences in fields of computing, specifically in cybersecurity. This project,
based on the use of a Project Based Learning (PBL) environment with high school
students, is a partnership between Tuskegee University, Auburn University, a
rural and an urban school district in the historic Black Belt region of the
state of Alabama, Tuskegee University Engineering and Computer Science Alumni
Associations, and the Alabama State Department of Education. The focus of the
partnership is to recruit annually a cohort of forty ethnically and racially
diverse high school students from the partnering school districts for immersion
in a STEM intensive PBL four-week STEM Summer Academy hosted by Tuskegee
University, followed by one semester in-school training. The Academy is designed
to provide 40 rising 10th and 11th grade students and ten high-school teachers
annually (150 over the life of the three-year grant) with far-reaching
technological experiences through the exciting exploration of secured mobile
application development under a PBL framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will provide, in a group setting, hands-on training in basic information
technology and information security concepts through a one-month training
program (4-week Summer Academy) hosted at Tuskegee University, a Historically
Black University, followed by one semester in school training on a project of
their choice. Each of the groups will be assisted by a computer science faculty
of Tuskegee University. The students develop a secured mobile application using
the MIT APP Inventor environment and test it using an android phone. The key
questions being addressed are: (1) To what extent does the innovative four-week
technology-oriented experience in a PBL environment followed by one semester in-
school training impact minority high school students’ knowledge, interest,
motivation, and attitudes towards STEM-related careers? (2) In what ways does
the collaborative small group experience with mentor teachers affect minority
high school students’ interest and awareness of STEM-related careers? (3) To
what extent do the effects of the program persist after its completion? Do they
lead to STEM-related post-secondary plans? (4) What instructional and mentoring
strategies can be effectively integrated in to boost minority high school
students’ knowledge, interest, and attitudes towards STEM-related careers? A
mixed-method design with both qualitative and quantitative data will be used to
examine the students' motivation and attitude towards STEM in a PBL environment.
This project is co-funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students
and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings
of practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to
increasing students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers. This project is also jointly co-funded by the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.