* 2048237
* CAREER: Co-Optimized Sensing and Reconstruction for Next-Generation Computational Cameras
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Katherine Bouman, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 03/31/2026
* USD 329,537.00

Imaging technology plays a critical role in advancing science. However, as
science continues to push the boundaries of knowledge, traditional imaging
sensors are reaching their limits. For example, traditional telescopes cannot be
constructed large enough to resolve a black hole’s shadow; traditional
microscopes are not able to see transparent cells, and traditional cameras
cannot be used to study the inner core of a cloud due to scattering. Breaking
these fundamental limits has only been possible through the emergence of
computational cameras, which replace optics with computational algorithms; this
new paradigm shift has enabled image formation processes that were previously
infeasible for conventional optical imaging. The full potential of computational
cameras is far from being realized; thus far they have primarily been identified
and developed though human ingenuity. Consequently, computational imaging
pipelines are often significantly under-optimized, and there is no doubt that
many such “cameras” have yet to even be identified. Developing the next
generation of computational cameras requires a fundamental shift away from
relying on human intuition and overly simplified models in the design of imaging
pipelines. This project aims to develop modern learning-based approaches to
jointly optimize sensor and algorithm designs in computational camera pipelines
in order to automatically discover new imaging
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop a
data-driven, generalizable learning framework that solves for a jointly
optimized sensor design and reconstruction algorithm for computational imaging
pipelines. The generalizable co-design framework will be developed to easily
incorporate domain knowledge and respect physical constraints. In collaboration
with domain-experts, the investigator will study the application of this
framework to problems ranging from astronomical imaging to seismic imaging. The
investigator will pursue fundamental work in four areas: 1) single-shot
probabilistic co-design to optimize sensor design jointly with reconstruction
methods, 2) online sequential probabilistic co-design for optimizing the next
sensor measurement conditioned on previous measurements for a particular target,
3) co-design with a stochastically evolving target, and 4) co-design with a
mismatched forward model. The investigator will make use of emerging
computational techniques and machinery in machine learning, signal processing,
optimization, applied math, and controls to efficiently co-optimize the
computational imaging pipeline. This research will transform the way novel
imaging pipelines are identified and developed, and will result in the
development of new methods that will impact a wide array of important imaging
problems, including astronomical, medical, seismic, and microscopic
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.