* 2048480
* Fostering Computer Science and AI Learning through Youth-Led Conversational App Development Experiences
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Kristy Boyer, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,527,140.00

Computing skills are essential for 21st-century workforce development, and
artificial intelligence (AI) is increasingly at the center of computationally
rich careers. To remain at the forefront of global technology, the US needs a
diverse workforce prepared with these skills. There is a tremendous pool of
talented learners who are currently not given access to computer science and AI
learning opportunities during the critical ages when they develop educational
interests and career identities. Experiences during K-12 have a significant
impact on those identities and resulting career path choices. This project will
engage historically marginalized middle school students in Alachua County,
Florida in a summer program that teaches them computer science and AI concepts.
Through an authentic inquiry process centered on developing conversational AI,
spoken technologies that engage users in conversation, students will investigate
and create innovative computational applications. Young learners will have the
opportunity to develop skills in the design and implementation of a variety of
personally relevant projects including speech assistants, question-answering
systems, and games. These projects can offer meaningful engagement that has the
potential to transform the way middle school students view computing and AI
careers. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
210 students from diverse, underserved schools with limited access to AI and
computer science will engage in two-week summer experiences to learn computer
science and conversational AI development. The curriculum design is guided by
the theoretical framework of a four-phase process model of interest development
from initial situational interest to the eventual well-developed individual
interest. Researchers in computer science and educational technology from the
University of Florida will investigate the following overarching research
question: In what ways can a summer development experience around spoken
conversational apps foster middle school students' cognitive outcomes around
computing and social-emotional outcomes of interest and identity formation
related to STEM careers? The project will use a mixed-method research design to
test the hypothesis that students will achieve significant knowledge gain as
measured on a pre/post-test for computer science concepts, and that students
will show a progression in the use of user-centered design practices as
evidenced by source code analysis and mapping both the prototyping and user
testing processes they undertake. The project will also test the hypothesis that
students will display a significantly increased sense of identity and interest
formation toward STEM careers. The research team will analyze patterns of
collaboration and participation to explain why the learning experience supports
these outcomes. The project will answer important research questions on how to
engage middle school students in learning AI and what type of learning outcomes
are achievable. This research has the potential to shed light on the emerging
field of AI education within the context of computer science and conversational
applications for the K-12 population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.