* 2048759
* I-Corps:  Highly Conductive and Additive-free Aqueous MXene Inks for Smart Textile Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2021
* Yury Gogotsi, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of new inks for the electronic textile market. State-of-the-art
conductive ink systems have complex chemistries. The proposed inks for smart
textile applications address the environmental concerns, eliminate the pre- and
post-treatment costs, and have better performance. This can be used for
applications such as wearable sensors, antennas, and RFID tags.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of conductive and additive-free
aqueous MXene inks that may be used as a dye to transform commercial
yarns/fabrics into functional devices or as an ink for inkjet/screen printing
devices directly on garments or soft surfaces. The proposed MXene ink
formulation, which consists of only two-dimensional MXene sheets dispersed in
water, may potentially solve the environmental and health concerns related to
the use of other organic substances usually used as solvent in the preparation
of conductive inks. Also, owing to seamless integration of MXene inks, the
mechanical properties of the yarns and fabrics do not need to be modified after
coating. Therefore, the resulting conductive yarns or devices are comfortable
and safe to wear. Preliminary investigations have shown that the produced MXene-
based yarns/fabrics may solve the manufacturability and washability problem of
the conventional conductive yarns/fabrics while enabling seamless integration
into textile-based devices. These issues have prevented translation of smart
textiles despite their tremendous promise as a platform technology for
functional devices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.