* 2048244
* CAREER: Digital Hospice: Human-Centered Design for Personal Accounts and Data at the End of Life
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Jed Brubaker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2026
* USD 339,178.00

This research will holistically study the post-mortem needs of online accounts
and data; develop end-of-life planning practices, guidelines, and systems; and
develop a framework describing the relationships between pre-mortem planning and
post-mortem experiences in technology design. Designers of social media and
other online information services have little guidance on how to create systems
that consider their users' inevitable deaths. Likewise, users have little
guidance surrounding technology when it comes to end-of-life planning. Drawing
from the principles of hospice care, this project aims to support end-of-life
planning for online accounts and data and the design of systems that support
post-mortem data management. This project will produce outcomes to ensure this
vision, including: (1) designing a transformative framework for end-of-life
planning that can be adopted by the public; (2) developing design guidelines
that will aid technologists with the nuanced considerations that mortality
presents; (3) launching and running a digital end-of-life clinic to help educate
the public about end-of-life planning for technology; and (4) engaging students
through research and curricular activities focused on human-centered approaches
to studying and designing technology related to the end-of-life and post-mortem
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage in longitudinal qualitative
and design research with terminally ill patients and a student run digital end-
of-life clinic serving the public to: (1) empirically identify challenges that
death presents for users and designers; (2) develop and validate strategies for
end-of-life planning related to online accounts and data that honor human
dignity while addressing the challenges and constraints of technology design;
and (3) connect research and education through curricular content that broadens
students' understanding of what counts as "human" in human-centered computing.
Additionally, this research will focus on collaboration, identifying the
specific properties of coordination that end-of-life planning involves - for
example, delegation between stakeholders (some of which may not be known pre-
mortem), interaction across long periods of time, and the inability to continue
coordination post-mortem when plans go into effect. Together, this work will
lead to theoretical insights that extend the state-of-the-art in human-centered
design by developing frameworks for end-of-life design that address
interdependencies between pre- and post-mortem interactions, as well as
identifying fundamental limits to user-centeredness and developing frameworks
for designing systems in a user's absence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.