* 2048937
* Connecting Students with Autism to Geographic Information Science &amp; Technology Careers
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jason Painter, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,345,436.00

Students with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) are less likely to start or
graduate from a postsecondary educational training program than their peers.
Additionally, they are routinely unemployed (or underemployed) as young adults.
Consequently, there is an urgent need to create workforce development models
that advance ASD students toward viable education and career paths. This project
is a three-year project that will motivate and prepare high school students with
ASD to enter postsecondary educational training programs and careers in
geospatial and data science sectors. Example careers include: surveyor,
cartographer, GIS technician, geospatial analyst, Geographic Information Science
(GIS) software engineer, GIS project manager, intelligence analyst, remote
sensing scientist, and unmanned aerial vehicle operator. The program's goal is
to develop an innovative, research-based workforce development model that
increases student self-regulation, interest, and motivation and expands
students' understanding of Geographic Information Science and workforce
development Technology (GIST). The research aim of this project is to generate
knowledge about how the design elements of a model intersect with self-
regulation constructs among high school students with ASD in face-to-face,
online, and hybrid learning contexts. The project will advance the research in
the field by facilitating insight into theoretical constructs around self-
regulation and connecting conceptual ideas to best STEM education practices for
youth with ASD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will recruit three cohorts of
students (80 total) over three years from the Durham Public Schools district
near the Research Triangle Park region of North Carolina. Research efforts will
investigate self-regulation among students with ASD in online and hybrid
learning settings using a mixed-methods (pre/post surveys, semi-structured
interviews, and qualitative observations) approach. Furthermore, the project
will utilize a strengths-based approach to enrich STEM education and leverage
traits commonly documented among individuals who have the disability. The
project will infuse evidence-based practices into GIST-focused distance and
hybrid education experiences to investigate self-regulation constructs among the
ASD student population. The results will present factors that aid or inhibit
student gains while gearing young people toward growing GIST careers. This
project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.