* 2048440
* Land, Forest and Water Management in a Tropical Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Nicholas Dunning, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 226,489.00

This project will investigate the land and water management strategies that
supported the development of complex society in a tropical environment. A
primary theoretical question to be addressed in this study focuses on how the
ancient inhabitants in the environmentally problematic region were able to
sustain an urban population. A corollary to this question asks how agricultural
intensification was achieved and how other essential resources, such as water
and forest products, were managed. The research plan includes ecological
assessments such as biomass and species diversity, as well as examination of the
sustainability of various land use practices all of which will be useful for the
management of the region which currently co-exists in an uneasy tension in
competition for land and water. The project is tri-national, involving
researchers and students from multiple countries and provides training for
graduate students from each country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The archaeological
site provides an ideal test case for examining the changing trajectories of
human- environment interactions because it grew into one of the paramount cities
and political-economic powers during the New World Classic period. The research
will examine the hydraulic, agricultural, and forest management strategies that
allowed the persistent occupation and growth in the face of changing
environmental and political economic conditions. It will provide insights into
the variability of adaptive strategies and the rise of social complexity. These
issues will be addressed by an interdisciplinary research team that includes
professionals and students with training in botany, paleoecology,
geoarchaeology, remote sensing, GIS, and anthropological archaeology and will
employ a unique combination of paleoenvironmental and archaeological methods.
The acquisition of lidar imagery of the area will allow the team to select a
variety of topographic settings, probable ancient agricultural fields,
reservoirs, and residential areas for excavation and coring, thus providing data
on resource management across the spectrum of environmental contexts and social
strata. These analyses will include eDNA which offers novel insights into
ancient land use and subsistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.