* 2048095
* CAREER: Structural Interplay Between Chromatin Remodeling and Lentiviral Integration
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Dmitry Lyumkis, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 03/31/2026
* USD 1,048,172.00

This research will uncover how some viruses like HIV hijack host protein
machinery and permanently alter the host genome to sustain infection. The work
will produce atomic structures that reveal the interactions between viral and
host proteins that mediate the integration of viral genetic information into the
host genome. The resulting structures and biochemical data will provide a
mechanistic framework for understanding how these interactions lead to
productive infection and will reveal insights into how this process may be
blocked, and lead to novel anti-virals, or can be exploited for gene therapy.
These research themes will be taught to audiences at different stages of their
scientific development. The integrated research and education plan includes the
advanced scientific training of both undergraduate and graduate students, the
exposure of students to complex scientific programs within a world-renowned
academic research institution, and the introduction of both structural biology
and virology to under-privileged high-school students to inspire their
scientific development. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;All lentiviruses, including HIV,
are characterized by an important hallmark that distinguishes them from other
viruses — their ability to integrate a complementary DNA copy of their RNA
genome into target host chromatin through a catalytic process called
integration. Integration establishes a permanent and irreversible infection in
the target cell and contributes to viral pathogenicity. Although we understand
the basic mechanisms underlying lentiviral integration, we know comparatively
little about the role that host factors play in this process. Specifically,
there is the prominent but wholly underappreciated phenomenon of chromatin
remodeling that accompanies successful integration. Disruption of host chromatin
remodelers leads to distinct phenotypes affecting lentiviral infection, but how
the remodelers are assembled, engage chromatin, and ultimately interplay with
lentiviral components to affect integration remain unclear. Using cryogenic
electron microscopy and biochemical methods, this research will investigate: (1)
how ATP-independent chromatin remodelers reorganize chromatin and exploit this
reorganized state to engage viral machinery prior to catalytic integration; and
(2) how ATP-dependent chromatin remodelers engage and reorganize integrated
viral DNA after catalytic integration to establish a transcriptionally competent
provirus. This work will provide a mechanistic molecular framework that
elucidates how host chromatin remodelers interact with viral machinery to
facilitate integration and establish a foundation for future work that broadly
examines the structure, function, and cross-talk between the molecular machines
responsible for chromatin remodeling and lentiviral
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work was jointly funded by the Molecular
Biophysics and Genetic Mechanisms clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.