* 2048590
* Collaborative Research: Transient response of regional sea level to Antarctic ice shelf fluxes
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Ian Eisenman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 635,163.00

This project will investigate the effects of Antarctic ice melting on the
regional variations of sea level over time. Ocean and climate models will be
used in conjunction with observations to study how the timing and location of
ice melt affects regional sea level rise. Increasing sea level from climate
change impacts coastal communities. Understanding how those impacts vary
globally is an important priority. The project will also provide workshop
training for teachers in K-12 schools on the topic of using numerical models to
make forecasts and predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of
the proposed study is to investigate the time-evolving sensitivity of regional
sea level to fluxes associated with Antarctic ice shelf basal melt. This
question will be addressed using a hierarchy of ocean and climate models,
ranging from idealized reduced-gravity models to an eddy-permitting ocean model
to a state-of-the-art coupled global climate model, informed by observational
data. Specific questions to be addressed include: (1) What are the timescales,
amplitudes, and patterns of dynamic sea level changes around the globe in
response to subsurface freshwater and latent heat perturbations along the
Antarctic coast? (2) What are the dynamic mechanisms in the ocean governing
these responses? (3) What are the potential impacts of Antarctic ice shelf basal
melt fluxes on sea level at locations around the globe, on timescales from
decades to centuries? The response of the ocean to meltwater injection and
latent heat cooling at depth, which is expected to be dictated by a mixture of
baroclinic and barotropic circulation anomalies, has been largely absent from
previous literature on sea level rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.