* 2048060
* CAREER: Mechanisms controlling spatial patterning of PIP lipids in eukaryotic cell polarity
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Scott Hansen, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 01/31/2026
* USD 600,783.00

The ability of cells to regulate the localization of molecules in both time and
space is a hallmark of cellular organization. In eukaryotic cells,
phosphatidylinositol phosphate (PIP) lipids function as master regulators of
cellular organization by selectively recruiting proteins to intracellular
membranes and locally controlling their activity. Using a multidisciplinary
biochemistry approach, this project will help decipher mechanisms that regulate
communication between signaling molecules that control cellular organization. In
long-term, this project will provide a molecular understanding of tissue
organization, asymmetric cell division, and cell polarity. Integrated with this
research strategy, the education plan seeks to improve how early career
scientists communicate their research using art and scientific imagery as a tool
for promoting inquiry-based learning. Undergraduate researchers will receive
training in visual arts to improve their ability to communicate science. The
education plan will support career development in scientific illustration and
molecular visualization that bridges science, art, and
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to determine
how biochemical reactions spontaneously self-organize on the plasma membrane to
drive cell polarity. To achieve this goal, this project will use a bottom-up
approach to biochemically reconstitute the communication between several
important signaling elements, including (1) phosphatidylinositol phosphate (PIP)
lipids, (2) Rho-GTPases, and (3) the actin cytoskeleton on membrane surfaces.
Measurements, implemented in this project, will span several length scales
beginning with single molecule biophysical measurements of PIP lipid modifying
enzymes on supported membranes using Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence
(TIRF) microscopy. Individual biochemical reactions will be combined to generate
reaction diffusion systems that exhibit emergent properties, including
bistability and polarization on membranes. This research will establish methods
to directly visualize interactions between polarized signaling domains and the
actin cytoskeleton using micropatterned supported bilayers and membrane
encapsulation. Deterministic and stochastic kinetic modeling will be used to
create a theoretical framework that describes the enzymology and spatial
patterning mechanisms investigated. Overall, the proposed research will identify
principles and signaling network architectures that are important for
establishing communication between different classes of membrane signaling
reactions that control cell polarity. This project is supported by the Molecular
Biophysics and Cellular Dynamics and Function Clusters of the Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences Division in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.