* 2048774
* US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE and GP17-ANT: Cobalt Biogeochemical Cycling and Phytoplankton Protein Biomarkers in the Pacific and Southern Oceans
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Mak Saito, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2023
* USD 598,499.00

Dissolved metals have an important role as micronutrients that influence marine
photosynthesis and the overall carbon cycle. Of these metals, cobalt is one of
the scarcest elements. Cobalt has an unusual behavior in the environment in that
it is strongly influenced by both nutrient uptake processes in the upper water
column and scavenging removal processes in the mid-water and deep ocean. There
is also growing evidence of cobalt's importance within marine biological
processes where different chemical forms of cobalt have been observed to
influence primary productivity. In addition, protein biomolecules bind most
metals within organisms, and the study of proteins within marine microbes can
provide useful information about how microbes respond to environmental
influences. In this proposal, the investigator will study the biogeochemistry of
cobalt and selected proteins across the South Pacific and Southern Oceans as
part of the GEOTRACES GP17-OCE and GP17-ANT expeditions. GEOTRACES is a global
program that studies the distribution of trace elements and isotopes. The
project will support a graduate student and a postdoctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The distributions of dissolved and labile
cobalt will be determined across the South Pacific and the Southern Ocean on
these two expeditions. Moreover, microbial proteins representative of nutrient
and micronutrient stresses will be measured across surface transects to compare
to the distributions of metals. The Southern Ocean and Antarctica coastal
regions are of interest for cobalt research because vitamin B12, which contains
a cobalt atom, has been observed to influence phytoplankton growth in Antarctic
polynyas due strong seasonal demand and increased glacial iron inputs. Recent
data suggests that this increased B12 use by the biota may be shifting the Co
biogeochemical cycle in multiple ways, and this project will explore these
dynamics and compare it with historical data. Cobalt will be measured using
cathodic stripping voltammetry after ultraviolet radiation to remove metal-
binding ligands. Proteins will be measured by metaproteomic methods that use
nanospray liquid chromatography high resolution mass spectrometry and
metatranscriptomic databases. Metaproteomic results will be incorporated into
the Ocean Protein Portal for broader use in research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.