* 2048502
* Collaborative Research: AI4GA - Developing Artificial Intelligence Competencies, Career Awareness, and Interest in Georgia Middle School Teachers and Students
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Christina Gardner-McCune, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 04/30/2024
* USD 444,243.00

As Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies begin to reshape modern society,
educating younger students about AI has become a national priority for both the
United States and its competitors. In these early days of K-12 AI education,
little is known about how diverse student populations relate to AI and which
instructional strategies are most likely to engage them. Since most K-12
teachers are not yet familiar with AI, research is also needed on how to develop
their AI fluency and confidence. This project, a collaboration between
researchers in AI and education and the Georgia Department of Education, will
investigate these questions by developing and testing a nine-week elective
course for Georgia middle school students called Living and Working with
Artificial Intelligence, and an accompanying online teacher professional
development course. The student course will offer a mixture of activities
including hands-on demonstrations, guided experimentation, online research,
project-based learning, and exploration of AI-enabled careers. Teachers will
also have the option of including computer programming activities. To ensure
that the curriculum is adaptable to the needs of different populations and
cultures, researchers will partner with school districts serving three
ethnically and geographically diverse populations in Georgia: rural, suburban,
and urban areas, and with large populations of white, Latinx, or Black students
respectively. Both courses will be developed in collaboration with a team of
middle school teachers from these districts who will first receive training from
the investigators in the basics of AI and in culturally responsive teaching.
Working with these teachers as they pilot the course will provide an
understanding of the challenges in teaching/learning the content and the types
of support needed for diverse teachers and learners to succeed. The project is
funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the three year project duration, 18 teachers
drawn from 6 school districts will receive training in AI and culturally
responsive instruction, and 1800 students will take the Living and Working with
Artificial Intelligence course. The project will investigate four research
questions: (1) What are middle school students' and teachers' knowledge of,
interest in, comfort with, and attitudes towards AI technology and AI careers?
(2) What types of technology-driven and innovative learning experiences are
effective in increasing rural, Black, and Latinx/Hispanic middle school
students' AI interest, knowledge, skills, self-efficacy, and interest in AI
careers? (3) What AI knowledge and skills are developmentally appropriate for
middle school students? and (4) What institutional or cultural
barriers/accelerators prevent/promote course implementation? The research will
use a mixed-methods design combining attitudinal surveys, in-class observations,
subject interviews, student reflections, and examination of student artifacts.
At the conclusion of the project, the professional development course will be
made publicly available through the Georgia Department of Education web portal.
Additional project deliverables include the middle school course materials, AI
demonstration software developed to support the middle school course, the
research findings, and measurements of the effectiveness of the curriculum for
diverse learner populations when implemented by middle school teachers in their
classrooms. The results will also be disseminated through conference
presentations, scholarly publications, and social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.