* 2048260
* CAREER: Designing 3-Dimensional Active Site Environments in Metal-Organic Frameworks for Oxygen Electrochemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Ambarish Kulkarni, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2026
* USD 649,999.00

Electrochemical reactions – such as those in fuel cells - play an important role
in realizing an environmentally-sustainable, globally-scalable hydrogen economy.
Catalysts are required to promote electrochemical reactions at practical rates.
However, the high-cost and low-efficiency of current electrocatalysts has
prevented large-scale adoption of electrochemical technologies. While
significant advances have been made in designing cheaper alternatives for the
oxygen reduction reaction important in fuel cell catalysis, performance has
plateaued over the past decade. The project focuses on a a new class of
structurally-modified Metal Organic Framework catalysts (MOFs) that are not
constrained by the limitations of current catalysts, thus opening the door to
both lower-cost and higher-efficiency fuel cell technology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this work is to establish bimetallic porphyrin-
based MOFs (PMOFs) as a viable platform for future experimental and theoretical
oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) studies. Multiscale molecular modeling
approaches (including density functional theory, wave function theory and
classical force fields) will be used to (1) screen MOF libraries and identify
3-D active sites that circumvent scaling relations, (2) develop methods to
predict solvation effects within confined PMOF pores, and (3) quantify the
various transport processes that are important for PMOF electrocatalysts. Taken
together these objectives will (1) assess the potential of using PMOFs for ORR
and (2) generate fundamental insights related to various ubiquitous phenomena
(i.e., solvation, O2 transport and charge transfer) in nanoporous materials. The
software infrastructure and theoretical approaches employed will expand the
boundaries of atomistic phenomena that can be studied computationally; these
methods will be valuable to both the nanoporous materials and heterogeneous
catalysis communities. The research program is closely integrated with
educational and outreach activities that focus on developing (1) a research-
oriented Molecular Modeling Lab course and (2) virtual reality-based chemistry
modules for K-12 students. The research-oriented course will help create a
scientific mindset and instill a “lifetime of learning” for students, while the
chemistry modules will improve K-12 student engagement and retention in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.