* 2048587
* NSF-BSF: Memory modification through concurrent conscious and unconscious stimulation
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* LIla Davachi, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 125,986.00

Our memories are at the heart of our basic human experience. From fondly
recollecting childhood events to remembering where we left our keys, memory
plays a vital role in every aspect of our lives. It provides us with a sense of
identity, preserves what we have learned, and teaches us life lessons that we
can apply in the future. However, there is also a dark side to memories. While
we rely on our memories to guide our behavior, sometimes the recall of painful
memories can be anguishing and rekindle stress. One of the most striking
examples of this occurs in post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), a devastating
condition in which a previous traumatic memory can be disabling, and make it
hard to get through the day. Is there a way to help people suffering from PTSD
(which affects an estimated 7-8% of Americans) by changing their memories?
Psychologists have long debated how and whether memories can be changed, but the
answer to this question still remains unknown. However, recent evidence
indicates that seemingly stable memories are susceptible to modification.
Inspired by neuroscience research showing that at the cellular level, weak
stimulation of a synaptic contact between neurons can lead to a decrease in
synaptic strength, an intriguing possibility is that weak reminders of past
associations paired with novel information could be very effective at modifying
or even overriding those older memories. Based on this insight, this project
aims to test a novel method for memory modification that involves simultaneous
presentation of information both consciously and unconsciously. The rationale
for this conjecture is that since unconscious stimulation is ‘weak’ and hence
should activate its neural pathway weakly, this opens up the possibility of
modifying the synaptic connections along this pathway. A combined pairing of
past information unconsciously (weak activation) and novel information
consciously (strong activation) is hypothesized to set up the ideal conditions
for modifying past memories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project experimentally
tests the hypothesis that concurrent conscious presentation of new information
with unconscious presentation of older information will facilitate the
modification of those older memories. Experiment participants initially learn
associations between two presented word stimuli (AB learning). After
participants have learned this paired association, they enter the second phase
where they will be asked to learn new, modified versions of the original AB
pairs, in which “A” is now associated with a novel stimulus “C”. In this phase,
participants are presented with different visual information to each eye. In one
eye, participants consciously view the new AC pairs, while simultaneously being
unconsciously presented with the older (AB) information in their other eye. The
experiments make use of a continuous flash suppression technique to manipulate
which images reach awareness and which do not. This experimental paradigm allows
testing of the hypothesis that unconsciously presenting the older AB information
to the other eye facilitates AC learning. In order to determine whether the
content of the information presented unconsciously has an impact on the final
behavioral memory test, participants are asked to recall which information was
presented with each A item (either B or C). The behavioral results from these
experiments will resolve whether weakly activating old associations in memory
enables modifications of those old memories. This research on potential
behavioral tools for memory modification has the potential to lead to
breakthroughs that could help people unlearn maladaptive behavior and alleviate
the stress associated with vivid memories of painful events. Discoveries that
could reshape memory will have profound implications for our understanding of
memory and also for society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project engages joint
international activities through the NSF-BSF (National Science Foundation –
Israel Binational Science Foundation) collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.