* 2049872
* Sustainable Supply Chains via Data-Driven Risk Analytics
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Basak Kalkanci, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 205,952.00

As a result of the outsourcing trend, 80 percent of global trade today flows
through multinational corporations and one in five jobs worldwide can be tied to
global supply chains. Therefore, global supply chains possess enormous potential
to contribute to sustainable development around the world. Yet, they continue to
be plagued by persistent social and environmental responsibility violations,
such as child and/or forced labor, hazardous working environments, excessive
overtime, poor wages, and pollution. These violations not only pose societal
burdens but can also create significant economic inefficiencies for firms in the
forms of product recalls, fines, problem corrections, supply interruptions,
stock value loss, and brand damage. To make a compelling business case for
sustainable supply chains and eventually create them, firms must quantify the
financial impacts of the responsibility violations of their suppliers, gain
greater visibility into the responsibility-related risks of their suppliers for
a more effective allocation of inspection resources, and implement appropriate
decision support tools for managers to account for responsibility-related risks
in sourcing decisions. The objective of this research is to couple data-
analytics approaches with the newly available datasets on social and/or
environmental violations of suppliers to generate the knowledge base needed for
firms to move in this direction. This research develops descriptive and
predictive statistical models, and behavioral decision support tools that can be
deployed by firms to proactively manage responsibility in their supply
chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research bridges an important methodology gap
in supply chain management by utilizing data-driven approaches for managing
supplier responsibility. First, this research utilizes machine learning and
language processing approaches to (1) link public supplier environmental
violation records with proprietary supply network data, and (2) enable a
systematic quantitative evaluation of how suppliers’ responsibility violations
affect the financial performance of buying firms for the first time. Second,
statistical models are developed to detect key common characteristics of
suppliers that are revealed as environmental violators and to predict “risky”
suppliers. These models will enable buying firms, governmental and/or
nongovernmental agencies to allocate limited inspection resources according to
predicted risk to achieve cost-effectiveness. Third, behavioral mechanisms are
designed and tested through a closed-loop experimental methodology to nudge
managers into considering responsibility-related risks in sourcing decisions.
Taken together, this research facilitates a shift from “reactive” to “proactive”
in the way firms view and manage social and environmental responsibility in
their supply chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.