* 2049109
* Empathy-Driven Engineering Internships for Teens: Connecting Technical Work to Social Needs
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Stacey Forsyth, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,498,871.00

This project responds to the persistent patterns of underrepresentation of
women, African American and Latinx people in engineering. Many youth continue to
have a limited, and at times inaccurate, understanding of what engineering is
and what engineers do. Often, these limited perceptions of engineering do not
align with youths’ interests and strengths. Both in-school and out-of-school
time experiences can provide powerful opportunities for young people to become
familiar with engineering and engineering career pathways, develop engineering-
related knowledge and skills, and begin to develop an interest in engineering.
However, these experiences are often short-term, which can limit the extent that
youth are able to: recognize how engineering can align with their interests,
begin to see themselves as engineers, and experience an authentic, iterative
engineering design process. This project addresses this limitation by engaging
120 youth in multi-month engineering internships at five sites across the
country: Colorado, California, Alabama, New Jersey, and Washington, D.C. The
project also addresses an additional challenge: the traditional focus of many
pre-college engineering experiences on technology and technical solutions can
limit youths’ opportunities to develop skills needed for sociotechnical problem
solving and limit opportunities for youth to see how their interests align with
engineering. Youth participants in the Build a Better Book internship will spend
three to four months engaging in iterative engineering design processes and
practices as they design and fabricate books and other products for children who
are blind or low vision. This opportunity will enable youth to develop technical
skills, including work with technologies like laser cutters and 3D printers,
while also including a focus on how engineering work can benefit people. Youth-
created designs of accessible books, games, and other products will be shared on
the project website so they can be shared with and reproduced by others.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to study the
influences of a long-term, professionally- structured, empathy-driven
engineering internship on teens’ perceptions of engineering, identities, and
transferrable STEM skills. The research seeks to understand how an intervention
can develop a more inclusive and human-centered engineering identity by
integrating the People Part of Engineering framework with the principles of
persistence of interest theory. Researchers and educators from the University of
Colorado Boulder, Heart of LA (HOLA), Mountain Lakes Library, Trussville City
Schools, Washington Leadership Academy Charter School, and J. Sickler Consulting
will collaborate on design-based case study research to examine the internship
model in five diverse formal and informal education settings to address three
questions: (1) To what extent, and in what ways, does the empathy-driven
engineering internship model impact teen interns’ perceptions of engineering,
personal engineering identities, transferrable STEM workforce skills, and vision
of their career trajectory? (2) Which elements of empathy-driven engineering
internships are most critical to teens’ cognitive and social-emotional gains,
regardless of context? (3) In what ways do different contexts require distinct
variations in implementation to effectively engage and activate persistence of
interest in teens? To investigate these questions the investigators will use a
comparative, multiple-case study design, with data collected through: pre/post
questionnaires, video reflections, focus groups, and student artifacts. The
investigators will also collect survey responses from a comparison group and
from program alumni. Data analysis plans include descriptive and inferential
statistics, non-parametric comparisons, and qualitative coding using a deductive
framework. The investigators will synthesize findings specific to each site to
create case descriptions which will also be analyzed for explore similarities
and differences across the different sites. The project will share research
findings broadly, with both researchers and practitioners, to advance the
field’s understanding of the critical factors and practices that positively
influence (or limit) teens’ motivation to pursue engineering and their
persistence in the field. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.