* 2049911
* CAREER: Foundations and Applications of Constraint-based Synthesis
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Peter-Michael Osera, Grinnell College
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 03/31/2026
* USD 459,264.00

Program synthesis promises to democratize programming for the masses by
automating the generation of tedious, error-prone code from more natural and
understandable user-provided specification. Over the past two decades, advances
in computational power have led to a proliferation of program-synthesis
techniques that draw upon various fields ranging from logic, programming-
language theory, and machine learning. These techniques differ substantially in
how they operate, and no single technique is universally superior in all cases.
Furthermore, little is understood about users' actual needs and sentiment
towards advanced development tools like synthesizers, which inevitably leads to
the development of theoretically interesting but ultimately uncompelling or
impractical tools. The novelties of this project are two-fold: (a) providing a
unifying framework for these differing techniques so that their theoretical
underpinnings can be better understood and next-generation program synthesis
tools can be built on top of this framework, and (b) identifying the set of
human factors that should be considered when making program-synthesis tools.
This project's impact is, ultimately, unifying perspectives on program synthesis
not just in terms of techniques but also disciplines: programming languages,
human-computing interaction, and computer-science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on two primary efforts. The
first is developing a unified set of semantic foundations for synthesis based on
a generalized notion of constraint that captures the common forms of
specifications found with current techniques, e.g., types, examples, logical
constraints, syntactic constraints, and partial programs. This constraint-based
approach to synthesis naturally leads to a deductive, hole-guided programming
style, different from traditional programming models. Therefore, the project's
second effort is a systematic study of the needs and sentiment of developers
towards this style of programming and the design of next-generation development
tools based on these results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.