* 2049613
* How do multiple coastal stressors structure the genomic diversity of marine populations?
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Jonathan Puritz, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 05/31/2024
* USD 680,897.00

Marine species face a complex suite of stressors that span multiple temporal and
spatial scales from long-term global ocean change to localized episodes of
coastal acidification. The cumulative and concurrent impacts of multiple
stressors remain relatively unknown and requires investigating their synergistic
impacts across all life stages. Two common stressors in coastal environments are
hypoxia, or low dissolved oxygen, and coastal acidification. Hypoxia and coastal
acidification are linked to daily cycles of respiration and photosynthesis, even
in pristine bays and estuaries. Coastal waters are also affected by pulses of
natural and artificial freshwater runoff driven by rainfall and storm events.
Pulses of freshwater can cause short-term, low salinity conditions, another
stressor, that are expected to worsen with climate change. For many marine
species, larval stages are the only means of migration and genetic exchange, and
larvae are likely encountering hypoxia, coastal acidification, and low salinity
stressors while they are in shallow coastal waters. Additionally, early
juveniles may encounter extended periods of all three stressors. The interaction
of early life-history stages with repeated and combinations of coastal stressors
has the potential to result in an increase of larval/juvenile mortality or the
removal of less tolerant larvae. The consequences of this differential mortality
are being investigated in the eastern oyster using laboratory multi-stressor
exposure experiments and in the field through genomic surveys of natural
populations. Patterns of genetic selection are being analyzed by combining
genomic and environmental data to elucidate how multiple stressors are shaping
marine populations. Broader impacts include training opportunities for a post-
doctoral fellow, graduate and undergraduate students and societal impacts.
Results from the study are key to predicting how oyster reefs will adapt to
long-term climate change and human population growth. A symposium is planned to
bring scientists and members of the broader community together to discuss
conservation and restoration of oyster reefs and sustainable aquaculture. A
better understanding the physiological limits of larvae and juveniles to
stressors is contributing to new strategies for oyster hatcheries to optimize
selection and screening of brood stock for robust larvae and
juveniles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad goal is to characterize how hypoxia
(DO), coastal acidification (CA), and low salinity events (LS) shape population
connectivity and microevolutionary processes of marine invertebrates. As larvae
grow and develop, they may be able to tolerate short-term exposures to
environmental stressors, but prolonged exposure to diurnal DO/CA cycling and LS
events may reduce subsequent survival, especially in juveniles. Larval and
juvenile interactions with multiple stressors have the potential to either
disrupt gene flow by simply not allowing migrant exchange or to act as a
selective force, structuring populations through genotype-environment
interactions. This project uses a coupled experimental and seascape genomics
approach to investigate how multiple stressors are shaping observed genomic
diversity. Phase 1 is determining how larval and juvenile genotypes and
phenotypes respond to multiple stressors across different developmental time
points. Experiments include two larval short-term exposures to factorial
combinations of DO/CA and LS, and a long-term juvenile exposure to factorial
combinations of DO/CA diurnal cycling and LS. The coding regions of genes
expressed during experimental exposures are being sequenced using a cost-
effective exome capture method. Phase 2 is determining the role of natural and
anthropogenic forces shaping the evolution of oyster populations by testing if
selective regimes differ and interact across life-history stages and if the
frequencies of both neutral and resistant genotypes correlate with environmental
conditions. Surveys of the genomes of adult populations across multiple
localities from several urbanized estuaries are generating a seascape genomic
framework based on a panel of genomic markers, including potential loci under
selection during early-life history. These data are being integrated with
environmental data to elucidate the mix of factors that contribute to population
structure and local genetic diversity. Results are linking adult genotype
frequencies at both neutral and putatively selective loci to changes in allele
frequencies in response to early larval, late larval, and early juvenile
exposure to stressors. The research is unraveling the complex interaction of
selection, migration, and drift on marine genetic diversity for a mechanistic
understanding of the genomic consequences of coastal stressor and their
interaction on larvae.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Biological Oceanography and Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.