* 2049356
* Collaborative Research: Honest and Robust Inference with High Dimensional Data
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Michal Kolesar, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2024
* USD 195,000.00

Modern data analysis in economics and other sciences often involves situations
in which researchers are interested in making predictions about or explaining
the behavior of many individuals; researchers may also be interested in how a
single factor affects an outcome but have to include several other factors in
explaining the outcome of interest. Testing for statistical uncertainty
surrounding the measured effects in these situations is difficult and existing
methods do not provide precise and efficient ways to measure this uncertainty.
This research project will develop new and improved methods for accessing
statistical uncertainty associated with effect measurements in both situations.
These situations arise routinely in economics and other social science research
that addressing many policy questions, and accurate methods for assessing
uncertainty are important for providing good policy recommendations. The results
of this research project will help improve the quality of policy evaluation and
statistical prediction and as result, provide policy makers with better advice.
This will contribute to better policy outcomes, hence foster faster economic
growth in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop new
methods to test statistical uncertainty in high-dimension data estimation in two
settings. In the first setting, we develop a general method for constructing
intervals that satisfy an average coverage property: the intervals cover a
prespecified fraction (95%, say) of the true effects on average. Focusing on
average coverage allows us to form intervals that automatically reflect
efficiency gains from data-driven regularization, including empirical Bayes
methods, and estimators of a regression function based on machine learning
techniques. Such gains are not possible under the usual notion of coverage,
under which a coverage guarantee is required for each effect individually, not
just on average. In the second setting, we focus on the usual notion of
coverage. To obtain informative confidence intervals, we exploit a priori
restrictions on the magnitude of the control coefficients. We show that our
construction enjoys several optimality and near-optimality properties. The
results of this research will improve the quality of policy advice and as a
result increase the rate of economic growth in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.