* 2049086
* Integrating Marine Seismic and Ocean Drilling Results with three-dimensional dynamic models of Subduction Initiation
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 351,595.00

This project seeks to better understand a process called subduction. Subduction
is where cold oceanic plates return to Earth’s interior. Plate subduction is a
key geological process responsible for the largest forces on tectonic plates,
the site of the most destructive earthquakes on the planet and leads to much of
the volcanism on Earth’s surface. The project will look at the process of
forming a new subduction zone, which is called subduction initiation. Subduction
initiation is poorly understood but is associated with the largest changes in
the forces which both drive and resist plate tectonic motions. Although many
aspects of plate tectonics are understood, subduction initiation remains a key
unknown and there has been a concerted effort in the last few years to
understand this process through marine geological and geophysical research. This
project will synthesize the recent marine research with what are called plate
tectonic reconstructions and incorporate that information into computational
models. Some of the key evidence that constrains the process has come from deep
sea drilling and through marine seismic surveys. These data constrain the
details of the geological evolution and present-day structure of the sites of
subduction initiation, respectively. The project will focus on four sites of
recent or on-going subduction initiation: Izu-Bonin Mariana south of Japan,
Tonga Kermadec in the southwest Pacific, Puysegur south of New Zealand and
Matthews-Hunter near Fiji also in the southwest Pacific. It has recently been
discovered through ocean drilling that the Izu-Bonin-Mariana and the Tonga-
Kermadec subduction zones may have initiated at the same time despite being
separated by several thousand miles and were associated with a major change in
the motion of the Pacific Plate. This project will look at the details of how
these subduction zones formed in terms of the basic physics of solid and fluid
mechanics. During subduction initiation, the so-called mega thrust fault, the
site of destructive great earthquakes, forms. It is thought that such a new
megathrust is in the process of forming south of New Zealand. In this project
sophisticated computational methods, call finite elements, will be used and will
use the largest supercomputers supported by the National Science Foundation.
During the project, a graduate student will be trained in computational methods,
which are widely applicable to many areas of science and engineering. The
investigator will work with the Caltech Seismo Lab Outreach and Social Media
office to communicate science to the broad, diverse community of the Los Angeles
community, including through visits to local public schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initiation of new subduction zones is a key
component of plate tectonics but remains an unsolved problem. With subducted
slabs being the primary force driving plate motions, formation of new subduction
zones and demise of existing ones are associated with the largest changes in the
forces on tectonic plates. There was an ocean basin-wide tectonic change in the
Pacific at about 50 Ma with initiation of IBM and Tonga-Kermadec synchronous
with a change in plate motions. This project will squarely address these
fundamental problems by exploiting the recently expanded observational record
from deep sea drilling and marine seismic surveys. The team of geoscientists
will test concepts for the initiation of subduction by comparing observations
against a new generation of 3D, time-dependent geodynamic models. With the
observational constraints on subduction initiation through ocean drilling and
marine seismic surveys jumping forward over the last six years simultaneous with
a commensurate maturing of software and computational hardware, the time is
ideal to readdress the mechanics of subduction initiation. The investigators
will build detailed regional plate tectonic reconstructions (data models) for
four western Pacific subduction initiation events: Izu-Bonin Mariana (IBM),
Tonga Kermadec, Puysegur and Matthews-Hunter. The Puysegur subduction zone
(offshore New Zealand) is an ideal natural laboratory for testing the mechanics
of subduction initiation with its well-constrained plate kinematics, structural
controls, stress evolution, vertical motions, and distribution of faults. These
reconstructions provide essential initial and boundary conditions and allow for
rigorous comparisons between geodynamic models and geological and geophysical
observations. The finite element method will be used for the solution of these
inherently time-dependent, multi-scale problems and achieve the resolutions
required to track the localization of deformation key for systems with plastic
failure. The visco-elastoplastic models will have thermal and compositional
buoyancy and explicit sub-scale models of weakening, dislocation creep, and
partial melting. The team will constrain, slab strength, stress propagation,
plastic failure and fault zone nucleation (weakening mechanisms associated with
grain evolution and sperpentinization) from time-dependent models with plate
motions for Puysegur since 15 Ma and Matthews-Hunter since 2 Ma. The team will
determine the conditions needed to initiate the IBM arc at 52 Ma over 100-1,000
km of strike such that the initial magmatic signal is synchronous within a few
Myrs. For IBM, the rate at which driving forces grow and are transmitted to the
Pacific plate will be addressed. The project will reach a new level of
integration between dynamic flow models, plate kinematics and MG&amp;G data that
could have broad application. The work could impact several large programs. The
geodynamic hypotheses could result in predictions that could be tested with deep
sea drilling under the auspices of IODP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.