* 2049645
* REU Site: Physics and Astronomy at the University of Minnesota
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Alex Kamenev, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/29/2024
* USD 378,239.00

This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an award for the Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) program at the University of Minnesotaâ€™s Twin Cities
campus School of Physics and Astronomy. It will enable ten undergraduate physics
and astronomy majors to take part in cutting edge research by participating in a
ten-week summer program. Each student will work in a research group, supervised
by a faculty member, making the transition from classroom instruction to state-
of-the-art research, from mastering old knowledge to creating new experiences.
The project enhances opportunities for development and education for the
involved students, on the one hand, and advances the progress of science, on the
other. An additional focus emphasizes diversity, the participation of students
from underrepresented groups, and first-generation college students. The
majority of participants will come from smaller colleges, where they do not have
the opportunity to participate in front-line research during the regular
academic year. By encouraging students to participate in scientific research,
particularly students from non-Ph.D. granting institutions, the summer REU
program addresses a critical national need for skilled employees in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific projects will be in astrophysics, high-energy physics, condensed
matter, and biophysics. Most of the student projects are anticipated to be in
the area of experiment and data analysis. Some projects may focus on theoretical
aspects of the areas listed above. In case the in-person participation proves to
be problematic due to COVID19, the project leaders have prepared a log of
projects that may be executed remotely with on-line interactions between
participants and advisors. Most of such projects are in the area of data
analysis of astrophysical or LHC-generated data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.