* 2049834
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Feeling the Squeeze: How Financial Stress Shapes Decision Making and Risk for Drinking Water Systems in U.S. Cities
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Christine Kirchhoff, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 202,204.00

Across the nation, cities face immense fiscal stress brought about by the
confluence of increased demands for critical city services – including drinking
water, education, transportation, fire protection, and housing – and precipitous
declines in revenues needed to support those increased demands. Decisions made
under conditions of fiscal stress may erode and undermine the resilience of
these critical city services by impeding the ability of water managers to
respond to today’s challenges and plan for an uncertain future, while
maintaining affordable and equitable service delivery. Financial stress
therefore presents a significant risk to the resilience of the services upon
which millions of people depend. Despite these risks, the effects of financial
stress on decision-making by city governments and the influence of local
political, institutional, and physical contexts on decision-making is poorly
understood. This award supports fundamental research that will address this
fundamental gap in knowledge. Specifically, this research will advance
understanding of the ways that financial stress affects decision-making and
resilience of drinking water systems (DWS), produce actionable knowledge that
will improve equity and resilience of DWS, generate a new, publicly accessible
database, and educate and train students and water professionals about the
intersection of fiscal stress, risk and resilience, and equity in municipal
decision making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research advances empirical and
theoretical understanding of the relationship between financial stress, fiscal
behavior, and resilience using a novel mixed methods approach. This research
also advances practical understanding of how financial stress affects decision
making and resilience in municipal DWS and generates a novel, integrative,
publicly accessible database of municipal government spending and revenue,
political and institutional context, drinking water system conditions, and
demographics. Results from this research will provide scholars with new
theoretical insights for understanding the relationship between fiscal stress,
behavior, and resilience and its implications for equity in public services, and
provide actionable insights to support effective interventions to improve
equitable resilience now and in the future. This research will train a postdoc
and graduate and undergraduate students including those from underrepresented
groups including women, students of color, and first-generation students in
rigorous, interdisciplinary research and engagement and reach over 100 more
students through instruction using case studies developed from this research.
Broad dissemination will occur through publications, conferences, webinars, and
case studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.