* 2049744
* Collaborative Research: Information and Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Stephen Morris, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 245,721.00

This project analyzes the impact of information for the structure of markets.
The use of information in internet and other markets has been revolutionized in
the twenty by developments in technology. Economic institutions are adapting to
these changes. At the same time, there have been fundamental improvements in our
theoretical understanding of the role of information in the economy, but these
new insights are somewhat abstract. Our project brings recent theoretical
developments in information economics to bear on key economic questions in the
economy. One component of our project addresses the new multi-billion dollar
market for internet advertising. Advertisers purchase the right to display
advertisements to particular internet users (the display of one advertisement to
a particular internet user is known as an "impression". Because internet
platforms have detailed information about users, it is possible to target users
precisely, i.e., show particular advertisements to internet users with
particular characteristics. The market for impressions has become very
sophisticated. The research team seeks to understand the gains and losses
associated with targeting impressions. This work will be an input into the
important policy question of how internet platforms should be regulated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team's work on the market for impressions will analyze
new questions in auction theory. In particular, in the market for impressions,
the publisher can use his private information about users to control
advertisers' information about the value of particular viewers. Providing more
information will increase the efficiency of the allocation. But more information
will also reduce competition and give more information rents to the buyer. The
team plans to understand the optimal information structure for the publishers
and see how the optimal policy translates into selling methods used in practice.
A second component of the project will study "Price Discrimination in
Competitive Markets". Price discrimination when firms exploit information about
consumers to target them with different prices. Price discrimination has been
most successfully studied in the context of a monopoly seller. When firms both
compete with each other but also price discriminate, the analysis can become
intractable. This is a good example of a setting where more insight and
tractability can be gained by allowing richer information. The team plans to
provide tight bounds on welfare outcomes and price distributions for a given
distribution of heterogeneous values of consumers. Finally, they want to improve
our understanding of the relation between information and "higher-order
beliefs". Higher-order beliefs encode a population's beliefs about the world,
their beliefs about others' beliefs and so on. What is the relation between
representing information via higher-order beliefs and less structured
representations? They will develop the connection, understanding how a many
player formalization of "more information" translates into higher-order beliefs
and identifying settings where higher-order beliefs can be used to approximate
any information structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.