* 2049902
* Saving Seniors’ Lives: Comparing the Efficiency and Equity of Medicare and the Clean Air Act
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Nicolai Kuminoff, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This research project will study the relative effectiveness of two public
policies---Medicaid expenditure and air quality regulation---used to reduce
mortality among Americans over age 65. It will measure the returns to Medicare
spending and Environmental Protection Agency regulation of fine particulate air
pollution in terms of the number of premature deaths avoided, extension of life
years, and private economic benefits. These measures are obtained by applying
the latest economic theory and measurement methods to data on Americans 65 year
and above over from 1999 through 2013 period. The research will also study how
air quality regulation affects racial, income, and gender groups differently.
This study therefore provides information on how best to improve the health of
older citizens in the US. The findings will inform policy makers about the
efficiency and fairness of different public expenditures used to improve the
health of the elderly. The results also will yield insights on how public
expenditures could be adjusted to reduce racial and socioeconomic disparities in
pollution exposure and life expectancy. The results of this research will help
to develop better policies to improve the health of US citizens generally and
thus contribute to US’s economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
generate novel estimates of marginal survival benefits of Medicare spending,
marginal survival benefits of long-term reduction in fine particulate air
pollution, and individuals’ willingness to pay for increased survival
probabilities. The project will show whether and how these estimates differ by
age, sex, health, and socioeconomic status. The econometric analysis will use an
instrumental variable approach to estimate survival functions that leverages
spatial and temporal variation in medical treatment style and regulation of air
pollution. The data used to implement this approach are constructed by linking
federal administrative records to surveys of a random sample of Medicare
beneficiaries. The results will show the relative efficacy in reducing mortality
through Medicare spending and regulating air pollution, and these efficacy
measures will be converted into dollars using an economic model of individuals’
expected utility-maximizing medical spending decisions. The results of this
research project will not only help improve efficiency of public policies to
improve health, but it will also help to establish the USA as a global leader in
health policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.