* 2049185
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Labor and Livelihoods within Militarized Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Marina Welker, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 06/30/2022
* USD 22,206.00

Soldiers are a critical part of the labor force in militarized communities.
Anthropological theories about the work of soldiers often focus on the risk and
uncertainty associated with conflicts affecting them and the related effects on
the human experience and social lives. However, being a soldier also provides
stable employment and provides new social relationships within communities that
are offset from other aspects of daily life. How do these social relationships
affect the experience of being a soldier? Does the everyday labor of being a
soldier provide experiences that are distinct from those associated with active
conflict? This doctoral dissertation project synthesizes theory from economic
anthropology and the anthropology of social structure to investigate the
tensions between stability and risk inherent to the military experience and its
effects on livelihoods in conflict zones. It trains a U.S.-based graduate
student in anthropological theory and methods and involves extensive
dissemination of findings for scholarly and non-scholarly audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this doctoral dissertation project examines
the lives and livelihoods of paid soldiers in militarized communities. Through
ethnographic observation and life history interviews of soldiers where they
reside and work, this project investigates how being a soldier contributes to
household labor and the activities that soldiers pursue to enhance their job
performance or retreat from daily stressors. It asks whether soldiersâ€™ social
networks inside and outside of the military context affect their understandings
of labor, for example, and how the labor of being a soldier in turn alters those
networks. By considering the way militarized social and economic spaces provide
possibilities for certain forms of work and social relationships to be pursued,
this project not only provides a novel approach to the study of security, but
also contributes to social scientific studies of political economy and
gender.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.