* 2049250
* Mortality Effects of Health Insurance Networks and Providers
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Jason Abaluck, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Why are some health insurance plans better than others at keeping beneficiaries
healthy? It is possible that differences in plan networks results in
beneficiaries having access to differential quality physicians and hospitals.
This research project will study why some private health insurance plans are
better than others at keeping their beneficiaries healthy. It will measure which
physicians and hospitals promote health for different types of patients and link
these to plan-level effects using new data on plan networks. The research will
also develop new methods to separate plans that promote health from plans that
enroll beneficiaries who will be healthier regardless of the plans they enroll
in. The findings from this project will provide guidance on how to regulate
private and government subsidized health insurance markets in ways that will
promote beneficiary health. By helping to improve efficiency in the health
insurance market, the results of this research project will not only improve
health outcomes in the USA but also promote economic growth and lower health
care expenditure. This research will therefore help to establish the USA as the
global leader in health insurance reforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a unified framework for studying quality differences and choice in
healthcare markets by synthesizing the heterogeneous mortality effects and
selection of different physicians, hospitals, and health insurance plans. This
analysis proceeds in three steps. It validates observational estimates of
provider mortality effects, allowing for heterogeneity by patient observables,
with quasi-experimental “mover” variation. Second, it uses discrete choice
methods to recover the effective networks of insurance plans from detailed
provider network information. This is combined with validated provider mortality
estimates to yield estimates of plan network quality. Third, it estimates a
model of plan choice, as a function of provider networks and other attributes,
and use this model to study (i) how health insurance markets impact health via
the matching of consumers and providers and (ii) whether counterfactual market
structures can yield better matches and health outcomes. The findings from this
project will influence policy debates over the optimal structure of private and
government subsidized healthcare markets, such as Medicare Advantage (MA). This
research will also yield new estimates of provider and plan network quality
which will complement existing public performance rankings. The estimates will
allow for a range of policy counterfactuals that evaluate the health
consequences and broader welfare impact of policies. The results will therefore
improve the functioning of the insurance markets as well as improve its
effectiveness on health outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.