* 2049979
* Topological Quantum Hydrodynamics in Nonmetallic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Yaroslav Tserkovnyak, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2025
* USD 650,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education with an aim to unravel hidden physical properties and potential
utilities of insulating materials. These materials could be chemically natural
or judiciously tailored in an atomic layer-by-layer fashion. The dynamic
cooperation among the underlying elementary constituents can result in the
effectively knotted geometric entities, such as vortices or magnetic textures
that resemble the arrangement of spines on a hedgehog, that spur unexpected
physical behavior. In certain natural or engineered systems, an intricate
geometric character is already woven into the chemical fabric of the homogeneous
material itself. While this may not be directly evident, it can be manifested
through exotic physics at the material's boundary. The latter, in turn, can be
exploited to control the textured inhomogeneous dynamics in the bulk by
electrical, thermal, or optical manipulations on the edges. Ultimately, this
research aims at establishing new modalities for classical and quantum
information transmission by appropriately designed systems and devices, which
can exhibit novel types of (out-of-equilibrium) dynamics and (nonelectrical)
signal generation as well as yield hidden
functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics studied here thus have
technological implications, while also offering educational opportunities. The
PI's collaboration with materials scientists and engineers will promote new
device concepts for efficient nanoscale energy storage and quantum
communications. The intersection between topology, quantum transport, and
quantum information science also offers a terrific departure point for designing
modern courses, research topics for training students and postdocs, as well as
educational outreach to schools and the public. The PI will team up with the
California NanoSystems Institute to carry out outreach activities to Los Angeles
public school district, maintain a theoretical nanoscience component at the UCLA
summer internship programs, as well as contribute to the physics fairs that are
periodically offered to the public by his department. Beyond UCLA, an
international conference will be organized for scientists from developing
nations, with a broad scope in topological and quantum phenomena in condensed-
matter physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education to investigate novel modes of
information flow and the associated quantum correlations in materials with
topological character. The latter is generally associated with bulk-boundary
correspondence, and provides control handles on the dynamics and transport
processes in the interior of a system through the manipulations and measurements
on its boundaries. We are primarily interested in insulating magnetic or
superconducting systems, which can exhibit spatially-inhomogeneous order-
parameter dynamics not hindered by much dissipation. Topological conservation
laws underlying such collective textures, like magnetic/superconducting
vorticity in 2D or magnetic hedgehog textures in 3D, offers a hydrodynamic
framework for developing a systematic field-theoretic formalism for quantum
transport. The topological bulk-boundary relations enable the bias and measure
the topological texture flow, either thermoelectrically or optically, offering a
fundamentally new way to probe transport in wide classes of nonmetallic media.
After developing a microscopic quantum response theory, it will be applied to
effective descriptions for ordered, disordered, and critical regimes, with a
focus on quantum magnets and spin liquids. Even for ordinary ferromagnets and
antiferromagnets, our perspective raises new types of questions for
interrogating materials. This becomes even more interesting when the material is
already topological at the level of its band structure, as in the quantum Hall
phases and topological superconductors. Here, we anticipate two interwoven bulk-
boundary features, with the robust edge states dictated by the band-structure
topology affording us universal means to bias and control real-space topological
textures in the bulk. Low-energy quantum degrees of freedom, which are either
naturally associated with the topological features (such as skyrmionic
vibrations or Majorana fermions in a vortex core) or artificially implanted
(such as nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond), are then studied in concert with
the delocalized collective driven-dissipative
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will further our understanding of
fundamental properties of correlated quantum materials on three fronts: (i)
Through the prism of their novel transport properties based on topological
conservation laws (which has so far eluded much attention in solid state); (ii)
By tuning an ensemble of individually-accessible quantum bits into strong
(electromagnetic) coupling with a topological material, and quantifying the
induced entanglement; and (iii) Exploring these questions for a driven-
dissipative dynamics, where the non-Hermitian character enriches both the
topological properties and the associated quantum correlations. The project thus
sets out to offer new general-purpose probes of dynamic properties of correlated
materials, with an eye on topology, quantum entanglement, and dissipation, along
with the interplay thereof.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.