* 2049620
* Geophysics of Iron in the Earth’s Core
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Wendy Mao, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 01/31/2024
* USD 330,111.00

Located nearly 3000 km below the crust, the Earth’s core is the most remote
region within our planet. Mainly composed of iron, the core’s outer shell is
liquid while its most inner part, the inner core, is solid. The core plays a
central role in the planet’s geomagnetism, dynamic processes, and thermal
evolution. Here, the team conducts laboratory experiments at the extreme
pressures and temperatures prevailing in Earth’s deep interior. They measure the
properties of the iron-rich materials that make up the core, e.g., their
deformation mechanisms and viscosity. These properties can be dramatically
altered at core conditions. The results give insight into why seismic waves
travel at different speeds through different parts of the inner core. They
constrain how the Earth’s magnetic field is generated and unveil its past
evolution. These outcomes are valuable to many researchers studying deep Earth’s
processes: mineral physicists, seismologists, and geodynamicists. The project
promotes technical advances useful across disciplines, in geoscience and
materials science, and in the industry. It also provides support for a female
graduate student, training for undergraduate students, and outreach toward K-12
students and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims at characterizing
key rheological properties of iron and iron-rich compounds and alloys at the
extreme conditions of the deep Earth. Two fundamental questions are addressed:
(1) What causes inner-core seismic anisotropy? (2) How does viscous dissipation
in the outer core influence the evolution of the geodynamo? To address the first
question, the team characterizes the dominant deformation mechanisms and
strength of solid iron at high pressures and temperatures. The lattice preferred
orientation that develops during iron crystallization is also measured. The goal
is to understand how the alignment of elastically anisotropic iron crystals may
be acquired during solidification or subsequent deformation (or both). To this
aim, the researchers carry out static compression experiments in resistive and
laser-heated diamond anvil cells. They perform in situ X-ray imaging and
diffraction measurements at national synchrotron facilities. Addressing the
second question requires measuring iron viscosity at core conditions. While
traditional measurements are limited to lower pressures, the team benefit from
new technical developments; these enable a path toward measuring the viscosity
of iron dynamically compressed to outer core conditions. Thus the team carries
out dynamic compression experiments and use novel X-ray diffraction and imaging
techniques at the Materials at Extreme Conditions instrument at the Linac
Coherent Light Source (SLAC) and the National Ignition Facility at Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory. These experiments represent new opportunities to
leverage the considerable resources and expertise available at national
laboratories and apply them to better understand the
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.