* 2049896
* Advances in behavioral decision analytics: Theory, Applications, and Training
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Daniel Cavagnaro, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 585,025.00

This project aims to help next-generation DRMS research reduce its reliance on
technical modeling assumptions that could bias or jeopardize the
interpretability and replicability of its findings. The key idea is to leverage
heterogeneity of behavior as an asset rather than treating it as a nuisance.
Directly connecting theories to variability over time, across contexts, and
between decision makers, will better attune management and policy to both
commonalities and differences in behavior across hundreds of millions of people,
leading to greater societal relevance. The grant also aims to better
conceptualize, define, and understand the scope of decision theories. Enhancing
theoretical scope means expanding policy coverage: A broader and deeper
perspective paves the way for applied DRMS-related professionals to support the
well-being of a larger portion of the population at more times and in more
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project features theoretical, analytical,
empirical, and training components. The proposed research develops new tools and
models to better understand strength of preference, new open-source public-
domain analytics software, novel methods for adapting decision-making
experiments dynamically during data collection, and innovative approaches toward
conceptualizing, defining, and assessing the scope of decision theories. These
innovations both inform and build on empirical work that looks more closely at
heterogeneity of behavior and context-dependence. The project considers how
ethical/moral foundations interact with evidence weighing, how framing interacts
with probabilistic inference, how risk and time synergize, as well as novel ways
to compare individual and collective decision making. The training component
focuses on next-generation DRMS scholars by training junior scholars in summer
schools, following-up with collaborative, research-based training jointly with
their home labs, and facilitating dedicated dissemination of the traineesâ€™
research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.