* 2049491
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing Rural Farmers' Soil Management Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Flora Lu, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 03/31/2023
* USD 25,200.00

Agricultural nitrate pollution and subsequent contamination of freshwater
resources pose a major threat to human health. High levels of nitrates in
drinking water are often attributed to poor nutrient management practices on
farms, where fertilizers leach into regional water supplies. Agricultural
scientists have widely investigated soil management practices that can reduce
nitrate pollution; however, effective practices remain underutilized among
farmers. This project, which supports the training of a graduate student in
anthropological methods, uses theoretical insights from economic anthropology to
investigate the factors that affect farmers’ amenability to various soil
management practices and implications for nitrate losses to freshwater
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research focuses on
farmers’ soil management practices among rural residential communities exposed
to nitrates in drinking water. Specifically, it asks: how are agricultural soils
managed when the people applying fertilizers are also those most exposed to
nitrate-contaminated drinking water? To answer this question, the researcher
will interview and work alongside farmers, shadow farmer assistance providers,
and observe public meetings related to regional water quality. Findings will
illustrate how environmental inequality intersects with socioeconomic mobility
and community support to offer a deeper understanding of how communities of
farmers negotiate the costs and benefits of resource
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.