* 2049044
* REU Site: Computational Bioengineering
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Guadalupe Canahuate, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 388,428.00

New computational methods, tools, and models are urgently needed both to improve
human health and to understand the molecular, biochemical, and biophysical
principles of life. Such advances are needed to provide early detection of
disease, design new drugs and medical devices, and recommend better therapeutic
strategies. These efforts are most likely to succeed when a collaborative team
with diverse backgrounds and experiences converges on a problem. To address
these technical challenges and to aid in the development of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce, the University of Iowa will host a 10-week Research
Experience for Undergraduates Site on the theme of “Computational
Bioengineering.” Faculty from the College of Engineering and the Carver College
of Medicine will mentor and train 10 students every summer from 2021 to 2023.
The goal of this REU is to: (1) encourage participation of students from
underrepresented backgrounds and from institutions with limited research
opportunities, (2) provide an inclusive and immersive research experience for
trainees to learn fundamental concepts of computational bioengineering and how
to apply them to solve biomedical problems, (3) enhance oral and written
scientific communication skills to facilitate collaboration across discipline
boundaries, (4) instruct students how to conduct research ethically and
responsibly, (5) and prepare participants to pursue graduate studies and careers
in a STEM field. Students participating in this REU will conduct mentored
research in participating faculty laboratories. Additional program activities
include weekly workshops, seminars, and a journal club on topics in computing,
communicating science, the scientific method, hypothesis testing, rigor and
reproducibility, ethics, career development, etc., and community building social
activities that will be coordinated with other undergraduate programs on campus.
The experience will culminate with submission of an abstract and poster
presentation on the REU student’s research at the university-wide Summer
Undergraduate Research Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Iowa
will establish a 10-week Research Experience for Undergraduates Site on the
theme of “Computational Bioengineering.” Faculty from the College of Engineering
and the Carver College of Medicine will mentor and train 10 students every
summer from 2021 to 2023. The goal of this REU is to attract a diverse pool of
students from underrepresented backgrounds and from institutions with limited
research opportunities into an inclusive research environment. REU students will
use computation to conduct research that contributes to advancing knowledge and
understanding on a variety of medical problems spanning topics that include
orthopedic and cardiovascular biomechanics, medical imaging, neuroscience,
computational genomics, mechanobiology, and tissue engineering. Students will
gain expertise and skills in computation with medical applications and
scientific communication by conducting mentored research in participating
faculty laboratories. Additional program activities include weekly workshops,
seminars, and journal club on topics in computing, communicating science, the
scientific method, hypothesis testing, rigor and reproducibility, ethics, career
development, etc., and community building social activities that will be
coordinated with other undergraduate programs on campus. The experience will
culminate with submission of an abstract and poster presentation on the REU
student’s research at the university-wide Summer Undergraduate Research
Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division
of Engineering Education and Centers (Directorate for Engineering), and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.