* 2049543
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Kinship Relations and Genetic Testing Technologies among Adult Adoptees
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Shannon Bae, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 25,195.00

The introduction of direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetics testing has radically
altered the landscape of birth family search. The research supported by this
award will investigate the scales at which DNA testing reinforces or challenges
existing frameworks of family, identity, citizenship, and belonging.
Ethnographically, it focuses on the discourses, practices, and policies
surrounding DTC genetic testing technologies used by adult adoptees. In addition
to providing funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in
the methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, the
researcher will produce a guidebook for policymakers, government officials,
social workers, educators, and fellow researchers to understand the implications
of genetic testing and the birth family search experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research project asks how DNA
testing reinforces or challenges existing frameworks of family, identity,
citizenship, and the nation, focusing on a research context with a historically
high concentration of adoptions and the proliferating use of DTC genetic testing
technologies among those adoptees. Participant observation will be carried out
with four organizations that offer genetic testing services to adoptees and
birth families. DNA testing has the potential to expose trauma on individual,
familial, and national scales, as well as raise significant social, legal, and
moral questions. Across this network of social actors and institutions, this
research asks how DNA is being imagined, constructed, and deployed to produce
personal and public knowledge of identity, kinship, citizenship, belonging, and
memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.