* 2049564
* US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE: Hydrogen sulfide as a strong ligand affecting the speciation and solubility of key trace metals
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Gregory Cutter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2024
* USD 465,383.00

Trace metals are present at very low parts per trillion concentrations in the
ocean but in spite of their scarcity many, like iron and zinc, are essential to
the growth of the microscopic plants called phytoplankton. Others, like mercury
and arsenic, are toxic. In addition to very low concentrations, the essential or
toxic nature of a trace metal also depends on the chemical form of the element –
as a free dissolved ion all by itself or as charged ion interacting with other
inorganic or organic ions. One of the inorganic ions in seawater that strongly
interacts with trace metals is bisulfide, the ionic form of the foul-smelling
gas hydrogen sulfide. Its reactivity with metals can be so strong that it forms
metal-sulfide particles that sink out and are removed from the water. This
research project will study how hydrogen sulfide interacts with trace metals
like cadmium, copper, mercury, nickel, and zinc to form dissolved complexes that
make these metals less reactive to other ions and phytoplankton, or insoluble
particles that remove the metals. The researchers will conduct these studies on
an oceanographic expedition from Tahiti to the ice edge around Antarctica to
Chile as part of the U.S. GEOTRACES program with many other researchers
measuring trace metals from the surface to the ocean bottom. All of this and
more will be the subject of a graduate student’s doctoral research. In addition
to learning how to work on a major oceanographic expedition and with other
researchers, she will communicate her experiences and findings on a blog
available to all who follow it. She will also help to create a presentation
about her science that will be part of the “Sailing with GEOTRACES” virtual
reality experience for schools, libraries/museums, festivals, and public
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE cruise from Tahiti
to the Antarctic ice edge to Chile will sample waters with large gradients in
phytoplankton biomass and species, macronutrients, and trace metals. With
anticipated changes in the concentrations and phases of hydrogen sulfide in the
oxic water column, the transect offers an ideal opportunity to quantify the
linked cycles of hydrogen sulfide and bioactive metals like cadmium, copper, and
zinc, and the toxic element mercury. With an overall goal of quantifying the
coupled cycles of trace metals and sulfide in the upper, oxic ocean, our
specific research objectives for this research will be: (1) Quantify the sources
and sinks of dissolved and particulate sulfide as it pertains to the cycling of
key trace metals in order to accurately link their cycles; (2) Establish the
conditions under which free sulfide reacts with and precipitates trace metals
such as cadmium, copper, and zinc, and quantify this removal term; and (3)
Evaluate whether nanoparticulate/colloidal pyrite exists in hydrothermal plumes
and its contribution to iron transport relative to colloidal iron oxyhydroxides.
A fully integrated set of shipboard measurements, laboratory studies, and data
synthesis and speciation modeling are designed to meet these objectives. The
approach includes close collaborations with investigations of dissolved and
particulate trace metals and their speciation, as well as with those studying
mixing processes using a variety of tracers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.