* 2049386
* Shunt or shuttle? Nutrient-driven biogeochemical consequences of diatom host-virus interactions
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Kay Bidle, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/29/2024
* USD 549,997.00

Diatoms are a type of microscopic marine algae that form the base of the ocean
food web and generate about 20% of the oxygen on the planet. Admired since the
Victorian age, these organisms are often referred to as the ‘glass houses of the
sea’ because of the intricate architecture of their cell walls made of silicon
dioxide, or glass. When these organisms die, the cellular-associated carbon and
other elements can be either recycled and reused by other phytoplankton or,
because glass is heavier than seawater, lost by sinking out of the surface
ocean. Thus, the contribution diatoms make to carbon cycling is dictated by the
balance between the factors that facilitate recycling and those that stimulate
export. As the most abundant entity in the ocean, viruses have, for decades,
been characterized as efficient recyclers, acting as ‘shunts’ by preventing the
transfer of energy up the food chain through host mortality and lysis. However,
it has been suggested that viruses may also act as ‘shuttles’ to the deep ocean,
stimulating cellular processes that facilitate sinking. This project is testing
this emerging hypothesis and determining how different nutrient regimes
influence the fate of diatoms through impacts on viral infection dynamics and
death. This is particularly timely given major national and international
initiatives currently seeking to quantify how ecosystem interactions regulate
carbon export in the ocean. Results of this project have the potential to
challenge the canonical role of diatom viruses in carbon cycling and transform
the understanding of host-virus interactions in the ocean. This project provides
critical funding support for a soft-money, underrepresented, female
oceanographer, as well a graduate student and undergraduates. Proposed fieldwork
leverages a Rutgers and European Union-funded project, fostering ongoing
collaborations with researchers at the Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn in Naples,
Italy. To facilitate ocean literacy, the PIs are working with the Rutgers’
Education and Outreach team to conduct a series of Teen Cafes focused on carbon
cycling, phytoplankton, and viruses utilizing the ‘Tools of Science’ (ToS), a
series of educational videos and lesson plans designed to introduce middle, high
school, and undergraduate students in underrepresented and underserved
communities to core scientific practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diatoms
contribute almost 40% of marine primary productivity, dominating the biological
pump and disproportionately contributing to carbon export due to the ballasted
nature of a silica-based cell wall. The contribution of diatoms to carbon
sequestration is dictated by the balance between upper ocean remineralization
and sinking, yet we still cannot explain widespread spatio-temporal variability
in diatom-mediated export. As the most abundant predatory entities in the ocean,
viruses play a critical role in shaping microbial ecosystems and driving global
biogeochemical cycles. The premise of this proposal is that nutrient regimes
drive the biogeochemical consequences of diatom host-virus interactions. For
decades, the role of viruses as ‘shunts’, redirecting particulate matter away
from higher trophic levels and into the dissolved fraction through host lysis,
has dominated microbial ecology and marine virology. However, the idea that
viruses may also act as ‘shuttles’, facilitating carbon export by stimulating
aggregation and/or ballast production, is now emerging as a potential mechanism
for carbon flux. This project is conducting laboratory-based studies on diverse
diatom host-virus systems and manipulative studies on natural diatom communities
to compare the impact of viral infection on processes that facilitate sinking –
mineral ballast production and particle aggregation – to those that stimulate
remineralization – bacterial-mediated hydrolysis and subsequent remineralization
of diatom particulate organic matter and silica. Taken together, this work is
characterizing the relative balance between these diametrically opposing
outcomes within the ecophysiological context of nutrient regime (specifically,
silicon and iron limitation), ultimately elucidating the impact of viral
infection on the fate of diatom organic matter in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.