* 2049960
* Transatlantic (US-NI-RoI) Workshop on Collaborative IoT/CPS Research Opportunities â€“ Security and Trust Beyond Hardening
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Shanchieh Yang, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 07/31/2023
* USD 103,023.00

The continuous prevalence of Internet-of-Things (IoT) and the blurring boundary
between cyber and physical systems have brought a plethora of opportunities to
improve our ways of life. Along with the opportunities come the security risks
associated with the rapid introduction and integration of information
technologies and operational technologies. This project aims to foster
collaborations between U.S. researchers and those from the Republic of Ireland
and Northern Ireland to leverage expertise toward development of novel research
projects in the thematic areas of IoT/Cyberphysical (CPS) Cybersecurity. This
trilateral collaboration will facilitate identification of key science questions
and develop mutually beneficial partnerships to address them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two virtual interactive webinars and an in-person
culminating workshop will bring together researchers and industry representative
in Forensic-ready IoT/CPS, Privacy Preserving CPS, and Adversarial Learning CPS,
as well as Crosscutting Research in Policy and Usability. The outcome is
expected to be innovative and viable solutions proposed by multiple trilateral
collaborative teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.