* 2049262
* The Crop-Climate Feedback Cycle and its Implications for Global Food Production
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Justin Mankin, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 06/30/2024
* USD 360,000.00

Crop growth often creates conditions more favorable for crop production, this is
known as the crop-climate feedback cycle. Research has demonstrated that in some
of the world's most productive agricultural regions, crop growth may cool the
local climate, reducing the impact of crop-damaging hot temperatures, thereby
boosting crop yields. This project's geographical analysis demonstrates the
strength and spatial variability of the crop-climate feedback, as well as the
physical mechanisms driving it. By better understanding how crops interact with
local climate, this project informs efforts to anticipate environmental changes
that could impact future agricultural potential as well as adapting strategies
to limit crop yield losses. The project's findings will be made available to the
public via media outlets and presentations and will be of interest to various
agricultural stakeholders and those who analyze food security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates spatial analysis, climate science,
and statistical crop yield modeling to assess the extent to which crop growth
affects local climate, and how this, in turn, impacts crop production. This
research is guided by four questions: (1) what are the physical mechanisms
driving the crop-climate feedback? (2) how does the strength and importance of
the feedback vary across geographic space and across differing levels of
economic development and patterns of vulnerability to natural disasters? (3) how
might the crop-climate feedback affect crop yield trends in the coming decades?
and (4) could the crop-climate feedback enable an adaptive strategy of
agricultural consolidation to reduce crop yield losses in a warming climate? The
project's findings inform researchers about the interaction between crops and
the climate, which is critical for assessing the future risk of climate-driven
food insecurity, the potential for economic losses in agricultural regions, and
for developing adaptation strategies to increase the climate resilience of food
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.