* 2049741
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Diffusion of Automobiles and Motortrucks in the United States in the 20th Century
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jay Dhar, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2024
* USD 17,181.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation in
economics examines the diffusion of automobiles and motortrucks on American
farms in the early- and mid-20th century – specifically, the impact of last-mile
all-weather road access on said diffusion, and the impact of said diffusion on
agricultural productivity. This dissertation also examines the impact of group
identity on the decisions of citizens and economic agents as they consider
agreements to fully integrate capital, labor, and trade flows between a
developed country and a developing country (as has occurred in the European
Union). In the U.S., automobiles and motortrucks all but replaced railroads for
long-distance travel, both passenger and freight. The pace of diffusion was
likely powerfully influenced by access to all-weather roads and farmers were
among the early adopters of automobiles and motortrucks. In less developed
countries today, there is tremendous growth in the sales of motor vehicles, but
lack of last-mile road access slows the diffusion of motor vehicles on farms.
Measuring the impact of all-weather road access on uptake of automobiles and
motortrucks is critical to reliably modelling the future of climate patterns,
world transportation networks, urban growth patterns, demographics, and
agriculture. Measuring the impact of automobile and motortruck uptake on
agricultural productivity and decomposing the impact into a labor-saving and
land-saving component, is critical to better examining in the context of
agriculture the induced innovation hypothesis posited by Hicks (1932): "a change
in the relative prices of the factors of production is itself a spur to
invention, and to invention of a particular kind—directed to economizing the use
of a factor which has become relatively expensive." Proposed or existing
international agreements liberalizing capital, labor, and trade flows are often
politically opposed by many citizens of prospective signatory nations, and
sometimes either fail to be adopted or are withdrawn from, despite overwhelming
consensus and a high degree of confidence that such deals will result in boosts
to the national incomes of all signatory nations (and general efficiency gains
to the world economy as a whole). Understanding the impact of group identity on
political decisions in favor or against economic integration is critical to
understanding events such as the eastward expansion of the European Union, the
Brexit withdrawal, and various nativist movements surging throughout the
developed world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the dissertation chapter on the impact
of road access on automobile and motortruck uptake on farms, a panel data set of
counties is developed from U.S. Agricultural Censuses from 1929 to 1959, the
period of most rapid diffusion of motor vehicles on farms. In OLS specifications
with road access as a single variable with county and state-by-year effects and
multiple controls, road access was associated with usage rates that were 4.6%
higher for motortrucks and 2.8% higher for automobiles. IV estimation based on a
polynomial spatial-lag instrument indicates that road access caused usage rates
to be 3.6% higher for motortrucks and 4.2% higher for automobiles. These
averages disguise a great deal of heterogeneity in the effect of road access.
The impact of road access differed markedly by the types of crops and farm
products produced in a county. When examining the impact of automobiles and
motortrucks on agricultural productivity, a CES-translog, a Cobb-Douglas
translog (with the interaction terms), and a log-log (without the interaction
terms) production function of farm enterprises will be estimated, with each
observation being the farm enterprises in a single county. The effect of each
factor of production will be allowed to vary based on the crop composition of
the county. Demographic, climate, and weather control variables will be
controlled for at the county level. Changes in total factor productivity will be
examined. The impact of automobiles and motortrucks will separately be
decomposed into labor-saving and land-saving components. The experiment
examining the impact of group identity on economic integration is motivated by
the Metzler-Richards labor supply model as adapted by Agranov and Palfrey (2015)
and a voting model that actualizes the Median Voter Theorem. One may hypothesize
that taxation rates selected would be higher among populations with stronger in-
group sentiment, and that conditional on a given taxation rate stronger in-group
sentiment will cause the electorates of countries with higher-skilled workforces
to be less likely to vote in favor of integration. However, the ultimate impact
of in-group identity on the integration vote of the electorates of countries is
theoretically indeterminate, as although conditional on a taxation rate in-group
identity may cause fewer votes to be in favor of integration, in-group identity
increases the tax rate enacted and the likelihood of a subject in countries with
more-skilled workforces voting for integration is increasing in the tax rate.
The results of the experiment will show which of these two effects is
greater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.