* 2049762
* The Census Tree Linked Dataset
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Mark Clement, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

This project will create a large database of digitized, linked census records
for people living in the United States between 1850 and 1950. The project will
expand the set of available links among the US censuses for these years by a
factor of three, while simultaneously increasing the representation of women and
minority groups in the data. The research team will also develop and use state-
of-the-art handwriting recognition tools to digitize millions of census, vital
statistics, and other records.The database will be used in promising research in
the social, behavioral, and economic sciences that would not otherwise be
possible. For example, the data will allow researchers to measure the
intergenerational transmission of wealth or education, and to estimate the long-
term impacts of childhood circumstances. This project will enhance the
infrastructure for research and education because the new data science tools
will be shared with the research community. Because the majority of the
resources for this project will support graduate and undergraduate research
assistants, the project will also contribute to the development of a globally
competitive STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create an
infrastructure for transcribing and linking together large collections of
handwritten historical documents using deep machine learning and crowdsourced
human resources. Our project is informed by other initiatives that take
advantage of recent advances in data science, computer vision, and machine
learning to extract text from historical images, convert that text into usable
data, and link the individuals in the record to other collections. Our work will
complement these efforts, and we have unique advantages that will allow us to
dramatically advance the frontier in this area. These advantages arise from our
partnership with FamilySearch.org, the largest genealogical research
organization in the world, which allows us to access the largest-ever corpus of
labeled handwriting images from historical records (1 billion+). Furthermore,
because the users of these genealogy platforms have themselves created millions
of record links using their private information, we have access to a massive
database of “true” links that can inform our data cleaning processes and act as
training data to improve the machine learning algorithms that are part of our
linking strategy. With these advantages, we will create a digitized,
longitudinal panel of linked census records that will include each of the 217
million people who lived in the United States between 1850 and 1950. For the
majority of these we will be able to link individuals across multiple censuses
and across families, and we will extend this effort to other publicly available
record collections. We will make the tools and training data that we create easy
to access and use by other researchers and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.