* 2049359
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: Understanding the Drivers of Inert Gas Saturation to Better Constrain Ice Core-Derived Records of Past Mean Ocean Temperature
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Alan Seltzer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 543,728.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The integrated heat content of the global ocean is a
fundamental climate variable for understanding Earth’s energy balance. Accurate
estimates of past changes in the global energy budget are essential for
understanding the inherent sensitivities of the Earth system. This project will
address the accuracy of these estimates by carrying out computer simulations of
dissolved gases in the ocean. By analyzing the outcomes of these simulations,
the team aims to refine ice-core-based reconstructions of ocean heat content
that rely on measurements of gases (Xenon, Krypton, and Nitrogen) in ancient air
bubbles preserved in ice cores. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to
produce the first estimates and uncertainty ranges of saturation anomalies of
Xenon, Krypton, and Nitrogen in the glacial ocean during the Last Glacial
Maximum. Recent analytical advances have permitted measurement of ratios of
Xenon to Nitrogen and Krypton to Nitrogen in ice cores at sufficient precision
to resolve whole-atmosphere changes in these ratios that reflect warming and
cooling of the global ocean at the 0.1ºC level. However, to quantitatively
constrain past ocean heat content using inert gas measurements requires
assumptions about long-term changes in the global ocean saturation state of
these gases, which remains an entirely open problem. Consequently, the team will
use the Transport Matrix Method for biogeochemical tracer simulations. They will
build on a suite of previously conducted simulations of oxygen and carbon
dioxide in the glacial ocean with the University of Victoria Earth System
Climate Model to quantitatively constrain the glacial-interglacial change in
inert gas saturation state and understand its physical drivers. In addition, the
team will add independent experiments using a second model (the MIT global
circulation model) and carry out several future warming experiments to consider
how ongoing changes in the Earth system may affect physical air-sea gas
transfer. Finally, the team will reevaluate existing ice-core inert gas records
to produce best estimates of changes in ocean heat content during the Last
Glacial Maximum and periods of abrupt warming throughout the last deglaciation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project that is jointly funded by the
National Science Foundation’s Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) (U.S.
participants) and the Natural Environment Research Council (UKRI/NERC) of the
United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency Agreement. This Agreement
allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted and peer-reviewed by the
Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of the budget. Upon
successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds the proportion of
the budget and the investigators associated with its own investigators and
component of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF award is funded in whole or
in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law
117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.