* 2049688
* Collaborative Research: Correlated velocity models as dynamic upscaling and model translation tools for watershed-scale hydrobiogeochemical cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Diogo Bolster, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 247,844.00

A strong understanding of watershed function is necessary for responsible
stewardship of water resources. However, fully characterizing or understanding
all the complex processes that occur within watersheds is often not feasible and
prohibitively costly. Many locations of concern simply do not have enough long-
term data to predict how solutes will be transported through watersheds, and
lack the time and money required to make such predictions. The purpose of this
project is to develop a framework whereby better predictions of solute transport
can be made, even in data scarce regions. The project leverages existing data
and high-resolution models, constructed at sites that have already been
characterized in great detail, to assess how flow and transport processes in
similar watersheds are related. This information will lead to simple statistical
models that can capture the complexity of real watersheds based on less detailed
characterizations. The models are expected to allow the translation of knowledge
from sites where great investments have been made to improve models of
relatively data-poor sites. The project is also creating new educational tools,
training undergraduate and graduate students, and reaching out to applied
watershed managers to better understand their needs for real-world applications
of solute transport models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach used in this
research focuses on using recent multi-domain correlated velocity models (MD-
CVMs) to represent coupled subsurface and surface flow and transport in
watersheds. Lagrangian particle-based numerical methods along streamtubes are
the core of this approach, which couples interactions between particles to
accurately represent crucial mixing and reaction processes. The water and
solutes from each streamtube interact as they come together, simplifying the
watershed geometry into a tree without sacrificing process-level realism. The
streamtube approach will also enforce velocity correlations, which is a novel
feature at watershed scales that is lacking in previous models despite evidence
that persistent correlations exist. The advantage of using velocity correlations
is that they are conceptually simple but yield robust models that show promise
across different sites. The resulting dynamically coupled, yet realistic,
representations of watersheds will expand the tools available for understanding
and optimally managing real watersheds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.