* 2049515
* Collaborative Research: Influence of pressure on microbial communities in subseafloor sediment at hadal, abyssal, bathyal, and shelf water depths
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ying Zhang, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,180,883.00

The globe-spanning realm of subseafloor sediment is Earth’s least-explored large
biome. This project addresses a fundamental question about the microbial
communities that inhabit the subseafloor sedimentary environment – to what
extent and in what ways are they adapted to the low temperature, high pressure
conditions where they are found? Or, alternatively, are they just accidentally
introduced from the shallower and lower-pressure world where the organic matter
that feeds them largely originates? This project is examining how these
organisms metabolize organic matter in sediments. The project is also advancing
the development of a diverse, globally competitive workforce in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). It introduces 10 or more
students to sea-going research, by including them as shipboard scientists. The
project especially focusses on creating and funding opportunities for students
from minority groups under-represented in STEM fields, students from
economically disadvantaged backgrounds, and students from Puerto Rico, and from
multiple educational stages (ranging from community college to graduate school),
with diverse STEM interests. Study of samples and data from the expedition are
central to graduate and undergraduate research by students from these multiple
institutions. The project also supports the broader science community by
collecting and providing diverse samples for additional studies, including, but
not limited to, studies of deep-water residence time in a deep-sea trench, past
oceanographic conditions, and subseafloor microbes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fundamental objective of this project is to determine how the subseafloor
microbial communities and activities across a gradient of oceanic depth zones
(sublittoral, bathyal, abyssal, hadal) are impacted by the pressure of the
surrounding water. The primary hypothesis being tested is that “microbial
communities in subseafloor sediment are adapted for in situ pressure.” The null
hypothesis is that these “communities are merely remnant populations introduced
from shallower depths and poorly adapted for in situ pressure.” To test these
hypotheses, the project compares the subseafloor communities and rates of
activity that occur in anoxic subseafloor sediment at ocean depths ranging from
50 to ~8400 meters below sea level in the Puerto Rico Trench region. To collect
the samples and shipboard data, the project includes a 26-day coring program.
The project interrogates the genomic composition and community metabolic rates
of the subseafloor sedimentary communities over this full range of ocean depths.
Experiments are being conducted to determine the pressure-dependence of
potential processes (sulfate reduction and methanogenesis) and genes that are
preferentially expressed at in situ pressures by sublittoral, bathyal, abyssal
and hadal subseafloor communities. These results are synthesized to identify the
nature and extent of adaptations to in situ pressure in subseafloor
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.