* 2049509
* Collaborative Research: What controls the marine refractory DOC reservoir?
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Timothy DeVries, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 389,988.00

Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in the ocean consists of free-floating organic
molecules left over from the metabolisms of microscopic marine biota, analogous
to the organic residues left behind within soils on land. The ocean currently
holds ~660 gigatons C of this DOC, making it the largest reservoir of reduced
carbon in the ocean; its size rivaling that of atmospheric CO2. Approximately
97% of this reservoir is comprised of a long-lived fraction, with a mean
radiocarbon age of 4000-6000 years, termed refractory DOC (RDOC). RDOC has been
traditionally considered a relatively inert and slowly-cycling C reservoir, but
recent research suggests its cycling may be more dynamic than previously
thought. A dynamic RDOC cycle could play a significant role in Earth’s carbon-
climate system, with oxidation of only ~0.4% of the marine RDOC reservoir in one
year sufficient to counterbalance the current oceanic sink for atmospheric CO2.
However, the biological, chemical, and physical processes that govern this
reservoir have largely eluded quantification thus far. This project will use
data assimilation of marine DOC concentrations and its isotopes in a numerical
modeling synthesis to test, diagnose, and quantify the environmental processes
responsible for the production and removal of marine RDOC. The processes that
control the marine RDOC reservoir will then be represented in a prognostic Earth
System Model, using a future climate forced simulation to reveal the sign and
strength of the marine RDOC carbon-climate feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
standard paradigm regarding the marine RDOC reservoir is that nearly all marine
DOC is internally produced in the surface ocean by primary production and that a
fraction persists for 1000’s of years due to production of chemically
recalcitrant organic molecules during biological utilization, a process termed
the microbial carbon pump. An alternative view is that the marine RDOC pool is
instead comprised of a heterogenous mixture of externally &amp; internally
produced, modern &amp; aged molecules that have localized sources/sinks and
distinct residence times. For example, recently identified localized RDOC
removal processes have been identified both at the sea surface (marine aerosol
formation) and near the crustal/water column interface (hydrothermal vents,
crustal aquifers). Reconciling the many hypothesized DOC sources, sinks, and
persistence mechanisms while synthesizing a coherent understanding of what
controls the marine RDOC reservoir will require numerical modeling at global
scales. This project will utilize recent advances in global ocean basin coverage
of marine DOC isotope (both 14C and 13C) measurements to diagnose and quantify
the sources and sinks controlling the RDOC reservoir through the implementation
of a novel global inverse model of DOC cycling and its isotopes. The pertinent
RDOC cycling processes and mechanisms including carbon isotopes from the results
of the inverse model will be implemented within the ocean biogeochemistry
component (MARBL) of the Community Earth System Model, in order to assess the
sign and magnitude of the marine RDOC carbon-climate feedback with a future
climate forced coupled simulation. Two graduate students will be supported by
this project, one each at UNH and UCSB. The UNH team will work with high school
instructors to deliver ocean carbon cycle and Earth &amp; Ocean science
curricula modules. Two undergraduate summer interns in ocean science research
located at UCSB will be recruited from HBCU’s.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.