* 2049832
* Citizen Scrutiny and Government Efforts to Fight Corruption
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Gaston Pierri, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2023
* USD 491,267.00

Corruption in government partly accounts for the slow economic and social
progress in many parts of the world. This research will use two projects to
investigate how best to efficiently decrease corruption in government
contracting. Governments have limited capacity to monitor all aspects of
government activity, hence they rely on citizens volunteering information to
fight corruption. However, citizens have their own interests and may not possess
the same training and capabilities as government workers. The ﬁrst project
investigates how best to delegate the monitoring of public works projects to
citizens, taking into consideration differences in their motivation and their
ability to perform complex audit-related tasks. Only governments can investigate
and sanction public oﬃcials based on information provided by citizen monitors.
However, governments have limited capacity to analyze large volumes of
information provided by citizen monitors. The second project therefore
investigates how technology can be leveraged to process large volumes of
incoming citizen reports and triage them. This project uses machine learning and
artificial intelligence (AI) to detect patterns of corruption from the large
number of reports and other types of information about corruption that citizens
report. The results of this research project will not only provide inputs into
policies to reduce corruption in government; it will also establish the US as
the global leader in the fight against corruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research uses two projects to make major contributions to the development
economics literature. First, it contributes to the growing empirical literature
on the detection and measurement of corruption by developing machine learning
and artificial intelligence (AI) tools and combining them with whistleblower
reports to predict the presence of corruption, and study how anti-corruption
eﬀorts can be targeted. Second, the project contributes to the literature on
tradeoﬀs between top-down and bottom-up monitoring of governments based on the
study of a unique hybrid program—implemented by a central government that rely
on citizen’s participation; it also investigate how best to design such a
policy. Third, the study contributes to the literature on the use of machine
learning in public policy, applying these tools to enhance anti-corruption
eﬀorts. Finally, the research contributes to the literature on the organization
of the state by studying the allocation of scarce organizational resources to
the ﬁght corruption. The results of this research project will not only provide
inputs into policies to reduce corruption in government; it will also establish
the US as the global leader in the fight against
corruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.