* 2049297
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE: Size-Fractionated Particle Collection and Analysis from Ultra-Oligotrophic to Antarctic Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Phoebe Lam, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2024
* USD 278,236.00

GEOTRACES is an ongoing international effort to study and understand how low-
abundance (“trace”) elements and isotopes are distributed in the world’s oceans.
Trace elements include both naturally occurring and human-influenced chemical
components of seawater. They have several important roles in the functioning of
the Earth that make them a focus of study: 1) their rarity is known to limit the
growth of microscopic plants which are the base of ocean food webs; 2) the
distributions of trace elements in remote parts of the world show how Earth’s
atmosphere, ocean, crust, and ecosystems work together on large, planetary
scales; 3) knowledge of these trace components is difficult to acquire but is
also an important component to improving computer models of Earth’s climate in a
rapidly changing world. The Pacific Ocean covers nearly a third of the planet,
and the rarely sampled South Pacific Ocean at the focus of this project includes
approximately a quarter of the world’s ocean volume. As part of a GEOTRACES
expedition to this remote region, this project has three main goals: 1) to
provide the sampling equipment and personnel to collect large volumes of
particles from the ocean, because many chemical components in seawater are in
particle forms; 2) to document and distribute ocean particle samples to
collaborators of many GEOTRACES laboratories; 3) to analyze ocean particles for
abundances of approximately two dozen trace elements at laboratories in
Savannah, GA and Santa Cruz, CA. A post-doctoral scholar and two graduate
students will participate in both field and laboratory aspects of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GP-17 OCE research expedition to the South
Pacific Ocean is planned for two months in late 2022 into early 2023. It
comprises two transects: a southward transect along approximately 150ºW between
French Polynesia and the Southern Ocean which will sample large biological and
geochemical gradients from the low-dust, low-biomass oligotrophic sub-tropical
gyre, though more productive regions of complex regions of watermass formation
and frontal mixing, and into the Southern Ocean. An eastward transect along 67ºS
and into Chile will sample the high-opal and Antarctic-influenced Southern
Ocean, deep-water hydrothermal influences, and across the South American
continental margin. The investigators will use large-volume in-situ pumps to
collect size-fractionated particles from the water column which will be
distributed to multiple collaborators; and they will operate and maintain
particle-sensitive optical equipment to be deployed on the expedition. The
research aims to address three main hypotheses: 1) that the large biological
gradients from pico-plankton dominated gyre through frontal regions into opal-
and Phaeocystis-dominated polar waters will present large gradients in particle
export, particle composition, scavenging of trace elements and isotopes (TEIs),
and remineralization length-scales of both carbon and TEIs; 2) that particulate
iron is dominated by lithogenic (crustally-derived) phases throughout most of
the water column, with the exception of regions of strong hydrothermal
influence, and that lithogenic particle origins will reflect inputs of external
aerosol dust, sediments, hydrothermal sources, and continental inputs as evident
via TEI ratios determined after total digestion; 3) that the optical ratio of
turbidity to beam attenuation coefficient is sensitive to iron-oxyhydroxide
abundances thus acting as a high-resolution indicator of iron-rich authigenic
and lithogenic particle inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.