* 2049308
* Collaborative Research: Sources and transformations of export production: A novel 50-year record of pelagic-benthic coupling from coral and plankton bioarchives
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Nicholas Record, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/29/2024
* USD 189,353.00

Changes in ocean life, the environment, and the climate can influence the timing
and composition of biological material that sinks to the sea floor. As this
material sinks it is consumed by bottom-dwelling organisms such as deep-sea
corals. Similar to tree rings, corals preserve a history of growth embedded in
their skeletons, which can be analyzed using a new technique called
microgeochemistry. This project is compiling a historic dataset from deep-sea
corals spanning 50 years in the Gulf of Maine to understand how biological
material sinking to the bottom has changed with time. Results from the coral
analysis are being compared with archival samples of small planktonic
crustaceans, copepods, to better understand the connection between productivity
in the surface waters and the geochemical record in the coral tissue. A
complementary modeling approach is identifying environmental and climatic
drivers of decadal-scale oceanographic change with the sources and
transformations of organic matter that connect the surface and the deep ocean.
This cross-disciplinary project is unifying transformational research with
broader impacts focused on science education and outreach that broaden the
understanding of the links between climate, oceanography, and marine ecosystem
response using a 50-year historical context. Two open access, media-enhanced,
and National curriculum standards-aligned educational lessons plans are being
developed through partnerships with a science documentary filmmaker, K-12
teachers from RI and ME, and the PBS LearningMedia Program. The topics of these
lesson plans are: 1) Deep-sea exploration: A window into the past and future,
and 2) Changing food webs on a changing planet. The project’s educational goals
include training of three graduate students, career development of five early
career researchers, and research experiences for undergraduates from
underrepresented groups in STEM. The multi-faceted research and education effort
is addressing a question described as highest priority in the Ocean Sciences by
the National Research Council: How are ocean biogeochemical and physical
processes linked to today’s climate variability and its variability?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pelagic-benthic coupling regulates ocean production and
food webs dynamics, biogeochemical cycling, and climate feedback mechanisms
through the export of surface production to the ocean interior. Yet access to
long-term data sets of export production are scarce and urgently needed to test
assumptions about 1) the sources and transformations of organic matter through
different food web pathways, and 2) the variability of these processes across
climatic, oceanographic, and ecological changes through time. The proposed work
is testing key hypotheses about bottom-up mechanisms that link decadal-scale
oceanographic changes in hydrography and biogeochemical cycling with
phytoplankton community composition, zooplankton abundance and trophic dynamics,
and the resulting composition of export production. Complementary approaches are
generating multiple and independent 50+ year, annually resolved time series of
phytoplankton community composition, zooplankton trophic dynamics, and export
composition. Coral tissue and archived zooplankton samples are being analyzed
using pioneering molecular geochemistry approaches to assess changes in diet
related variation in primary production. Deep-sea corals are being collected
using a remotely operated vehicle (ROV), and zooplankton are available through
archival samples from a Gulf of Maine long-term monitoring program managed by
NOAA. The stable isotope data are being integrated with additional data from
existing long-standing ocean monitoring programs and incorporated into a
unifying modeling approach to identify unique ecosystem states and their
environmental drivers. The project is focused on Jordan Basin in the Gulf of
Maine, which has a long history of oceanographic study and is experiencing
significant changes due to climate warming, making it an ideal natural
laboratory for testing hypotheses on drivers of change in the composition of
exported organic matter, and the relative importance of primary (e.g., phyto-
detritus) vs. secondary production (e.g., copepod fecal pellets), and large vs.
small pelagic plankton dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.