* 2049169
* GSS: General Social Survey Competition 2022/2024
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Jeremy Freese, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2025
* USD 11,611,729.00

The General Social Survey (GSS) provides basic information on the changing
attitudes and behaviors of the American population over the past 50 years. These
data are used widely to examine the complex dynamics of social change over time,
and are central to our understanding of the evolution of US society. The GSS
also provides data allowing comparisons with other countries through the
International Social Survey Programme (ISSP). In this project, the GSS/ISSP
surveys are continued into the 2022 and 2024 rounds. The research plan has three
primary goals. Aim 1: Enhance the GSS as a platform for scientific discovery by
soliciting and developing new content. The GSS/ISSP data enable systematic and
theory-driven empirical research on social change by furnishing both a rich set
of stable measures over time and new content that illuminates new research
issues. Aim 2: Innovate to continue collecting data of the highest quality as
the survey environment changes. As response rates continue to fall for
traditional survey modes, NORC is evaluating a new mixed-mode design in 2022 and
2024. Such a design may allow generation of an even larger realized sample while
maintaining high standards for quality. Aim 3: Expand dissemination and use of
the GSS/ISSP data. The GSS/ISSP project is already one of “60 discoveries or
advances that NSF believes have led to a large impact or influence on every
American’s life,” and further expanding access to the data beyond the social
science research community amplifies its impacts. In this project, the reach of
the data is expanded both through updated websites and exploration tools and
through increased outreach to students and other users in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several approaches are used to generate new content
for the 2024 GSS, including soliciting sponsored modules from the research
community, conducting a module competition, using the GSS as a platform for
collection of follow-up panel data, and adding content to the GSS through
linkage to other data sources. A cost-effective GSS web-based platform is made
available for researchers to sponsor follow-up survey modules. The primary mode
of data collection remains face-to-face interviews in 2022/24 (unless pandemic
restrictions are still in effect), however, web-based data collection continues
to be explored to ensure that the GSS remains at the forefront of social science
research. In each cycle in 2022 and 2024, 3,500 completed cases are targeted
(which exceeds the original required minimum of 2,500 per data collection year,
and represents a 40% increase). This larger sample size yields more cases across
sub-populations. In addition, the GSS provides supplementary data in 2022
derived from NORC’s probability panel (AmeriSpeak) on an experimental basis..
The GSS commitment to open science is maintained through the prompt release of
public use data, continued support of user technical assistance and GSS use in
the classroom, and the development of strategies for reaching a more diverse set
of users. Data dissemination is enhanced through a substantial upgrade to the
Data Explorer, the primary data access tool for the GSS. This project is
supported by the Sociology Program in SBE/SES and by the IUSE Program in
EHR/DUE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.