* 2049272
* US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE and GP17-ANT: Particulate and biogenic trace elements in the South Pacific and Southern Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Benjamin Twining, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2024
* USD 543,189.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. Many
trace metals, such as iron, manganese and zinc, are essential for life and serve
as nutrients for phytoplankton. However, regions of the Pacific and Southern
Oceans have very low concentrations of iron and manganese, in particular,
limiting the growth of phytoplankton at times. This project will improve
understanding of the uptake and removal of micronutrient metals by phytoplankton
in these regions. This project will accomplish three main objectives: 1) measure
the concentrations of phosphorus and eleven trace metals in particles collected
from the upper region of the South Pacific and Southern Oceans during a cruise
from Tahiti to Chile; 2) measure a subset of these elements, along with carbon,
sulfur and silicon, directly in phytoplankton cells collected from these waters;
and 3) measure the same elements in phytoplankton collected from coastal
Antarctic waters on a subsequent, companion cruise into the Amundsen Sea. Two
undergraduate student interns will be involved in the project, along with a
postdoctoral scholar. The scientific results and research experience will be
shared with additional undergraduates through two classes, and the project will
be brought to the broader public through a virtual reality game and associated
activities produced during the project and introduced through libraries and
institutional outreach events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S.
GEOTRACES GP17-OCE expedition, planned for late 2022, aims to determine the
distribution of trace elements and isotopes along a transect spanning regions of
global importance to nutrient and carbon cycling, crossing the South Pacific
Gyre, the iron-limited waters of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, Pacific Deep
Waters with hydrothermal inputs, and waters near the Chilean margin. The South
Pacific Gyre and Pacific sector of the Southern Ocean are climate-critical
regions for the transfer of heat, carbon, and nutrients within the global ocean,
and they are a region where phytoplankton growth is typically limited by low
concentrations of iron (Fe) in the surface ocean. The researchers will use
inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry and synchrotron x-ray fluorescence
microscopy to address three primary research questions focused on the internal
biogeochemical cycling of trace elements in this region: 1) How do trace element
contents of dominant phytoplankton taxa respond to environmental macronutrient
and trace element gradients? 2) How does the trace element composition of the
various particulate matter fractions (lithogenic, authigenic, biogenic) vary
across the section? 3) How does the composition and stoichiometry of particulate
material influence trace element cycling and trace element:nutrient
stoichiometry of the surrounding water masses?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.