* 2049808
* DDRIE: Knowledge Access and Cumulative Innovation-Network Econometric Evidence from the Republic of Letters
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2023
* William Collins, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 09/30/2023
* USD 20,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research will use a unique historical data collected
by the researchers to investigate the effects of scientific knowledge flows on
innovation. Economic growth in advanced economies is mainly innovation-driven, a
processes that rely on previous discoveries as essential inputs. Efficient
access to recently generated knowledge thus is important for economic growth.
Testing this theory is difficult because of lack of appropriate data. The
researcher will use the resumption of scientific information between the UK and
continental Europe in the intervening years between Nine Years War (1688-1697)
and the War of Spanish Succession (1701-1714) to develop a citation index
linking scientific knowledge in the earlier period to scientific knowledge in
the earlier period. The researchers will then use this data to assess how the
information flow affected innovative activity afterwards. In addition to the
research will develop a new and innovative methods that will allow them to draw
a causal relationship from knowledge exchange to innovation. This research
project permits the isolation of the innovation effects induced from changes in
a communication channel. The results could provide inputs to design efficient
intellectual property rights protection policies and thus maintain the US as the
global leader in innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research project
investigates how the re-establishment of the packet boat service between Dover
and Calais in the period of peace intervening the Nine Years' War (1688-1697)
and the War of the Spanish Succession (1701-1714) affected the formation of
citation-based links within a network of influential scholars. Citation data
from the earliest two academic journals will determine the link structure of the
network and make the links indicative of cumulative innovation: If A cited B,
then A used the existing knowledge of B to create something new. War-related
turmoil in the English Channel did not obstruct bilateral exchange between all
scholars. Considering each possible pair of scholars as a separate cross-
sectional unit gives rise to a quasi-experimental setting. The control group
contains initially unaffected pairs and the treatment group pairs those who
benefited directly from the re-establishment of the cross-channel service. A new
econometric approach exploits network-induced variation to estimate the effect
of unobservable knowledge flows from pairs in the treatment to pairs in the
control group. The average treatment effect on the treated pairs is identified
by comparing the two groups' pre- to post-period changes in the linking
probability. The empirical analysis requires an extensive set of geo-referenced
network panel data. The data set permits the study of different research
questions and testing of new methods. The results could provide inputs to design
efficient intellectual property rights protection policies and thus maintain the
US as the global leader in innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.