* 2049188
* REU Site: Advanced Materials Research and Professional STEM Training at the University of New Orleans
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* John Wiley, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 404,828.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The goal of this REU Site is to provide advanced
materials training to the next generation of scientists and engineers while
increasing participation by various underrepresented groups. Talented students
are being recruited nationwide with a focus on attracting participants from
local and regional historical black colleges and university (HBCU) partners and
state-funded, predominately undergraduate institutions (PUI). The experience
includes an intense 10-week summer program with a rigorous hands-on independent
research lab experience in various aspects of advanced materials including
multidisciplinary projects in chemistry, physics, mechanical engineering, and
biology. In addition to research, participants get impactful training through
weekly career pathway and professional development sessions, safety, ethics, and
anti-harassment seminars, a 1–2-day industrial laboratory rotation, and a series
of working lunches with professionals from academics, industry, and government
laboratories. The REU Site is evaluated during and after the 10-week session
with assistance from outside consultants; long-term impact on the participant
vocations will be assessed during the following five years. The research and
professional training provided by this program is serving to promote graduate
studies and careers in advanced materials. Graduates in materials typically find
employment in advanced manufacturing, medical and quantum-computing materials,
oil refining, energy storage, and environmental
remediation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This REU Site provides
students with a highly focused interdisciplinary 10-week summer research
experience in advanced materials. Participants are involved in a wide range of
both fundamental and applied independent hands-on projects, including those in
catalysis, quantum materials, polymers, nanocomposites, medical materials, and
environmental remediation. Beyond research, students get impactful training
through career pathway and professional development, a 1–2-day industrial
laboratory rotation, safety, ethics, and harassment seminars, and a series of
working lunches with professionals from academics, industry, and government
laboratories. The REU Site promotes inclusion of underrepresented groups and
provides research and career training that effectively prepares participants for
graduate programs and professional careers in advanced
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.