* 2049214
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE: Dissolved concentrations, isotopes, and colloids of the bioactive trace metals
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Timothy Conway, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 351,982.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. Many
trace metals, which are by definition present in very low amounts, are essential
for life and thus considered nutrients for phytoplankton growth. Other elements
can be useful for tracing other ocean processes, and some (such as lead) are
important because they are pollutants. This project will address three main
objectives: 1) to measure the dissolved concentrations and size partitioning of
micronutrients iron, manganese, zinc, copper, cadmium, nickel, and pollutant
lead in seawater from Tahiti towards Antarctica and then back northeast to South
America; 2) to analyze the isotope ratios - the relative abundance of different
forms of the same chemical element - of iron, zinc, cadmium, nickel, and copper
in seawater, suspended particles, aerosols, and porewaters from this section, as
isotopes provide diagnostic insights into sources, sinks, and metal
transformations beyond what is provided by concentration measurements alone; and
3) to use ocean models to constrain the rates of ocean processes and effects of
ocean circulation on trace metal and isotope distributions. This project spans
three US labs, and four graduate students and several undergraduate students
will participate. It will also provide ultrafiltered samples and data to several
other collaborating groups as a service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
U.S. GEOTRACES GP17-OCE expedition, planned for late 2021 or 2022, aims to
determine the distribution of trace elements and isotopes along a transect
spanning regions of global importance to nutrient and carbon cycling, crossing
the South Pacific Gyre, the iron-limited waters of the Antarctic Circumpolar
Current, Pacific Deep Waters with hydrothermal inputs, and waters near the
Chilean margin. The South Pacific Gyre and Pacific sector of the Southern Ocean
are climate-critical regions for the transfer of heat, carbon, and nutrients
within the global ocean, and they are a region where phytoplankton growth is
typically limited by low concentrations of iron (Fe) in the surface ocean. The
investigators will use a variety of analytical approaches, along with analyses
made by other project collaborators, to address four major objectives related to
dissolved micronutrient biogeochemistry in this region: 1) What are the relative
fluxes of dissolved metals from dust, sediments, and Antarctic continental
inputs to surface waters of the South Pacific gyre and ACC waters? 2) What
fluxes of trace metals, especially Fe, are delivered by Pacific Deep Water to
the Southern Ocean for upwelling to the surface waters? Are these fluxes
hydrothermal or benthic in origin? Are dissolved metals supplied by the Pacific-
Antarctic Ridge to the abyssal Southern Ocean? 3) How do micronutrient metal
uptake stoichiometries change across gradients of primary production, community
composition, and nutrient limitation from the gyre to ACC waters? How are these
affected by metal speciation? 4) How do pre-formed biological signatures in
surface waters, combined with regeneration and scavenging along the transport
path, influence the regional and global distribution of
TEIs?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.