* 2049546
* Investigating Near-Surface Ocean Heating and Mixing Processes in the Presence of Surface Material
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Christopher Zappa, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 360,338.00

Solar radiation is the largest form of heating of the upper ocean and is unique
to the air-sea flux balance due to its penetration beneath the ocean surface. It
has been speculated that near-surface heating is enhanced in the presence of
algal blooms and surface slicks but this has not been accounted for in current
models. Although surface slicks are common in the world oceans, our knowledge of
how these slicks impact ocean heating has been limited due to the lack of
appropriate observational tools. By using ship-deployed high-endurance
Unoccupied Aerial Vehicles (UASs), the investigators targeted large-scale slicks
and covered 10s of km2 several times a day. The project is a quantum advance in
utilizing UAS technology for science. This investigation will provide new
insights into the distribution of heat in the upper ocean due to the presence of
surface slicks. This project will improve models of the daily cycles of surface
ocean heating, global biogeochemical cycles, and sea surface temperature. These
results are in great demand within the regional modeling community of the South
Pacific, Maritime Continent, and Indian Ocean. The project will foster the
development of the next generation of scientists in Oceanography. The
inverstigators will create teaching materials for their existing course at
Columbia University. They will also work closely with K-12 teachers in the
greater New York City area and with large numbers of students from
underrepresented groups through the Earth2Class
Workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will analyze measurements
made onboard the R/V Falkor in November-December 2019 in the Southwest Pacific
near Fiji from a combination of novel tools. UASs were equipped with
hyperspectral visible, and broadband thermal infrared cameras to study the
albedo of sea surface biogenic slicks as well as the sea-surface skin
temperature (SST). UASs and ship-based instrumentation measured air-sea
heat/radiative fluxes and SST; an autonomous catamaran sampled sea-surface
microlayer surfactants and the surface microlayer algae populations; drifters
measured the near-surface response of the upper ocean temperature, salinity,
ocean currents, and turbulence; spectro-radiometric profiles provided estimates
of net radiant flux at depth; and shipboard infrared imaging measured the
response of ocean surface SST important to upper-ocean heating. The results will
further our understanding of the role cyanobacteria blooms and surface slicks
play in physical air-sea interaction. The analyses will expand our knowledge of
the upper-ocean mixed layer response to algal blooms and provide novel
observations of near-surface ocean heat budget.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.