* 2049600
* SBIR Phase I:  A Minimally Invasive Transurethral Cryotherapy Catheter System for Benign Prostate Hyperplasia
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Matthew Silvestrini, ALSUS MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2022
* USD 255,564.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to provide a low-cost, safe, and durable treatment option for benign
prostate hyperplasia (BPH), affecting 12.9 M Americans annually. First-line
pharmacological therapy is the most common treatment for BPH, but these drugs
provide modest clinical improvements and induce undesirable, and sometimes
permanent, side effects that impact quality of life. This drives an estimated
62-91% of patients to discontinue treatment after 12 months. Patients who fail
first-line therapy have the choice to pursue surgery, but due to the high risk
of permanent complications, painful recovery, or a poor long-term prognosis
associated with current surgical techniques, only 1.1% of all managed patients
choose to have surgery each year. As a result, 35% of all managed BPH patients
opt to not receive either medication or surgery. This watchful waiting patient
population risks irreversible bladder damage if left untreated, where symptoms
have been reported to worsen in ~87% of BPH patients over a four-year period.
Importantly, it is estimated that sur gical intervention is necessary in 30% of
all men afflicted with BPH, leaving millions of Americans without a robust
option. The proposed solution treats the prostate with a minimally invasive
catheter system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project advances translation
of a system to provide focal cryoablation to the human prostate. By implementing
directional and localized cryotherapy through a series of catheter balloons, the
device can remove enlarged prostate tissue while preserving adjacent anatomical
structures key for preservation of sexual function and continence. Moreover,
treated prostate tissue can be monitored in real time with ultrasound imaging
for enhanced safety and treatment guidance. The goal of this Phase I proposal is
to optimize a directional cryotherapy system in a benchtop model and verify its
use to ablate the prostate lateral lobes. To optimize cryoablative dosing,
temperature isotherms will be characterized and spatially mapped in an in vitro
prostate tissue model across a range of operating
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.