* 2049935
* Exploring and Exploiting the Understanding/Acceptance Assumption
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Craig McKenzie, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 583,349.00

Experiments on behavioral decision making often compare how people behave
(descriptive facts) with how they ought to behave (rational, or normative,
models). Many differences have been documented over the past several decades
between them. However, whether differences between rational and actual behavior
signal a problem with behavior or with the rational model (or its application)
is sometimes hotly debated. And knowing whether the behavior in question is
indeed (ir)rational is important, both because understanding how we ought to
reason or make decisions has practical implications for improving judgments and
decisions, and because it influences the research strategy of much of the field.
How, then, does one know what is rational? Rationality is determined by analysis
and reasoning; it rests on arguments. Because some arguments are better than
others, and because new arguments can be introduced, what is deemed rational can
change. Nonetheless, experts can -- and often do -- disagree on what is
rational. The proposed research probes a wide variety of non-experts about
whether they believe that controversial errors and biases are in fact mistakes,
and whether they are swayed by arguments for and/or against traditional
interpretations. The research does not only contribute in important ways to the
debate regarding rational behavior, but also tell us a great deal about people’s
intuitions about rationality, which is itself intrinsically
valuable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies present participants with purportedly
descriptive violations of rational models to see whether they believe that the
behaviors in question are indeed mistakes. For example, do people consider it a
mistake to respond differently to the typical frames used in framing
experiments? In addition, the research agenda incorporates the
“understanding/acceptance” principle -- namely, the assumption that the deeper
the understanding, the greater the willingness to accept a normative principle
-- by presenting participants with competing normative accounts and seeing if
that influences whether they believe that the behavior in question is a mistake.
For example, does understanding the principle of description invariance lead
participants to accept framing effects as mistakes? The studies examine people’s
intuitions about, and responses to arguments about, behavioral phenomena such as
framing effects, joint-separate reversals, default effects, and intransitivity.
In each case, the goal is to examine the compelling arguments for accepting the
traditional conceptualization of rationality or the competing
accounts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.