* 2049602
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Blockchain and the Frontiers of Provenance and Risk in the Cattle Ranching Industry
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Colin Pitet, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 26,610.00

This doctoral dissertation research project investigates contemporary means of
recording and accounting for ownership and responsibility by exploring cattle
ranchers’ use of technology in animal husbandry. The researcher will focus on
U.S. ranches that have adopted blockchain, the record-keeping mechanism
underlying cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin. Agriculture is among the first sectors
of the U.S. economy to implement blockchain in real-world cases unrelated to
cryptocurrency. Historically, ranchers have proven ownership and controlled
movement of cattle through a combination of branding and barbed wire, both of
which had significant social impacts beyond cattle husbandry. Beef producers are
now testing blockchain’s promise of making detailed transactional information
publicly available, aiming to enable consumers to self-verify the provenance and
quality of their food rather than placing trust in often opaque supply chains.
This project, which trains a graduate student in methods of scientific data
collection and analysis, explores the motivations and potential social
ramifications of cutting-edge technology adoption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project tests the hypothesis that the infrastructure of meat production is
primarily organized around notions of risk. Some uncertainties inherent to food
production, such as weather, are practically impossible to predict; others, such
as predation loss or negligence liability, are to a greater extent predictable.
Predictable losses can be quantified as risk and thus managed through insurance
or other means of transfer. The investigator will perform observational research
among cowhands, conduct interviews with lawmakers and technology promoters, and
undertake archival research, inquiring into the context and motivation for the
use of branding, barbed wire, and blockchain as provenance technologies that
increase certainty of ownership. This inquiry will reveal the distribution of
risk across the beef supply chain, including who bears the burdens of risk and
who is able to leverage it to generate value. The research will contribute to a
greater understanding of how risk is conceived of and commodified. The far-
reaching impacts of such an understanding include the safety of the US meat
supply, the general configuration of supply chains, and the relationship between
agricultural innovation and notions of ownership and responsibility with respect
to property.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.