* 2049810
* Efficient Matching, Continuous Voting, and Non-Contractable Critical Information
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Philip Reny, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 150,001.00

Many U.S. cities (including New York City, Boston, Seattle, Cambridge,
Charlotte, Denver, Minneapolis, and Columbus) allow families to choose a school
for their children that is outside the district in which they live. Because
there may not be enough seats at any given school to accommodate all students
for whom that school is their first choice, school districts use priority rules
together with randomly assigned lottery numbers to resolve the conflicts that
inevitably arise. For example, in many New York City (NYC) public schools,
children in a school's predefined geographic zone have priority over all
children outside that zone, and children with a sibling already enrolled at the
school have priority over children who are outside the school’s zone and who do
not have a sibling enrolled at the school. There are other priorities as well.
Any conflicts between students in the same priority group are resolved according
to each student’s randomly assigned lottery number. In NYC, each student can
list up to 12 schools on their application in the order of their preference.
After all students have submitted their ranked lists to the department of
education, a computer algorithm matches each student to the school that is as
high as possible on the student’s list subject to maintaining consistency with
all school priorities and the randomly assigned lottery numbers. This same
algorithm is in fact used in many other cities as well. Now, while this
algorithm does perform its designated task, it can nevertheless fail to make
students as well off as possible. For example, according to a study conducted by
Abdulkadiroglu, Pathak, and Roth (2009), in a New York City school district in
2006-2007, over 4,000 grade 8 students could have been made better off by
reassigning them to a school different than their match according to the
matching algorithm, without changing any other student’s assigned school. The
problem is not with the algorithm itself. Indeed, the algorithm performs
precisely as intended. The problem is that school priorities sometimes
unintentionally take precedence over student well-being. Indeed, the reason that
the algorithm was not allowed to match those 4000 students to their preferred
schools is that their preferred placements would have violated the priorities of
students whose matches would have been unaffected by the changes. So in this
case, the rigidity of school priorities implicitly took precedence over the
well-being of those 4000 students. We offer here a more holistic view of school
priorities that places limits on their use by students to object against a
status quo. Adopting the resulting matching method proposed here never makes any
student worse off than they would have been under the current system and will
typically make many students better off---like the 4000 NYC students
above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, say that a matching (of students
to schools) A blocks a matching B if ne makes better off a student whose
priority is violated by B without making worse off any student whose priority is
violated by A. This notion of blocking captures a student’s right to seek relief
from a priority violation by finding a preferred matching, so long as it would
not be vetoed by a student whose priority it violates. Say that a matching B is
priority-neutral if it is unblocked. We seek matchings that are both priority-
neutral and Pareto efficient: we call such matchings priority-efficient. We will
establish that priority-efficient matching always exist and are unique for every
school-choice problem. Moreover, among all priority-neutral matchings the
priority-efficient matching is weakly preferred by all students. Since all
stable matching are priority-neutral, this implies that all students weakly
prefer the priority-efficient matching to the stable matching. Thus no student
is ever made worse off, and many will be made better off, under the priority-
efficient matching versus the stable matching for any school-choice
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.