* 2049012
* YouthAstroNet: Research on the scale-up of innovative technology experiences in astronomy and science imaging
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Philip Sadler, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,890,288.00

The Youth Astronomy Network (YouthAstroNet) project will support and research
the scaling-up, broadening of participation, and sustainable implementation of
an innovative online platform for learners ages 11-14. It features customized
access to robotic telescopes, support for authentic engagement with scientific
and computational analysis tools and practices, opportunities to pursue space
science-related activities and investigations of personal interest. It also
includes live and asynchronous interaction with peers, educators, and diverse
adult volunteers from related STEM and information and communications technology
(ICT) fields who serve as online role models and mentors. YouthAstroNet’s in-
school and out-of-school activities engage learners to plan and request remote
observations from robotic digital imaging telescopes, to analyze and enhance
telescopic images, and to create and share reports on their astronomical
findings. The project draws on a growing collection of educator-contributed
resources that support culturally-relevant adaptations of the program for
different communities. Prior research has demonstrated that these learning
experiences and other specific program factors promote gains in important skills
and content knowledge along with science affinity, STEM career interest,
computer affinity and science identity, especially for youth from groups
historically underrepresented in STEM. The insights generated by this project
will help educational stakeholders and the developers of learning innovations
understand how promising interventions can be effectively scaled up in ways that
sustain impact on learners while providing both equity of access and equitable
participation. Over the course of the project, YouthAstroNet will expand its
reach to 500 educators in both school and community settings, and up to 15,000
students ages 11-14, particularly underrepresented minority students in under-
resourced schools and communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project begins with
a leadership cadre of experienced YouthAstroNet educators, teen advisors, and
the project’s advisory board to optimize the intervention and its online
professional development (PD) model for broadened participation, sustainable
adoption, and spread. Over the following three years, the project team will then
strategically recruit 150-200 new educators each year into the program from a
variety of institutional contexts -- teachers of Earth and Space Science in
grades 5-9, and out-of-school educators from afterschool programs, libraries,
museums, and community centers -- focusing especially on the recruitment of
participants from groups underrepresented in STEM. Recruited educators will be
randomly assigned to one of four different conditions of initial PD training,
implementation coaching by peer leaders, and access to STEM expertise, with
decreasing involvement of the project team. This tests how different strategies
for educator PD promote (or inhibit) the successful adoption and integration of
a technology-rich learning innovation into different settings, and to examine
the conditions under which YouthAstroNet is most impactful on student and
educator outcomes. The project aims to answer the following research questions:
1) Does a focused version of the YouthAstroNet intervention, optimized for
scale-up, produce equal or better results (as measured by student and teacher
outcomes) than the original project? 2) How do student experiences, teacher
practices, and student and teacher outcomes differ between the YouthAstroNet
program and other STEM programs of similar duration? 3) How do student
experiences, teacher practices, and student and teacher outcomes differ between
novice educators and those who have previously participated in the program? 4)
Under which conditions of PD support is the intervention most successful in
producing gains in STEM interest, identity and career interest – especially for
female and underrepresented minority students? Research instruments include
previously validated pre- and post-surveys for students that measure STEM
knowledge, interest, affinity, and identity, along with online participation
analytics. Educators will complete pre- and post-PD, and post-implementation
surveys, using a concerns-based adoption model to measure their progress in
readiness to integrate the project into their program and to gather relevant
data on classroom, organizational, and community contextual factors. Studying
the broad implementation of YouthAstroNet will produce generalizable findings of
how innovative technology experiences that promote STEM and ICT career interest
can be adopted and adapted in sustainable ways on a large scale. This project is
funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in STEM and ICT careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.