* 2049478
* Collaborative research: Regulation and dynamics of microbial communities and biogeochemical cycling in hydrothermally-influenced habitats in the Gulf of California
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Karthik Anantharaman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2024
* USD 397,118.00

Hydrothermal ecosystems have captivated the imagination of scientists and the
general public since their discovery ~40 years ago. Hydrothermal habitats are
characterized by extremes in temperature and pH, low oxygen concentrations, and
high concentrations of toxic metals. Despite this, these ecosystems support rich
and abundant microbial communities that achieve high rates of biogeochemical
cycling. This project supports unprecedented studies to identify the impact of
chemical regimes on microbial and viral community composition, diversity, and
activity along areas in the Gulf of California differently influenced by
hydrothermalism and varying bottom water oxygen levels. The project provides
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. Results are
communicated through talks and lectures, publications, and data sharing through
public repositories. The work will be shared through Ocean Discovery Camp and
Clubs for diverse middle school students, displays at the Georgia Museum of Art,
and a collaboration with the BBC Planet Earth III â€“ Oceans team. Through these
cumulative efforts, the project will forge a strong legacy in education and in
fostering ocean literacy and promoting ocean advocacy in the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gulf of California is a system where
hydrothermal fluids flow through and alter sediment prior to discharge into deep
waters. In sediments, fluid flow modulates biological dynamics through changes
in carbon loading and electron accepter availability. In the water column,
inorganic and organic energy sources are injected into hypoxic deep waters,
creating dynamic chemical niches. This project studies how gradients in
geochemistry shape and modulate the microbial and viral communities that carry
out key biogeochemical reactions in sediments and in the water column of Guaymas
and Pescadero Basins. The research integrates data streams from biogeochemistry,
genomics, microbial activity, and microbiology (~single-cell activity) to
achieve unprecedented insight into regulatory mechanisms and dynamics. The
project includes experiments and observations in the laboratory and at sea
during an expedition on the R/V Atlantis with the deep submergence vehicle ALVIN
in 2022. Key topics for investigation include: (1) Do variations in geochemical
regimes select for metabolically plastic microbial populations? (2) Do different
microbes become active under specific geochemical conditions or do the same
microbes adapt to changing geochemical conditions? (3) What is the role of
viruses in shaping the microbial populations present in highly dynamic
hydrothermal habitats?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.