* 2049558
* Networks of Influence and Support in Peace Operations
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Jessica Braithwaite, American University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 03/31/2024
* USD 316,506.00

United Nations (UN) peace operations are deployed to some of the most difficult
environments in the world, charged with transforming war-torn states into
countries that can sustain peace. Focusing on the effect of military
peacekeepers, international peacekeeping scholarship has produced relatively
consistent findings: the deployment of international peacekeepers, particularly
in contexts where there is a comprehensive peace agreement, reduces the
likelihood of civil war recurrence. To examine the effect of this organizational
diversity within peacebuilding operations on peace and security outcomes, the
PIs create a new dataset of peacebuilding actors and their networks with one
another. They also complement the dataset with in-depth case studies in three
countries. The project has several broader impacts: (1) it contributes to an
improved understanding of the aid-conflict relationship, supporting better aid
policy and having an important impact on US national security policy, (2) it
increases diversity in international relations scholarship by including graduate
and undergraduate research assistants from underrepresented populations, and (3)
it disseminates findings through two workshops to a network of international
donors and intergovernmental organizations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PIs
identify the intervening international actors involved in contemporary UN peace
operations, as well as the connections between these actors that are likely
shape the success and failure of peace operation objectives. The PIs use these
"networks of influence and support" to examine how the broader set of actors
involved in peacebuilding activities affects important outcomes for human
security in conflict-affected states. Using a mixed methods approach
(qualitative case studies, social network and large-N quantitative analysis) the
PIs create a new dataset on the presence and formal connections between UN
entities, INGOs, bilateral and multilateral donors, perform three detailed case
studies with semi-structured interviews donors and INGO, and analyze secondary
source information. The findings from this research contributes to the
literature on civil war interventions, peacekeeping, and peacebuilding by
accounting for the heterogeneity of actors involved in international
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts. Furthermore, the PIs contributes to how
these networks among them and with domestic actors in the host country influence
peace and security outcomes. This fine-grained, actor-focused analysis will
enable the peacekeeping and peacebuilding literature to engage with the
increasingly actor-centric scholarship on dynamics of civil
wars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.