* 2049407
* Collaborative Research: Reevaluating calcification response to changes in seawater chemistry by testing the Proton Flux Hypothesis and the Coral Metabolism Model
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Christopher Sabine, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2024
* USD 673,426.00

Corals build calcium carbonate skeletons to maintain the three-dimensional
structure of a coral reef, which provides habitat for many organisms and
protects shorelines from bioerosion and storm damage. However, changes in ocean
chemistry threaten the ability of corals to build and sustain these ecological
important structures. To further the understanding of how climate change impacts
coral reefs, this project investigates how changes in ocean carbonate chemistry
directly influence coral calcification. The researchers are conducting a series
of experiments on corals grown in seawater tanks to study corals responses to
seawater chemistry in a changing ocean. Broader impacts of the project include
student research opportunities, science-inquiry labs, and virtual learning. This
project supports the training of several early career researchers, Ph.D.
students, undergraduates, and high school students in the disciplines of
chemistry, engineering, and marine ecology. Researchers partner with the Texas
State Aquarium to communicate with the general public through a virtual research
expedition series that will focus on coral reef health. This series includes
interviews, behind the scene tours, and virtual dives on coral reefs in
Hawaii.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the fundamental connections
between seawater chemistry and coral physiology by investigating the modulation
of seawater chemistry in the microenvironment surrounding corals. Specifically,
this project 1) examines the response of corals to differing carbonate chemistry
and 2) characterizes the proton gradient across the corals' boundary layers
under differing ocean acidification conditions. Results of this work isolate
whether carbonate ions or hydrogen ions have a stronger influence on
calcification rates. This work utilizes a state-of-the-art experimental mesocosm
facility that combines an automated systems to simultaneously and independently
control both total alkalinity and carbon dioxide in the tanks to examine coral
response under different carbon chemistry scenarios. Small-scale gradients in
carbon chemistry surrounding the corals are being characterized using an
innovative solid-state, reagentless sensor capable of making simultaneous
measurements of two critical carbon system parameters. Coral biological response
variables are quantified during short-term incubations and long-term mesocosm
manipulations to understand physiological implications across multiple scales
(i.e., individual and community scales) and across boundary
layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.