* 2049764
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Exploring gender differences in effort before competition
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Coren Apicella, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2022
* USD 19,051.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Competitions are increasingly
prevalent in the global labor market, where winners are disproportionately
rewarded. Prior work has suggested that gender differences in competitiveness,
with women being less competitive, on average, than men, may contribute to
persistent gender disparities in labor market outcomes. As a result, much of the
research on gender differences in competitions has focused on i) understanding
the sources of the gender difference and ii) designing interventions to
encourage women to compete more. Less consideration, however, has been paid to
whether and how women and men may differently respond to competitions. Because
past research suggests that women are less confident and more risk-averse than
men, and this may, in part, explain their reluctance to compete, women may spend
more time preparing for competitions when they do compete. The first aim of this
research is to examine whether women spend more time than men preparing for
tasks where their performance will be evaluated, and specifically, when their
performance is being evaluated against a competitor. The second aim of this
dissertation is to test whether beliefs about gender differences in performance
on a task, which have previously been shown to affect confidence and
performance, also affect gender differences in preparation before competition.
Experiments are conducted using an online marketplace, where participants are
paid for their performance on various tasks. Understanding how individuals
respond to competitive situations may help address economic disparities across
groups, including persistent gender differences in labor market outcomes. If,
for instance, competitions exacerbate gender differences in the amount of effort
exerted (i.e., preparing) before performance, this may affect women’s labor
output, career advancement, their ability to achieve a satisfying work-life
balance, and even their decision to enter or stay in competitive environments.
As this is a new area of research, there are many promising and exciting avenues
for future exploration, all of which have the potential to inform policies that
promote greater gender equality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
hypothesize that women will spend more time preparing than men, especially
before competitions, in part because they are, on average, less risk-seeking and
confident than men. We will also test boundary conditions of the anticipated
interaction by examining how beliefs about gender differences in performance
shape decisions to prepare before competitions. The researchers experimentally
test these hypotheses in an online marketplace where participant performance on
the task is incentivized. In the first experiment they manipulate whether
participants will be paid according to a competitive payment scheme (i.e.,
incentives for their performance are higher, but they must outperform another
individual in the study to earn anything for their performance) or a non-
competitive payment scheme (i.e., incentives for their performance are
guaranteed, but lower). Participants will have the option to complete an
unlimited amount of practice problems that closely resemble the incentivized
task before entering the incentivized stage of the study. In the second
experiment, they manipulate participants’ beliefs about gender differences in
performance on a task under a competitive payment scheme. Specifically,
participants are randomly assigned to learn about results from a scientific
article that either i) point to a male advantage or ii) point to a female
advantage on the task. Similar to the first experiment, participants have the
option to complete an unlimited amount of practice problems before moving on to
the competition. Across both studies, the main dependent variable of interest is
amount of time spent preparing for the incentivized task. It is predicted that
women will choose to prepare more than men before a competition, especially when
they are led to believe that males may have a performance advantage. The
proposed work will advance knowledge by providing the foundation for a fruitful
line of work focused on how men and women differently respond to competitions,
and its possible economic ramifications for women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.