* 2049748
* Collaborative Research: Experiments on Procedures and Prediction in Economic Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Kirby Nielsen, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2024
* USD 247,797.00

This project contributes to research in behavioral economics. We know that
standard economic models of individual behavior often do not accurately describe
how people behave in specific situations. Another way to say this is that these
models are not descriptive. However, these models are built on assumptions that
people may think include valuable principles that should guide behavior. If this
is the case, then these standard canonical models would instruct people on how
they should behave. Such a model would be prescriptive, because it prescribes
the behavior that people should choose to follow the principle. This project
examines whether or not standard economic models are prescriptive in laboratory
decision making experiments. The results of this research will further our
understanding of whether and how economic models of individual behavior can
guide policy interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop two
novel experimental methods to assess the normative (prescriptive) nature of
expected utility, discounted expected utility, and subjective expected utility.
The first methodology will treat axioms as procedures that make a choice on
behalf of the individual. Indi- viduals will see axioms represented in a
visually simple manner and will report whether they want their choices to be
consistent with the axiom. Then, individuals will make choices from decision
problems related to the axiom, and will be given the opportunity to reconcile
any discrepancies between their preference over axioms and choices. This
methodology will test whether individuals treat the axioms as normative in
decision-making, even in situations where they originally violated the axiom. We
will employ this methodology in the domains of temporal choice and choice under
risk and ambiguity. The second methodology will directly elicit whether
individuals prefer recommendations that are predicted by a model. This will
reveal whether the model itself is viewed as normative by evaluating
predictions, without needing to explain the model to experimental participants.
We will employ this methodology to study the normative appeal of expected
utility theory. Together, this research agenda will show whether individuals
want their choices to be consistent with canonical economic models. If they do,
then the frequently observed violations of these models might be better thought
of as mistakes rather than reflecting underlying
preferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.