* 2049604
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE: Understanding neodymium isotopes and rare earth element systematics in the South Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Sidney Hemming, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2024
* USD 469,092.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of multiple chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans.
The National Science Foundation is supporting a U.S. GEOTRACES sampling
expedition in the South Pacific and Southern Ocean, one of the most remote and
poorly sampled ocean regions on Earth. Neodymium (Nd) isotopes and rare earth
elements (REE) are important tools used to track water masses along global
circulation pathways, trace the sources of continental inputs into the oceans,
and constrain biogeochemical processes in the water column. The investigators
will analyze Nd isotopes and REE in seawater, suspended particles, and core top
sediments on this expedition. The project will support an early career lead
investigator, two postdoctoral researchers, and several undergraduate students.
Outreach to local high schools and paid undergraduate research positions are
designed to broaden participation in geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
GP17-OCE cruise track is well-designed for illuminating the processes that
govern the marine cycling of REE and Nd isotopes, as it (i) covers the
oligotrophic South Pacific Gyre, (ii) crosses the sub-tropical, sub-Antarctic
and polar fronts, capturing transitions between different productivity regimes,
(iii) traverses through the high latitude South Pacific, which hosts areas with
extensive deep water upwelling and new water mass formation. It offers a unique
opportunity to study biogeochemically important yet largely unsampled regions in
the South Pacific at unprecedented detail. The investigators plan to (1)
generate seawater Nd isotope and REE data to characterize the intermediate and
deep water masses that form in the high latitude South Pacific, (2) decipher the
evolution of dissolved Nd isotope and REE abundances across oceanic fronts and
atmospheric dust flux gradients, (3) identify the roles of particle abundance,
composition, and size in modulating dissolved Nd isotopes and REE, (4) evaluate
the effect of REE contributions from the Antarctic and Chilean margins on water
column Nd isotopes and REE inventory, (5) evaluate the impacts of the benthic
flux of REE, (6) understand the process of signal transfer between the deep
water and sedimentary archives (fossil fish teeth, Fe-Mn oxide coatings). This
information is important for our understanding of Nd cycling in the global ocean
and will also facilitate a thorough evaluation of the use of Nd isotopes as a
past water circulation proxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.