* 2049983
* Preparing Highly Qualified STEM Teachers to Support Effective Learning in Remote, In-person, and Hybrid Learning Environments
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Salvatore Garofalo, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 895,517.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing highly qualified
science teachers who have a technological skillset that helps them teach
effectively in high-need schools. Research suggests that less affluent schools
teach less grade-level content, offer significant synchronous instruction, and
are more likely to provide paper worksheet packets. Conversely, research
demonstrates that more affluent schools use technology for live conferences with
teachers, digital delivery of content, and pre-recorded science lessons that can
be viewed asynchronously. The project expects that increasing teachers’ use of
technology can support greater equity between low-poverty and high-poverty
schools, particularly during extended periods of remote instruction. The project
builds on integrated collaboration with informal science learning organizations,
as well as college-based technology training that addresses how we work with,
socialize, and educate science teachers. A direct goal of this effort is to
prepare highly qualified science teachers who can teach in physical, digital,
and hybrid environments that best serve the high-need schools in which they will
serve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Queens College, CUNY, includes
partnerships with three high-need local high schools (Bayside High School,
Forest Hills High School, and Freeport High School), as well as two informal
science learning agencies (the New York Hall of Science and the Black Rock
Forest Consortium). The project’s overall goal is to improve the effectiveness
of biology, chemistry, geoscience, and physics secondary science educators from
culturally diverse communities. To this end, the project seeks to support a
total of 30 Scholars across three annual cohorts of undergraduate students and
STEM professionals. To support completion of New York State licensing
requirements for secondary science teaching, twelve undergraduate Scholars will
receive two-year scholarships and eighteen STEM professionals will receive one-
year stipends. The project aims to deliver a revised curriculum intended to
enhance Scholars' technological content knowledge, science pedagogies, and
research experience. It is expected that the project will contribute to a deeper
understanding about how integrating formal and informal technology training can
support the preparation of highly qualified, culturally diverse teachers who
will advance scientific literacy in high-need schools. The results of this work
have the potential to inform other teacher preparation programs across the
country. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.