* 2049782
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Building a comprehensive understanding of enterprise risks and their interdependencies for improved risk-intelligence
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Joseph Sinfield, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 12/31/2021
* USD 37,975.00

Businesses are ubiquitous and inseparably merged with human lives. Thriving
corporations provide the fundamental activity necessary for an equitable society
with benefits ranging from the ready availability of goods and services to
regional employment in support of economic prosperity. Simultaneously, high-risk
events such as COVID‐19 are bleak reminders that enterprises are continuously
threatened, and that building enterprise resilience is crucial. Yet, one of the
cornerstones of enterprise resilience - risk intelligence – or the adequate
awareness of the various risk factors and their complex interdependence, remains
grossly underdeveloped. This project addresses this gap in knowledge by
developing complex network views of enterprise risks. Employing big data and
tools of artificial intelligence the project identifies and develops an
enterprise-agnostic risk inventory that is considerably more comprehensive than
any such publicly available resource. In addition, expert input allows for
converting seemingly disconnected risk factors into interconnected complex risk
networks, which enable the search for risk chains that may compound and lead to
more significant adverse effects. This work builds a knowledge resource base
useful to explain mechanisms of cascading risks and to predict the varying
impacts of risk events on enterprises. Thus, the work serves national interest
and is in alignment with NSF’s mission to promote the progress of science, and
via that, advance national prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
work is grounded in the complexity systems view of enterprise risk management
and seeks to build a comprehensive, data‐informed view of the dynamic risk
network influencing enterprises to systematically enhance risk awareness and
contribute toward the evolution of truly risk‐intelligent organizations. This
perspective is achieved through: a) the development of a comprehensive
enterprise agnostic risk factor inventory, b) the generation of risk networks
that map risk factor interrelations, and c) the exploration of the complex
dynamics of these risk networks. The work entails a mixed-methods approach
utilizing information extraction (IE) on a large, curated dataset of company
risks, and Fuzzy Cognitive Mapping (FCM) for complex risk-network development
and analyses. Public information (SEC filings) are augmented with private risk
data (analyst reports) for enterprises in the S&amp;P 500, providing robust
coverage of true risk factors. The corpus is analyzed using IE principles, which
include part‐of‐speech tagging, dependency-parsing, n‐gram extraction, and topic
modeling. Surveyed and/or interviewed experts from industry and academia inform
qualitative measures of risk interaction (dependencies, direction, and degree of
influence) during the FCM process leading to complex risk network development.
The resulting risk networks are analyzed quantitatively to reveal insights such
as centrality of risks, the distances between risks, and sub‐group structures
within the risk networks that could inform an order of critical risks. The
research contributes to the field of Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) by
increasing scholarly awareness on the breadth of risks affecting enterprises.
Further, via FCM, the work converts expert understanding into a quantifiable
network, bringing focus on risk interdependencies. In addition, via network
analysis, the effort illuminates critical risks and propagation mechanisms that
may be overlooked in traditional views. Overall, this effort provides an
expansive, data‐informed view of risk factors affecting enterprises, their (non-
intuitive) interactions, and related dynamics thereby advancing the complexity-
view of ERM research as well as sharpening an enterprise’s ability to predict
cascading effects caused by seemingly unrelated
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.