* 2049023
* A Culturally-Relevant Computer Science Education Program to Expand Equity, Access, and Opportunity for Native American High School Students
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Kathy DeerInWater, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,441,169.00

The underrepresentation of Native Americans in STEM and computing deprives the
nation of its potential for innovation and transformative solutions that can
arise from a diverse STEM workforce. Studying the educational differences
between Native American and non-Native American learners will increase the
understanding of how to reduce inequity and improve educational and economic
outcomes for Native American students, families, and communities. To achieve
these objectives, the American Indian Science and Engineering Society and the
Kapor Center will study the design and implementation of culturally relevant
computer science courses for Native American high school students with emphasis
on how to best support Native girls’ advancement to careers in computational
STEM fields. The project will provide curricula, training, and support for in-
school and out-of-school computer science education. These interventions are
designed to expand equity, access, and opportunity for students to increase
knowledge and interest in computer science, and afford pathways to higher
education and careers in computing and computational STEM fields. The project
team will engage a highly diverse set of partners and Native community members
to participate in development and implementation of the project’s activities and
deliverables. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences
for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
engage 1,824 Native American students and 28 educators. Findings will inform
replication of the program as a model computer science for high schools with
predominately Native American students. Research and program coordination will
be conducted by researchers with extensive experience in computing education in
Native communities. The research will have a quasi-experimental design. Baseline
data collected at the beginning of each course will be compared with post-
intervention data to examine the relationship between the intervention and
student outcomes. Quantitative and qualitative data will be collected using
surveys, course data, transcripts, interviews, and focus groups. Methods include
surveys and sharing circles, which will be conducted with girls and boys
separately. The sharing circles will seek to determine similarities and
differences in how respective genders in Native communities experience cultural
activities introduced during the project’s activities. Research questions
include: (1) What is the impact of culturally relevant, female-focused computer
science courses on increasing the entry, persistence, and success (i.e.,
knowledge gained) in computing of Native American students in general and Native
female youth, specifically?; and (2) What program components are essential to
increase Native American females’ computer science aspirations, engagement,
self-efficacy, resilience, and social and emotional learning? The project will
contribute to the literature by studying existing structural, psychological, and
social barriers for Native students in computing education and the efficacy of
rigorous, culturally relevant, and intersectional computing courses and out-of-
school college and career readiness activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.