* 2049010
* AF: Small: Expanding the Reach of Topological Data Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2020,08/31/2024
* Tamal Dey, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Data science and analysis have taken a center stage in modern years for a swath
of applications&lt;br/&gt;embracing daily life. In general, AI and machine
learning have been the backbone of this&lt;br/&gt;development. Recently, a
technique based on the classical mathematical area of topology has
evolved&lt;br/&gt;that is showing promise to complement and in some cases be an
alternative to AI techniques. As this&lt;br/&gt;emergent area, known as
topological data analysis (TDA), expands its reach, the task of
extracting&lt;br/&gt;intelligent summaries out of diverse, complex data becomes
increasingly challenging. To meet this&lt;br/&gt;challenge, TDA also needs to
expand its current repertoire of techniques by making further
and&lt;br/&gt;deeper connections between mathematical and algorithmic concepts.
This project aims to develop&lt;br/&gt;these techniques while training graduate
students and other workforce in data science as
a&lt;br/&gt;consequence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, in particular, will
investigate several novel mathematical concepts in conjunction
with&lt;br/&gt;computations to address various challenges appearing in the
following topics: (i) augmenting&lt;br/&gt;topological summarization with
geometry, (ii) connecting discrete Morse theory to
further&lt;br/&gt;applications, (iii) developing persistence theory for
combinatorial dynamical systems, and (iv)&lt;br/&gt;developing multi-parameter
persistence from a computational view-point. A successful
algorithmic&lt;br/&gt;theory supported by sound mathematics for the four
aforementioned themes can provide a powerful&lt;br/&gt;tool for data exploration
and analysis in a spectrum of engineering and scientific fields.
The&lt;br/&gt;proposed outreach activities will also further consolidate the
ongoing effort of bringing together&lt;br/&gt;different communities in science
and engineering engaged into modern data analysis. The project&lt;br/&gt;will
help train graduate students who will develop skills in mathematics and
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;computer science, most notably in algorithms and topology,
in writing efficient and usable software,&lt;br/&gt;and in its application to
analyzing real-world data sets. Efforts will be made to recruit and
mentor&lt;br/&gt;students from under-represented groups, as has already been
done by the investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.