* 2049258
* Collaborative Research: Routine Maintenance of Registration Lists
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Dane Mataic, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 33,054.00

Databases that contain information about people need regular attention to keep
them up-to-date as individuals move, die, become inactive, or otherwise change
status. The refreshing of state and local registration lists must therefore take
place periodically to prevent the integrity and usefulness of the data from
degrading. Across the United States, though, the particular practices used to
maintain registration lists vary with local conditions and traditions. The
effects of data-updating choices implemented during the pandemic are
particularly hard to understand. This project therefore investigates the
relationship between demographic data and registration list updates. Variables
of sociological interest in this context include the procedures used, the
officials responsible for the process, the socio-demographic characteristics of
communities, and the regional effects of Covid-19. To test hypotheses about
these variables, the project compiles an open database of list maintenance
procedures that can serve as a public resource. This can help scholars, data
scientists, and decision-makers better understand the menu of alternatives
available to protect the accessibility, accuracy, and security of such lists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across all 50 U.S. states, the project will match data
about registration lists, the demographics of individuals, the socioeconomic
characteristics of their communities and officials, list maintenance procedures,
as well as COVID-19 disruptions and responses. The study will use longitudinal,
multilevel, and spatial analysis to test hypotheses about different ways of
performing maintenance on registration lists. This project is jointly funded by
the Sociology Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.