* 2049933
* I-Corps:  Portable Automated Intravenous Injector
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Gopal Nadkarni, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a portable automated intravenous injector for easy and fast drug
delivery and intravenous (IV) access in medical emergencies outside of the
hospital. Each year, it is estimated that more than 350,000 people suffer from
sudden cardiac arrest outside of the hospital and roughly only 10% survive. Data
show that the use of Automated External Defibrillators (AEDs) save more than
1600 people each year. The proposed portable automated intravenous injector
would complement existing AEDs, which are widespread and commonly available. It
is estimated that in emergency situations roughly 20% more lives could be saved
if epinephrine or other drugs are used in conjunction with an AED. The proposed
device may allow a non-trained operator to inject rescue medication following
the American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines, by using a proprietary learning
algorithm that will not require extensive medical knowledge. It is estimated
that the market size is around $5B for such a device that is complementary to
the AED market. The global market size for intravenous access is estimated to
about $11B including adjacent markets in hospital blood sampling, drug injection
and other applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of a portable automated intravenous injector, which is a smart
injection device that senses the location and depth of a vein and injects a
preset and safe dosage of a drug (in this application, epinephrine) using an
algorithm derived from a combination of machine learning and big data. When
attached to the forearm, the proposed technology is able to find the location
and depth of the vein for drug injection automatically. It has two degrees of
freedom. One is to move along the width of the forearm, and the second is to
insert the needle inside the vein. The proposed technology uses ultrasound along
with infrared light to locate and find the depth of the vein. It leverages
Artificial intelligence algorithms to accurately detect the location of the vein
and evaluate the patient's emergency. The system is designed to continue to
learn through the usage and trial phase, and as data continues to build the
system it continues to get “smarter” and more accurate over time. The historical
data may be mined further to allow for smarter insights into cardiac care
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.