* 2049225
* Exploring the role of boundary layer microbial remineralization in flavivirus-host dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Ian Hewson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2023
* USD 775,595.00

Marine diseases pose considerable risks to invertebrates, such as sea cucumbers,
in the face of changing ocean conditions. While many invertebrate diseases are
driven by pathogens, the interplay between animal biology and environmental
conditions often mediates the outcome of the pathogen-host relationship. Sea
cucumbers are ecologically and economically important animals that occur in a
wide range of marine habitats. This project aims to decipher how the interaction
between the biology of sea cucumbers, environmental conditions, and a newly-
discovered type of virus, seemingly innocuous under typical conditions, may lead
to lethal disease in giant Pacific sea cucumbers in the U.S. West Coast. The
study includes surveys in coastal regions in southeast Alaska, Washington, and
California as well as laboratory experiments manipulating seawater oxygen
concentrations, temperature, and simulated microalgal blooms. The project
engages community scientists, fishers, high school students, and indigenous
groups, and supports training of one graduate and several undergraduate
students. A workshop that brings together scientists across marine ecology,
disease, and veterinary disciplines is planned to prepare a handbook of best
practices in marine disease investigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metagenomic and
community-level sequencing efforts have revealed an astonishing diversity of
viruses associated with grossly normal marine invertebrates. The vast majority
of detected viruses likely represents asymptomatic infections under typical
conditions but may generate pathology in hosts under changing environmental
conditions. This project investigates the ecology of a group of enveloped
positive sense single-stranded RNA viruses (flaviviruses) that this research
team has recently discovered in the giant California sea cucumber Apostichopus
californicus by addressing three hypotheses: 1) Aquatic insect-only Flaviviruses
(aiFVs) do not cause gross pathology under typical conditions; 2) aiFVs
proliferate and generate clinical and gross pathology under suboxic stress; and
3) Periodic increases in primary production and mean temperature excursions
cause aiFV proliferation and subsequently exacerbate holothurian disease
process. The study comprises a restricted survey of aiFV diversity via amplicon
sequencing and their prevalence within and between populations, development of
an antibody-based approach for aiFV detection, and examination of aiFV behavior
in concert with host transcription and veterinary pathology. The study includes
field surveys and in laboratory manipulative
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.