* 2049063
* Real-Time Haptic Performance Feedback for Model-Based Surgical Skill Training
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jean Bismuth, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 06/30/2024
* USD 779,056.00

The goal of this project is to make endovascular surgical training in virtual
reality-based simulators faster, more consistent, and more efficacious by adding
online vibrotactile (haptic) performance feedback to the visual feedback that is
customarily available. There are three research objectives. The first objective
seeks to identify the most appropriate measures of surgical performance to
provide as supplemental feedback and to determine the frequency of haptic cueing
most appropriate for endovascular surgical navigation tasks. The second
objective seeks to implement the vibrotactile feedback on the ANGIO Mentor
endovascular simulator, and then assess learning on endovascular navigation
techniques in two groups of trainees. One group will receive real-time
performance-based haptic feedback and the other will serve as the control group.
The third objective seeks to model the empirical results and to use the models
to determine how to refine the training protocols to optimize skill acquisition.
An additional set of human subject experiments will test the optimized feedback
scheme. This project will advance the national health, prosperity and welfare
making surgical training faster and more consistent, which should improve the
success rate of endovascular surgery and improve patient outcomes. The project
will also advance the science of skill acquisition more generally by providing
data on how surgeons learn. Outreach and mentoring programs will further broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research has demonstrated that
movement smoothness measures computed from surgical tool tip kinematics are
strong predictors of surgical expertise. Further, it has been shown that
providing real-time haptic feedback based on these metrics can positively
influence task completion time and trajectory on a non-surgical task. In this
project, the study team will leverage the data collection abilities of a virtual
reality surgical simulator platform as a first step towards improving the
efficiency and efficacy of surgical training. The plan is to provide
endovascular surgical trainees with supplemental real-time, individualized,
performance-based feedback. This feedback, based on measures of tool movement
smoothness and motor coordination, will be encoded as vibrotactile cues provided
to the trainee via a wearable haptic device as they navigate to simulated
anatomical targets within the VR simulator. Human subject experiments involving
surgical residents will examine the complex learning dynamics that underly human
skill acquisition within the context of endovascular surgery. Mathematical
models of skill acquisition will be fitted to the experimental data to identify
principles guiding the adaptation of real-time supplemental feedback with the
aim of improving learning outcomes and training efficiency. The project's
findings will advance an understanding of the potential role of supplemental
feedback on skill acquisition, which will ultimately advance understanding of
relevance to human motor control, endovascular surgery, haptics, dynamical
systems modeling, and experimental psychology
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.