* 2049893
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Who Leaves Teaching After Childbirth? An Analysis of Teacher Retention and Teacher Quality
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Kelly Bedard, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

This research project will use a large data set from the state of North Carolina
and innovative economic methods to study whether childbirths induce loss of
female teachers and if this leads to a reduction in the quality of teachers.
Teacher quality is one of the most important school-related inputs influencing
student success. This project will do this by constructing a novel dataset
linking administrative birth records, teacher employment records, and student
school records to answer this question. This project will compare the paths of
employment for men and women in teaching around the time of childbirth to
understand the differential impacts of childbirth on employment by gender.
Additionally, it will investigate differences in this type of attrition by
teacher quality in order to understand whether childbirth is a point of high
quality teacher dropout. Teacher quality is one of the most important school-
related inputs influencing student success. Given that childbirth is a well-
known point of attrition from the labor force for many women in the U.S. and
teaching is a female-dominated profession, it is not clear whether this is the
period when high quality teachers are lost to the profession. The results of
this research has important implications for policies to retain teachers,
improve teacher quality, and improve educational
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs gender-specific event-study
regressions to track employment in teaching around childbirth, compare the
patterns for male and female teachers, and investigate heterogeneity by
teachers’ “value-added” to student achievement, as measured by cognitive
outcomes such as student test scores and non-cognitive outcomes such as student
attendance. This project contributes to the existing literate in three ways.
First, the novel dataset construction overcomes a multitude of limitations in
existing data, such as small sample size and limited information on fertility
and employment. Second, the project contributes to the literature on labor
market penalty of motherhood by focusing on one specific profession that is both
an interesting case study and has an overwhelming proportion of employees as
women Third, relating the risk of leaving the profession around childbirth to
teacher effectiveness provides the first descriptive evidence of whether
childbirth is a contributing factor to the loss of high quality teachers from
the profession. This research can inform the ongoing debate in the U.S. on the
provision of family-friendly labor market policies such as paid family leave,
which has been shown to increase women’s employment and retention to their pre-
birth employer but is still not available to most individuals in the U.S. labor
market&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.