* 2049858
* Adaptive Human Migration in Changing Environments: Leveraging Geographic Sciences to Advance New Models of Migration Decision-Making
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Randall Boone, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2024
* USD 399,940.00

This research investigates human migration as both a consequence of, and cause
of environmental and social change. This project asks two related questions: why
do people choose to move, and what are outcomes of their mobility in both origin
and destination areas? Migration and subsequent outcomes result from complex
processes that are not well understood because they are based on over-
generalized assumptions and on place-specific factors. This project addresses
these complex processes by combining field survey data and satellite imagery
that will result in generalizable and predictive models of migration and
environmental change. Results will produce a potentially transformative agent-
based model that can be used to predict population movements, changing land use
intensity and agricultural productivity. The scientific methods used in this
research will be incorporated into STEM education and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the importance of understanding human
mobility and ecological change, theory regarding migration-environment
relationships has been slow to develop. This project uses innovative methods to
collect data about migration decision-making on the ground coupled with advanced
satellite-based Earth observation data that measures land use and land change
over time. These data are combined into a predictive agent-based model designed
to test existing theories on migration-environment relationships (e.g., people
move to access land vs. people move following social networks) and promoting the
development and testing of emerging theories. The results of this project will
improve our understanding of migration dynamics and will provide important data
and tools that promotes resilience in social and environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.