* 2049360
* Collaborative Research: The consequences of species loss for food web persistence and functioning in the Gulf of Maine rocky intertidal
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Laura Dee, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 559,240.00

Species are going locally extinct in coastal ecosystems at an alarming rate, yet
the ability to predict the consequences of these extinctions remains limited. In
particular, the loss of one species may trigger additional, and potentially
unexpected, losses of species, because species depend on each other for food or
habitat. For example, the loss of a prey species might result in predator
declines and the loss of important functions and services that the predator
provides (e.g., food production). In the Gulf of Maine, rapid warming and
overexploitation are thought to have contributed to the near local extinction of
the intertidal blue mussel (Mytilus edulis), an important prey species whose
loss could have cascading consequences for this ecosystem. The project explores
the consequence of blue mussel declines to the food web and to the ecosystem
(e.g., through water filtration that improves water quality, and secondary
production that supports food for people). The investigators are using
theoretical models of species loss from food webs in combination with long-term
ecological data and field experiments to investigate the effects of local
species extinctions on ecosystem function. This combined approach is generating
and testing theoretical predictions of species loss on ecosystem biodiversity
and food web structure. Insights from this project are contributing to a better
understanding of dynamics of coastal ecosystems worldwide that face similar
losses of prey species. The project is fostering a new collaboration between a
small liberal arts college (Colby College) and a research-intensive university
(University of Colorado Boulder), creating unique training, mentoring, and
educational exchange opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. This
project is training a PhD student, a postdoctoral scholar, and undergraduate
students, with a focus on engaging underrepresented groups and enhancing
computational training for marine ecologists. This project is supporting the
development of web-based teaching modules on complex ecological systems in
combination with outreach and education efforts in Maine's coastal communities
and in Colorado’s inland rural and urban communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Worldwide changes in local biodiversity are altering the
functioning of ecosystems and the ecosystem services on which humans depend.
Predicting the consequences of such changes in biodiversity to coastal ecosystem
function and structure is complicated by the multiplicity of species
interactions that characterize complex food webs. Food web theory predicts that
the loss of species like the blue mussel has cascading impacts on the community
through secondary losses of consumers that depend on resource species. However,
such predictions of food web collapse (termed "robustness") have rarely been
empirically tested. Furthermore, previous studies have rarely considered how
secondary losses of species might alter coastal ecosystem function. For example,
the loss of the abundant filter-feeding M. edulis is likely to affect water
filtration, however, M. edulis’ role as a key prey species could impact other
ecosystem functions performed by species that consume M. edulis (e.g., secondary
production). Thus, to estimate and predict the consequences of local extinctions
on coastal ecosystem functioning, requires a research approach that moves beyond
a focus on single species, and considers both direct and secondary species
losses. This project is integrating food web modeling, field observations, data
synthesis, and experimental species removals to quantify the impact of recent
species losses on the structure and stability of the Gulf of Maine rocky
intertidal food web. Historical and existing species interaction data and field
observations are being synthesized to generate a detailed food web with
ecosystem functions for the Gulf of Maine rocky intertidal. This food web model
is used to predict the cascading impacts of species loss in this community, with
particular attention to the impact on key ecosystem functions measured in situ.
Finally, the predictions are tested in a multi-year factorial species removal
experiment that quantifies how the diversity, structure, and function of the
food web is affected by targeted species removal. This novel approach is
providing much-needed empirical ground truthing to predictions of food web
ecology. It is among the first of such experimental tests in marine systems.
This research has the potential to transform the understanding of how marine
ecosystem structure and function are altered by species losses, and the
predictability of food web changes through empirical
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.