* 2049932
* Responding to turbulent times: Coping with the COVID-19 pandemic and its aftermath in a probability-based US national sample
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Roxane Silver, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2023
* USD 363,998.00

In December 2019, scientists identified a novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) that was
associated with an outbreak of pneumonia in Wuhan, China and that was suspected
of being zoonotic in origin. Within 3 months, this outbreak was labeled a
pandemic by the World Health Organization, and a national emergency was declared
in the United States. Over the next year, over 500,000 Americans lost their
lives to the disease and millions more became ill. In addition, U.S. residents
simultaneously coped with a variety of other cascading collective traumas (an
economic recession, race-driven social unrest, weather-related disasters, and a
contentious presidential election). In the context of this turbulence, variants
of COVID-19 have spread worldwide. Nonetheless, there has been unexpectedly good
news regarding the development of safe and effective vaccines for COVID-19, and
their rollout across the U.S. has accelerated over time. Understanding how
Americans respond to the pandemic and government actions to address the pandemic
(e.g., vaccine rollout) is critical information that can guide policymakers as
they develop national policies to mitigate its impact on public health and
welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2020, in collaboration with NORC at the
University of Chicago, the research team studied over 6,500 individuals from the
AmeriSpeak panel, a nationally representative probability-based sample of adults
across the United States, as they responded to and coped with both personally-
and collectively-experienced traumas. Initial data were collected in March and
April 2020, at the start of the pandemic in the U.S., and a second wave of data
was collected in September and October 2020. The scholars will conduct a third
survey of these respondents as vaccinations continue, the pandemic waxes and
wanes across the world, and Americans return to a post-pandemic reality. The
team will continue to study emotional (fear, worry, distress), cognitive
(perceived risk, time perception), and behavioral (health protective behaviors)
responses to the pandemic and its associated stressors and examine how early
responses to the pandemic and evolving psychological processes have shaped
outcomes over time. The research also examines how widespread media coverage of
COVID-19 and direct exposures to pandemic-related stressors (e.g., job loss,
death of a loved one) are associated with psycho-social responses to the
pandemic, and how cognitive and affective processes shape risk assessments,
behavioral responses, and mental health outcomes over time. Finally, psycho-
social responses are also mapped against neighborhood, county, and state-level
parameters (e.g., behavioral restrictions, unemployment rate, COVID-deaths).
Limited research has taken a social ecological approach to infectious disease
response or examined how community-level factors may affect perceptions of risk
of future hazards – especially ones with such uncertain and deadly outcomes.
This project examines predictors of variability in response to the COVID-19
crisis, as well as advances future conceptual work on coping with highly
stressful national threats. The findings can help policymakers, service
providers, members of the media, and educators design risk communication
materials and intervention efforts that are evidence-based, cost-effective, and
sensitive to the needs of the populace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.