* 2049837
* Transforming Theory and STEM Education Through Reproductions and Replications in the Geographical Sciences
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Peter Kedron, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 11/30/2024
* USD 315,082.00

This project establishes a theoretical framework for the reproducibility of
science. Within this framework the researchers will create protocols for
increasing the use of reproductions and replications in human-environment and
geographical science (HEGS) research. Reproductions repeat a study while holding
the input data and parameters of the study constant, thereby establishing
credibility and generalizability of prior research. This project is responsive
to increasing governmental requirements for transparent and reproducible
research. It will conduct reproduction and replication studies of recent high-
impact HEGS research to establish credibility and generalizability necessary to
influence public policy. The investigators will integrate this framework for
reproducible science into undergraduate and graduate methods courses resulting
in a curriculum for teaching replication studies and reproducible research
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HEGS has been slower than other disciplines to
adopt more reproducible research practices, limited by a lack of well-developed
exemplar replication studies, curricula for teaching reproducibility, and the
challenge that variable geographic contexts cause for replication. What is the
state of research practices in HEGS with regard to reproducibility and barriers
to reproducibility? Can the credibility and generalizability of recent high-
impact HEGS research be established through reproductions and replications? Can
teaching reproductions and replications achieve the same benefits as project-
based learning pedagogies and develop researchers with the capabilities for
doing reproducible research in HEGS? The proposed work is anticipated to
establish the foundational survey research, reproduction and replication studies
and pedagogies necessary to transform research practices in HEGS by building
knowledge through the scientific process of reproducing and replicating
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.