* 2049292
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: The effects of weight status and sleep duration on adolescent cognitive functioning and food choice
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Aaron Fobian, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2023
* USD 25,116.00

Obesity represents one of our nation’s leading public health issues. In 2017,
over 30% of U.S. high school students had either overweight (15.6%) or obesity
(14.8%), and the average U.S. BMI continues to rise. Overall, this increasing
trend is associated with earlier mortality and lower quality of life. Weight
loss interventions typically target food intake and exercise, but maintenance of
weight loss after these interventions is poor. Therefore, it is important to
identify other factors beyond food intake and exercise that may contribute to
improved prevention and treatment of overweight and obesity. This study aims to
do this by investigating the roles of sleep and cognitive function (e.g.
impulsivity) in relation to weight. Past research has demonstrated that poor
cognitive function may lead to less healthy food choices. Poor sleep may
exacerbate this problem, particularly in individuals with overweight and obesity
that may be more vulnerable to changes in cognitive function following short
sleep. Given these relationships, sleep may represent a target to prevent weight
gain and improve obesity interventions. However, more research is needed to
understand the relationships between weight, sleep, cognitive function, and food
intake. This research investigates these relationships by having adolescents
with normal weight and with overweight or obesity complete two sleep conditions,
one in which they sleep for 4.5 hours for two nights and one in which they sleep
for 9 hours for two nights. Each condition is followed by a self-serve breakfast
and tests of cognitive function to assess the effects of weight status and sleep
duration on food intake and cognitive function. The findings inform current
obesity prevention programs and weight loss interventions and increase
understanding of the factors related to weight
gain.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Overweight and obesity (OWOB) has traditionally been
explained through energy balance, with weight loss interventions focusing on
decreased food intake and increased energy expenditure. However, interventions
targeting these mechanisms often fail to produce long-term changes in adiposity.
Thus, identification of additional modifiable mechanisms is critical. For
example, aspects of executive function, including cognitive flexibility and
impulsivity, have been shown to be impaired in individuals with OWOB and may
predict increased food consumption. Importantly, sleep restriction, which is
common in adolescents with OWOB, also impairs cognitive function. Further,
current fMRI evidence suggests that adolescents with OWOB are more vulnerable to
changes in reward sensitivity following sleep restriction as compared to peers
with normal weight (NW). However, this relationship has not been well evaluated
in relation to performance-based cognitive function. Thus, this study aims to
expand on present literature by exploring the roles of adiposity, sleep, and
performance-based cognitive function in relation to observed food choice. Using
a randomized crossover design, participants with NW and with OWOB will complete
two conditions in a randomized order: a sleep-restricted condition in which
participants sleep 4.5 hours for two nights and an adequate sleep condition in
which participants sleep 9 hours for two nights. Conditions are separated by a
2-night washout period to prevent carryover effects. On the last night of each
sleep condition, participants fast for 10 hours overnight before attending a
morning lab visit. Upon arrival, they are given a self-serve breakfast of whole
and processed breakfast foods, and food choice is measured. Following the self-
serve breakfast, participants complete the Stroop test and NIH Toolbox Cognition
Battery. Key relationships assessed are: 1) the relationships between body fat
percent and outcomes of food choice and cognitive function; 2) the unique
effects of, and interaction between, sleep and body fat percent in predicting
food choice and cognitive outcomes; 3) the effects of cognitive function as a
moderator in the relationship between adiposity and food choice when adolescents
are adequately rested and sleep restricted. Overall, the findings strengthen
foundational understanding of the cognitive mechanisms underlying OWOB and food
choice, serving as a framework for future research in fields such as health
behavior, physiology, and cognitive neuroscience. This project informs obesity
prevention and treatment programs as well as public policy regarding adolescent
academic environments and sleep guidelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.