* 2049992
* Recruiting, Preparing, and Retaining STEM Educators to Serve in High-Need Schools in Central Louisiana
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Guoyi Ke, Louisiana State University at Alexandria
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 04/30/2022
* USD 732,668.00

This project aims to serve the national need for highly effective STEM teachers.
To do so, it will recruit undergraduate STEM majors to complete STEM degrees and
obtain a secondary teacher certification. These STEM undergraduates will receive
scholarships and other supports designed to enrich their STEM knowledge, as well
as their teaching knowledge and skills. To expand their STEM content knowledge,
the Noyce Scholars will have the opportunity to participate in collaborative
mentor-scholar projects, summer computational workshops, and a chemometrics
course. They will also benefit from faculty mentorships that include
opportunities to reflect on their academic and career pursuits. Monthly
workshops will include sessions related to interpersonal skill development, such
as grit, and cultural and linguistic competence. Such skills are important for
effective teaching in high-need school districts. The project expects these
undergraduate Noyce Scholars will gain the knowledge, skills, and perspectives
needed to help students in Central Louisiana high-need secondary schools learn
mathematics and science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Louisiana State
University at Alexandria includes partnerships with seven high-need school
districts (Allen, Avoyelles, Concordia, Evangeline, Grant, LaSalle, and Rapides
Parish School Districts) and Central Louisiana Technical Community College.
There are three specific projects goals. The first is to recruit, prepare, and
graduate 21 qualified undergraduate biology, chemistry, and mathematics majors
for secondary education certification over the five-year grant period. The
second goal is to provide professional support for the long-term success of
these STEM educators. The final goal is to place and retain a high percentage
(90%) of these Scholars in teaching positions in high-need school districts upon
graduation as they complete their teaching service requirement of two years of
teaching for each one year of scholarship support. The project is based on a
theoretical framing that proposes evidence-based and innovative strategies are
needed to ensure the preparation of highly effective STEM teachers for service
in high-need schools. The project expects to generate new knowledge about
pathways that support Scholar success and strategies to increase interest of
STEM undergraduates in pursuing teaching careers in high-need schools. A robust
project assessment process, led by an independent evaluator, is intended to
identify aspects of the program that are most effective in STEM teacher
recruitment, retention, and preparation. The project intends to use results from
this evaluation to improve the teacher education program and will disseminate
the results locally and nationally via publications and presentations. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends Noyce project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program. The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary k-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.