* 2049031
* Collaborative Research: A Laboratory Experiment to Quantify the Impact of Whitecap Foam on Air-Sea Momentum Transfer
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Brian Haus, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 147,140.00

This project is motivated by the need to improve parameterization of air-to-sea
momentum fluxes. This research is expected to result in an in-depth
understanding of the impact whitecap foam has on momentum transfer at the air-
sea interface. The impact of whitecap foam on air-sea momentum flux will be
studied in the laboratory environment using the Air-Sea Interaction Saltwater
Tank (ASIST) at the University of Miami. The results will lead to improved
parameterization of the momentum transfer at the air-sea interface which is
important for ocean and climate modeling, hurricane forecasting, and modeling
waves which effect coastal erosion and offshore
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will quantify the impact of whitecap
foam on air-sea momentum transfer using the Air-Sea Interaction Saltwater Tank
(ASIST) at the University of Miami. Foam will be generated by purging air
through gas permeable tubing to imitate residual foam which lingers on the
surface after a wave has broken. Wind will then be blown over the foam patch and
turbulent momentum flux measured at two locations downwind for comparison to
clean, foam-free water. The experiment will be conducted using a range of wind
speeds and foam areas. Both fresh water and natural sea water will be used and
bubble size and stability will be adjusted by altering surfactant
concentrations. The outcome of this research will be a quantification of the
impact whitecap foam has on air-sea momentum transfer by altering the surface
roughness over a variety of conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.