* 2049213
* MOMS: a Minimal Ocean Mixing System
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Alberto Scotti, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 513,475.00

Despite occurring on centimeter and smaller scales, turbulent stratified mixing
in the ocean affects the circulation at basin scales. Much work has been devoted
to understanding how to express the efficiency of the process in terms of local
turbulent parameters. Recent work though suggests that the physics of stratified
mixing cannot be abstracted from the larger context in which it occurs. In this
project, laboratory experiments will be conducted in a tank large enough, and
suitably forced, that it may approximate more faithfully the conditions observed
in the ocean, a Minimal Ocean Mixing System (MOMS). The laboratory measurements
will provide a way to test theoretical and practical ways to represent mixing in
computer models. Stratified turbulent mixing in a similar environment is also
present in the atmosphere, and this research will therefore have a spill-over
effect in atmospheric sciences. The present measurements and numerical
simulations will also constitute a new dataset which can be used as a training
set for Artificial Intelligence algorithms reduced order models and data-
assimilation techniques which require a substantial knowledge of the flow for
their validation. Finally, reducing uncertainties of irreversible mixing using
the present research will improve the predictive power of general circulation
models at climate scales. The PI will make every effort to advertise the postdoc
position broadly so to reach candidates that traditionally have been
marginalized. The PI will also work with the local chapter of SCIREN, an
organization that connects STEM researchers with local teachers to improve the
quality and scientific literacy of youths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
clear that the recent work surveyed shows a shift in the focus from a purely
local characterization of stratified mixing (e.g., the quest for
parameterizations of mixing efficiency based on the buoyancy Reynolds number) to
a view that sees mixing as the end product of a dynamic that starts at much
larger scales and is (potentially) much more intertwined than previously
recognized. Experimentally, this requires rethinking the problem of stratified
mixing to include a more natural way to force the problem, and a domain
sufficiently large to accommodate both the anisotropic and the isotropic part of
the spectrum, a MOMS. The dataset collected in these experiments and numerical
simulations will therefore, constitute a novel way to test and validate
theoretical arguments to model the energy exchanges in stratified turbulent
flows across the anisotropic / isotropic divide. In addition, this research aims
to provide a link between vertically/horizontally towed instruments and planar /
volume-resolved measurements. This project also intends to establish a link
between near-ocean conditions combining theoretical with technical challenges at
unprecedented scales for which the UNC Joint Fluids lab is designed. In
addition, the Craya-Herring framework combined with the structure functions
methods will provide the state-of-the-art theoretical foundations to analyze the
role of the turbulence where intermittency remains a key open question to
analyze and interpret field measurements, since mixing events are rarely
observed nor statically converged in field measurements of strongly stratified
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.