* 2049210
* Engaging Communities to Discover Environmentally and Socially Optimal Waste Management Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Damon Hall, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 338,032.00

Waste management is a key stakeholder in the pursuit of many sustainability
goals, for example, recycling of materials, utilization of organic wastes to
generate energy and/or soil amendment while minimizing landfilling and can
contribute to climate goals. Determining the best treatment options for waste
streams, economically, environmentally, and socially for any given municipality
is a complex decision dependent upon existing infrastructure, available funds,
and local policy goals such as climate action plans. It is very difficult to
evaluate options without the assistance of mathematical modeling to represent
these systems, often referred to as decision support tools (DSTs). DSTs help to
facilitate identification of the best solution given the characteristics of the
waste stream, the existing infrastructure, specific policy goals in a given
location. However, the tools can be challenging for nonexperts to use, and with
the rapidly changing waste management landscape, they need updates to represent
emerging waste management options and expand decisions beyond one or two
metrics. This work engages stakeholders early and throughout the project to
increase shared understanding of a widely used DST called the Solid Waste
Optimization Life-Cycle Framework (SWOLF) and learn about the short- and longer-
term targets for the stakeholders. This knowledge shapes technologies added to
SWOLF as well as shape scenario analysis to best serve these stakeholders. SWOLF
represents waste management options from a life cycle perspective; that is, the
materials and energy flow across the entire chain of operations rather than just
at the facility level and applies optimization techniques to allow for
consideration of multiple objectives, in this case cost, carbon, and nutrients.
Overall, this project provides better DSTs as well as uncover better approaches
to developing DSTs that are more accessible to end
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this work is to transform
decision-making toward environmentally, economically, and socially optimized
waste management by improving model development through early and frequent
engagement with stakeholders. Determining the best treatment options for waste
streams, economically, environmentally, and socially for any given municipality
is a complex decision dependent upon existing infrastructure, available funds,
and local policy goals, e.g., climate action plans. Decision support tools exist
for waste management; however, even the best among them have need for inclusion
of ability to model novel management options and social impacts. In particular,
these existing tools generally address waste management decisions with respect
to a single objective, such as minimizing cost or emissions, and do not reflect
the reality that decision makers need to select waste management alternatives on
the basis of multiple, conflicting criteria. An “alternative” waste management
approach in this context is multi-faceted, consisting of a mix of potential
investments in technologies, logistics resources, and manpower, which further
argues for a systems modeling approach to addressing such questions. The project
uses and enhances the Solid Waste Optimization Life-Cycle Framework (SWOLF)
model for analysis of waste management strategies: (1) To identify mixes of
strategies that optimize stakeholders’ objectives with respect to cost savings,
greenhouse gas reductions, and social impacts. (2) To create life cycle
inventory (LCI) data for novel waste management options and integrate these into
SWOLF expanding the set of SWOLF environmental and economic objectives to
include an option for social benefit maximization. (3) The project’s final
modeling extension integrates the enhanced SWOLF model into a multi-objective
optimization framework that identifies the efficient frontier of candidate
solutions (across economic, environmental, and social objectives), and then
helps direct a stakeholder to its preferred solution along that frontier. Using
this extended modeling framework, waste management system analysis is applied
using stakeholder-identified variables, metrics, and decision-making criteria.
The intellectual merit of this project includes improving communication
strategies between stakeholders and modelers, development of LCI data for novel
waste treatment processes, improved multi-objective optimization modeling
capacity for solid waste management, and waste management systems analysis
tailored to stakeholders’ geography and situation. The broader impacts of this
project include undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral mentoring, networking
across three academic institutions, and collaborating with a variety of
stakeholders. Further, through model-presentation workshops the project improves
the broader research communities’ ability to create impact models and help waste
management. The workshops also allow sustainability professionals make informed
and aligned decisions based on their resources and
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.