* 2049358
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Low-Income Expectations and Student Loan Repayment Plan Choice
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Scott Imberman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2023
* USD 23,475.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most individuals in the United
States who attend college borrow money from the Federal government in the form
of student loans. After they leave school, borrowers pay back their student
loans by making monthly loan payments. The minimum payment Federal student loan
borrowers must make is determined by a choice between: (1) a mortgage style
repayment plan with fixed monthly payments and (2) income-based repayment (IBR)
plans where minimum payments are related to the borrower’s income. One reason
borrowers may choose mortgage style repayment plans rather than IBR plans is
mis-judgement of risk of earning a low income. This research will explore
whether IBR uptake can be improved by providing information about low-income
risk to seniors and juniors in college. The researchers will run an information
experiment at a large university in the U.S. Half of surveyed students will be
provided with information on low-income risks tailored to their specific majors.
The project will then examine whether provision of the information changes
student preferences for IBR plans and how the responses vary by student
characteristics. The outcomes of this proposal will improve the understanding of
federal student loans and will have potential implications regarding the
communication of these loans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Income-based student loan
repayment provides borrowers with insurance against high repayment burdens
relative to their income. Students on IBR plans are significantly less likely to
default on their student loans. Despite these benefits, most students choose to
stay on mortgage style repayment plans where payments do not change with the
borrower's income. This project will explore whether this outcome is partially
caused by borrowers having low subjective probabilities of earning a low-income
after they graduate. This hypothesis will be tested using a survey experiment
fielded to juniors and seniors at a large university in the U.S. Half of survey
respondents will be provided the information on the incomes of college graduates
with their major. These students will then be asked about their future income
expectations and their choice of student loan repayment plan under a
hypothetical borrowing scenario. The results of this project will advance the
body of knowledge on federal student loans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.