* 2049936
* Collaborative Research: Foreign Capital Liberalization, Structural Change,  and Economic Empowerment of Vulnerable Groups
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Manisha Shah, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2024
* USD 269,999.00

Many countries have promoted increased foreign capital liberalization as a path
to economic growth and development. However, little is known about the social
consequences of these policies. This research project will study the socio-
political and distributional effects of foreign direct investment (FDI) induced
by these policy changes. Using the staggered liberalization of access to foreign
capital across several industry groups, the research will attempt to answer the
following questions: (1) Does foreign capital liberalization in the
manufacturing and/or service sector accelerate the process of changing the
structure of economies? (2) What are the social, economic, health, and
political, and distributional consequences of foreign capital liberalization
policies, especially for vulnerable groups, such as women, racial and other
minorities? The research project will build a large data set disaggregated at
local administration level to study these issues. The results of this research
project will guide policies to deal with the possible economic effects of
foreign direct investment. It will also provide guidance on policies to decrease
the possible negative social consequences and distributional effects of foreign
direct investments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project exploits the staggered
liberalization of foreign capital flows to different disaggregated industries at
different times to measure the causal average and distributional effects of
foreign capital liberalization. This project has two parts: The first part
measures the effects on occupational switching, gender attitudes, human capital,
and fertility. The second part will measure the effects on social outcomes
related to the rise of populism, such as crime, political attitudes, and
religious violence. Treatment of industry by foreign capital liberalization is
measured by the pre- and post-reform mix of industries in a district. The
analysis will then use a local labor market difference-in-differences (diff-in-
diff) strategy to compares outcome change in affected and non affected districts
from the pre- to post-reform period. The project will build panel datasets that
will be harmonized at the district-level to measure the distribution effects of
policy changes. This project will provide one of the first causal evidence on
the effects of foreign capital liberalization on structural change as well as on
a broad range social effects, such as female labor force participation,
fertility, and education. The results of this project will provide guidance on
policies to decrease the possible negative social consequences and
distributional effects of foreign direct investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.