* 2049427
* Technology, Automation and Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Pascual Restrepo Mesa, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 183,000.00

The last 40 years have witnessed a rise of inequality in the developed world.
During this period, the labor share in national income declined from 66% to
about 58%, in part due to the emergence of large firms with high sales but low
employment and labor shares. These facts raised a need for understanding the
causes and consequences of these developments. This project explores the
contribution of technology, and in particular, new automation technologies, to
these trends. The project will use a new survey that contains detailed
information on the use of artificial intelligence, robotics, specialized
software, and dedicated machinery among a large number of US firms from all
economic sectors. Specifically, the research will provide a comprehensive
overview of the adoption of advanced technologies and how they vary across firms
by industry, location, cohort, size class, as well as the motivation for
adopting these technologies. The project will further study the implications of
the adoption of these technologies for the workforce by taking into account
differences in the skills demanded by firms that use or supply automation
technologies. Finally, the research will study the contribution of advanced
technologies to the rise in sales concentration and the emergence of large
dominant firms with high sales but low employment and labor shares. The project
will have policy and regulatory implications for technology, labor markets and
industrial organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the
determinants and consequences of the adoption of advanced automation
technologies across US firms. Using detailed new data on technology adoption
among a large number of US firms, the project will provide stylized facts on
technology adoption. Adoption rates are still low, especially for
artificialintelligence and robotics. However, adoption concentrates on large
firms, which account for a significant share of employment, especially in
manufacturing. Furthermore, adoption of technologies have the explicit objective
of automating tasks previously performed by labor. Second, the project will
study the implications of the adoption of these technologies for the workforce.
Firms adopting advanced technologies report no overall changes in employment but
a significant increase in their demand for skilled workers. Using granular
employer-employee data, the project will explore this issue empirically by
documenting differences in skill mix among technology adopters and non-adopters.
Based on these differences, the project will develop a methodology to quantify
the contribution of advanced technologies to changes in the demand for skills
across firms, by industry, region, and for the overall nation. The research will
further examine the role of advanced technologies in relation to sales
concentration, firm size and labor share. The project will explore the notion
that part of the higher labor productivity among large firms is due to their
adoption of advanced technologies and may not necessarily reflect higher
markups. Moreover, the skewed adoption of these technologies among large firms
partly accounts for the rise in sales concentration seen in some
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.