* 2049393
* Collaborative Research: The Macroeconomy, Labor Markets, and Economic Mobility from the Civil War to Today: New High Frequency Data on Local Economic Shock
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Vellore Arthi, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/29/2024
* USD 115,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information on local economic activity is crucial
to research and policy evaluation. It is an outcome of interest in the analysis
of economic growth and inequality, regional development, and a range of national
and local policies. This information is also an input to key questions about the
behavior and welfare of individuals, cohorts, and firms. Despite their paramount
importance, systematic historical data on local economic conditions in the US
are extremely limited. This limitation creates challenges in examining the
evolution of the US economy during a period that includes geographic expansion,
demographic and political realignment, and transformation from a rural, agrarian
economy into an urban industrial one. Moreover, it poses challenges in
understanding more recent developments in the US economy, since many of these
have historical roots, or depend on cumulative or historical exposure to shocks.
This project will generate a long-run panel on local economic conditions in the
US—one that is comprehensive, high-frequency, spatially-disaggregate, and
available consistently over the period 1865-present. The project will further
illustrate the research potential of this new dataset and provide the first
systematic, high-frequency evidence on local economic conditions in the US prior
to the 1970s.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The panel dataset will comprise deposits of
all households and firms in each county-year from 1865-present. For the period
before 1960, the project will generate new data from the balance sheets of all
nationally-chartered banks in the US, and supplement this with information on
deposits held by state-chartered banks and other depository institutions. From
1961 to the present, the project will merge newly-collected data with existing
information on deposits by county. The project will further explore deposits as
a close and reliable proxy for traditional local economic indicators, such as
employment or income, for which high-quality historical data are not readily
available. An additional dataset will contain the detailed balance sheets of all
US depository institutions underlying the county panel. These new datasets will
have applications to all fields of economics, as well as across broader social
science and policy evaluation spheres. The data will advance knowledge on the
evolution of the US economy, fostering an understanding of critical local
dynamics that previous data have obscured. By filling a substantial gap in the
nation’s data infrastructure, this project will contribute to both economic
knowledge and policy effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.