* 2049151
* US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE and GP17-ANT: Mapping zinc speciation in the Southern Ocean overturning circulation to test the zinc scavenging hypothesis
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Nicholas Hawco, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 289,691.00

The Southern Ocean plays a significant role in the global carbon cycle because
deep ocean waters rich in CO2 are brought into the surface layer and can
exchange with the atmosphere. The growth of phytoplankton counteracts this
carbon source by fixing CO2 into biomass, which can sink back to the deep sea.
While the Southern Ocean is rich in macronutrients that support phytoplankton
growth, key micronutrients such as iron, manganese and zinc are at very low
abundance. Of these metals, only iron has been found to limit phytoplankton
productivity on a large scale, but few observations of Zn and Mn have been made.
This proposal seeks to map bioavailable Zn concentrations across an
oceanographic transect from the South Pacific Ocean to the Amundsen Sea. At low
abundance, Zn scarcity can limit phytoplankton, but Zn can also affect the
uptake of other scarce metals, especially Mn. Measurements made as part of this
project will determine the extent of limiting and toxic levels of Zn in this
critical but undersampled region of the oceans. Such constraints are necessary
for modelling changes to the oceanic Zn cycle – and its effect on phytoplankton
activity – under past and future climate scenarios. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;As
part of the GEOTRACES GP17 OCE and ANT expeditions, parameters governing the
reactivity of Zn will be measured in high vertical and latitudinal resolution
across a transect extending several thousand kilometers and crossing formation
regions of globally important water masses. Voltammetry techniques will be used
to determine the concentrations of free zinc (Zn’) and Zn-binding organic
ligands dissolved in seawater for hundreds of samples. Together with other
investigators in the GEOTRACES program, these measurements will constrain the
reactivity of Zn’ in the deep ocean and define empirical relationships between
Zn’ and phytoplankton metal uptake. This is essential for understanding the
global distribution of Zn and other micronutrients in the oceans and their
potential to affect primary production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.