* 2049351
* Collaborative Research: Temporal Variability of Vertical Upwelling of a Natural Hydrocarbon Seep and its Connection to the Ocean Surface
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Daniela Di Iorio, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 878,812.00

Natural release of methane and oil from hydrocarbon seeps in the ocean floor is
poorly understood. This project is a field and modeling study of the properties
and behavior of hydrocarbon bubble plumes in the Gulf of Mexico. Observations
will be made of hydrocarbon bubble characteristics including size, rise
velocity, and dissolution near the source; entrainment of ambient water in the
plume phase; and the location of hydrocarbon that reaches the sea surface. The
project will also model individual bubble and plume properties. The results have
potential broader impacts for understanding natural versus anthropogenic sources
of hydrocarbon for predicting ocean climate. The project will also involve
training of high school teachers with a focus on building a robotic underwater
vehicle for a robotics competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
measuring bubble and turbulent properties of hydrocarbon plumes from natural
seeps in the Gulf of Mexico. The techniques to be used include measurements of
flow characteristics from high frequency ADCP and of bubble characteristics from
Particle Tracking (and Imaging) Velocimetry (PTV and PIV). These observations
will be used to estimate bubble size distribution, volume and momentum fluxes,
turbulence and entrainment, and vertical upwelling during the initial rise to
reveal potential connections with the near-bed turbulence characteristic and
hydrographic conditions. Numerical modeling will be used to predict the
hydrocarbon trajectory and distribution in the water column and on the surface.
Estimates of surface residence time for oil slicks will be made using satellite
data and measured surface currents to compare to model predictions of the fate
of hydrocarbons at the sea surface. Overall the project will improve
understanding of the physical mechanisms that control bubble plumes and
entrainment from hydrocarbon seeps and dispersion in the ocean
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.