* 2049917
* Collaborative Research: Dealing with Disruption: Investigating the Micro-level Underpinnings of City Response to the Climate Crisis
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Rachel Krause, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 203,884.00

Municipalities are grappling with myriad complex challenges linked to the
changing climate. Their responses to anticipated but uncertain disruptions exist
on a continuum, from inaction to transformative change that fundamentally alters
an urban system. We do not know enough about the factors leading cities to more
or less transformative responses, inhibiting efforts to tackle such
disturbances. To address this challenge, we propose the networked micro-decision
context (NMDC), an arena where individuals involved in determining a policy
response confer, negotiate, and act. This research assesses how two key
dimensions of the NMDC—the composition of its actors and the flexibility of its
structure—affect the transformative potential of governance. Via the
administration and analysis of a nation-wide survey, qualitative cases studies,
and social network analyses, this research yields insight into the potentially
nuanced ways composition and structure affect the transformativeness of a city’s
approach to disruptions linked to the climate crisis. Climate-induced
disruptions share similarities with other mounting social challenges in that
they are highly complex, affect multiple economic and governmental sectors, and
are characterized by substantial resource interdependencies. As such, lessons
this research produces can help understand and improve governance responses to
other societal disruptions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research examines and
predicts when and how local governments pursue decision processes theoretically
linked to a greater likelihood of transformative policy outcomes. In so doing,
the research establishes the networked micro-decision context, which constitutes
the micro-level, relational underpinnings of aggregate government behavior. The
diversity of NMDC participants, the flexibility of its structure, and the
presence of policy entrepreneurs are hypothesized as determinants of
transformative governance, which is characterized by learning-focused,
proactive, and risk-accepting processes. The research team leverages a mixed-
methods approach to develop theory and test its generalizability, proceeding in
three phases: (1) a large-n quantitative analysis, involving a nationwide survey
and collection of secondary-source data; (2) in-depth case studies of 16 cities,
employing interviews and archival analysis; and (3) a detailed social network
analysis of the interactions that comprise the NMDC within those 16 cities. The
network analysis is be coupled with the survey and interview-based findings to
evaluate how a city’s likelihood of pursuing transformative governance processes
around climate-related disruptions is affected by the NMDC’s balance between
diversity and social cohesion; the position of climate policy entrepreneurs in
the NMDC; and the NMDC’s diversity (organizationally and individually) and
flexibility (operationalized as trust and
fungibility).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.