* 2049576
* Collaborative Research: Global eddy-driven transport estimated from in situ Lagrangian observations
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Harper Simmons, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 48,526.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine fluid
transport by long-lived coherent mesoscale eddies in the global ocean, including
volumes within their coherent cores, transiently trapped fluids in eddy
peripheries, and stirring effects in the ambient watermasses due to eddy
influence therein. The project would rely on a novel eddy-identifying analysis
technique (developed in prior work by the PIs) applied to in-situ measurements
from global surface drifter dataset and the historical set of acoustically-
tracked subsurface floats. This is a departure from the usual approach of eddy
detection in gridded satellite products, relying instead on the adaptation of
signal processing techniques to float trajectory data. Prior studies based on
such gridded products significantly underestimate numbers of eddies, and
overestimate eddy sizes and transport of water trapped within them. Data
analysis will be supplemented by theoretical idealized and realistic numerical
modeling. This work will address what observed ubiquitous coherent eddies
actually accomplish in terms of their effect on the large-scale flow. This is a
question of societal importance because of its relevance for the development of
accurate subgrid-scale parameterizations for general circulation models. The
project will advance the boundaries of the viable use of Lagrangian data, and
thus provide new tools for eddy examination to the community. The project will
support and inform free online courses in fundamental and advanced oceanographic
data analysis, so that that these state-of-the-art methodologies will be broadly
accessible to the next generation of researchers. The project supports an early
career latino scientist, who will develop an undergraduate-level teaching module
related to this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a
definitive study on the role of coherent eddies in driving fluid transport,
taking significant eddy detections from in situ Lagrangian observations as the
starting point. The detection method, called vortex signal extraction, recovers
time-varying oscillatory signal components from Lagrangian trajectories, without
a requirement for the oscillations to be strictly periodic. Available data
include approximately 24,000 global surface drifter trajectories plus another
3,000 subsurface trajectories from an historical set of eddy-resolving floats,
both NOAA datasets. Data analysis will be complemented by idealized and ultra-
high-resolution realistic modeling. These components will be used to explore the
subtleties of observing the eddy field from the Lagrangian perspective, to
examine the theoretical properties of the eddy detection methods, and to
investigate the dynamics of the transport processes of interest. The project
will proceed in three branches: (i) dynamics of direct and indirect eddy-driven
transport, (ii) the vortex observability problem, and (iii) global estimates.
Anticipated products will be new global estimates of coherent eddy properties,
populations, and boundaries through statistical modeling informed by an improved
understanding of the physics of long-term and transitory trapping. The project
will further provide a calibration process by which remotely-sensed features can
be more accurately mapped onto fluid structures, and a hydrographic analysis
will convert areal transport estimates into mass
transports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.