* 2049263
* NSF-BSF: Collaborative Research: Market Conduct in Technology Adoption in the Automobile Industry
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Jing Li, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/29/2024
* USD 189,924.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antitrust enforcement research has mostly focused
on price and quantity collusion, even though antitrust law encompasses more ways
to collude. This project will explore the causes and welfare consequences of
automakers colluding on the adoption of emission control technologies. The
project focuses on automakers that have been alleged to have colluded on
adopting Diesel Exhaust Fluid (DEF) tanks that were too small to effectively
clean up nitrogen oxide (NOx), a major contributor to air pollution. The project
will investigate how the alleged collusion by automakers concealed violation of
NOx emissions regulation. The project will quantify the effects of the alleged
collusion on NOx pollution damages, car buyer surplus, and firm profits.
&lt;br/&gt;These effects inform the proper amount of antitrust penalties to
remedy welfare damages of such collisions. Finally, the project will examine
whether and how environmental and antitrust regulation can mitigate
inefficiencies from technology collusion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
build and estimate a structural model of consumer vehicle demand and automaker
technology choice, and simulate counterfactual policies. The project utilizes a
comprehensive new data set on vehicle prices, sales, and characteristics. A
novel feature of the employed structural model is that the probability of non-
compliance detection for one firm depends on other firms' behavior as well as
its own. A more dispersed distribution in choices may cause a regulator to
question why some firms need to use large DEF tanks while others apparently
manage with small tanks. By coordinating on small tanks, the automakers
simultaneously reduce the probability of being detected by the regulator and
make their vehicles more attractive to car buyers (as the tank reduces cargo
space, a valuable vehicle feature). With the model and estimates of consumer
tastes and automaker costs, the project will conduct counterfactual simulation
to explore the following issues: (i) quantify the benefit of strengthening the
enforcement of emission standards; (ii) calculate the anti-competitive damage of
technology collusion compared to the competitive counterfactual; and (iii)
identify the demand and supply conditions most conducive to technology
collusion. The project advances the economics research and has regulatory and
policy implications on firm collusion, antitrust enforcement, and industry
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.