* 2049895
* Firm Relocation as Environmental Policy: Impacts on Agglomeration and the Environment
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Namrata Kala, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2023
* USD 249,998.00

As countries industrialize, trade-offs between promoting economic growth and
negative environment effects such as pollution and emissions become more
binding. Because environmental policies impact firm decisions, they provide a
lens to test theories of firm interactions that contribute to our understanding
of firm behavior. This research project will study the effects a policy which
relocated firms located in densely urban areas to industrial locations outside
the city. The goal was to move polluting firms out of high population density
areas so that they would affect fewer people. Because random drawings were held
to assign plots at the new location to firms as industrial plots became
available, the randomization makes the firms that relocated earlier comparable
to those that relocated later. This makes it possible to provide an improved
understanding of how the presence of industrial activity at a variety of scales
affects air quality and emissions in urban areas, workers’ choices of where to
live. Additionally, the proposal develops a new method of inferring air
pollution levels from historical high-resolution satellite images which can be
helpful whenever direct measurements are not available. This innovative design
allows the researchers allows researchers to assess the impact of industrial
policy on the environment. The results of this research will provide inputs into
environmental policy and thus establish the US as the global leader in
environment research and policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding aggregate
and distributional consequences of environmental policies is important to inform
policies that balance the growth-pollution trade-off. We use the randomized
removal of firms from city centers at different times to assess neighborhood-
level policy impacts on a range of outcomes such as agglomeration, entry and
exit, environmental quality, and land values. A key input to the analysis is
fine resolution air quality measures spanning a fifteen year period. The
proposed research will use deep learning methods applied to satellite imagery to
create pollution measures at a fine spatial and temporal resolution.
Furthermore, conditional on a firm’s assigned plot being in one of four size
categories, the specific plot that a firm allotted was also random. This
generates random variation in firms’ neighbors, as well as in location
characteristics such as proximity to infrastructure like roads. The project will
estimate how different aspects of firm location impact firm outcomes and how
these effects are heterogeneous depending on neighbors’ characteristics. In
studies of agglomeration and density, truly experimental variation is almost
entirely absent so that most identification is either quasi-experimental or
model-based. This study is the first to conduct a joint experimental analysis of
how firm density impacts environmental quality, firm outcomes, and
agglomeration. The results of this research will provide inputs into
environmental policy and thus establish the US as the global leader in
environment research and policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.