* 2049743
* Updating of Geophysics Computer Facility, University of Colorado/CIRES
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Craig Jones, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 74,113.00

Modern geological and geophysical science depends on acquiring, storing, and
analyzing data on computers. Data sets are often many terabytes in size, and
computational algorithms can be so complex that they might run continuously for
weeks on end. Computers that were last purchased by the geophysics group at the
University of Colorado, Boulder dated from before 2011; while these permitted
allowing work that was published in over 100 papers, these machines are no
longer capable of being updated to currently released operating systems and are
far slower than newly available computer systemsmachines. This project award
will permit the purchase of a new suite of computers and storage devices that
will renew the ability of the scientists in this group to acquire and analyze
new and existing datasets in a far more expedient manner. The research conducted
by this group includes (but is not limited to) understanding the structure and
evolution of continental lithosphere, the location and characterization of
earthquakes, seismic hazards associated with oil and gas development, the
physics of slow slip at large subduction zones, and exploratory development of
tsunami warning algorithms. The new equipment also improves our ability to
visualize data and results in more intuitive ways while supporting work from
graduate and undergraduate students as well as summer interns affiliated with
RESESS (Research Experiences for Community College Students) an REU site funded
by NSF under a separate award..&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This group of researchers
represents a coherent unit within the Department of Geological Sciences and
CIRES at the University of Colorado Boulder with mutual research interests in
seismology, tectonics, geodynamics, and an emphasis on field experiments. The
most common needs addressed here include large (10s of terabytes) amounts of
storage with highspeed access to a processing core, fast multicore machines for
specialized software, a large storage volume that is readily accessible from
multiple computers, computers where sophisticated visualizations can be created,
and smaller local platforms to accommodate the more routine accessing of
processed results, creation of routine graphics and associated writing. The four
PIs are actively working on research projects funded by NSF and other funding
agencies. Research conducted within this group occurs within the broad themes of
seismicity and hazards, continental deformation and structure, and geodynamics.
Much of the seismological work requires the collection and analysis of large
subsets of data acquired by portable field experiments as well as the
Transportable Array component of EarthScope and permanent seismic stations.
Other projects require the analysis of continuous datastreams from seismic
networks to identify, locate and characterize seismicity in different
environments. Other work requires the accumulation and analysis of
crystallographic fabrics for comparison with seismological constraints on
structures within the deep crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.