* 2049906
* DDRIE: Economic Consequences of Discrimination Against Minority Bosses by Subordinates
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Christopher Blattman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will use experimental methods to
study the causes and consequences of discrimination against minority managers
who are underrepresented in leadership positions. Prejudice, discrimination
especially aimed at minority manger, and racial and cultural barriers keep
productive people out of, or decrease their effectiveness in, the labor market.
Besides human costs, this mis-allocation of talent can slow economic growth,
thus preventing countries from achieving their potential to improve the welfare
of citizens as well as broaden opportunities for under-represented groups and
prevent the development of entrepreneurial talent in low income areas where
upward mobility may depend on entrepreneurship. The focus of this study is on a
specific type of discrimination: employeesâ€™ discrimination against minority
employers and supervisors. This will be one of the few studies that uses an
innovative approach to study discrimination from below. The findings of this
study will be helpful in understanding the extent to which discrimination from
subordinate workers thwart the upward mobility of minority groups. It will
inform on policies to reduce discrimination in the workplace and provide equal
opportunity for all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to answer three main
questions: (i) Do minority employers and supervisors face discrimination from
below in labor markets? (ii) What are the underlying motivations?; and (iii)
What are the economic consequences of such discrimination from below? This
research will use two field experiments to test for the presence of bottom-up
discrimination, and study its economic consequences for minorities in the labor
market. This research makes some contributions to the growing empirical
literature on the economics of discrimination. This is the first study to
provide experimental evidence on discrimination from below in real world field
setting. Second, unlike most field experiments on discrimination in labor
markets, the experimental design allows for an analysis of the underlying
motivations for discrimination from below. The results of this research has
important policy implications to decrease labor market discrimination and
improve the efficiency of labor markets and thus increase economic outcomes. In
addition to economic growth, the results of this research project has the
potential to provide inputs into policies to decrease inequality as well as
expand entrepreneurial and managerial opportunities for under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.