* 2049603
* EAGER: Development of Techniques for 3D mapping at Macroscopic Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Terry Pavlis, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 62,789.00

Recent technological breakthroughs afford unprecedented new opportunities for
high-resolution, three-dimensional (3D) visualization and mapping of Earth’s
surface. This project is aimed at exploiting this technology to develop new
field techniques for 3D geologic mapping. Developing these techniques is
potentially transformative because conventional techniques based on fixed-scale
paper maps were severely handicapped by low resolution issues that are resolved
with modern technology. As these techniques develop, geosciences will have
unprecedented abilities to resolve 3D geometry of rock bodies and this new
ability will open new avenues of research across a spectrum of the geosciences.
Basic science applications will ultimately improve understanding of subsurface
geologic bodies and this enhanced understanding will have economic impacts in
extractive industries (mining and petroleum industries) as well as environmental
applications (groundwater modeling, hazards, and shallow subsurface modeling).
Finally, 3D visualizations of geologic structures developed in the study will be
important new educational resources for the broader geoscience community
including the University of Texas El Paso, a tier 1 Hispanic Serving
Institution, and will provide cutting edge technology access to those Hispanic
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geosciences are in the midst of a revolution
brought on by 3D visualization. The development of Structure-from-
Motion/Multiview Stereo (SM) models provide unprecedented new opportunities for
3D visualization of Earth’s surface. In particular, there are new opportunities
to understand the geometry of geologic bodies by 3D mapping at accuracies
unattainable a few years ago. Bedrock geologic mapping has yet to make extensive
use of this new technology. This project is an attempt to facilitate the
transformation of traditional field-based, map-scale studies to fully 3D mapping
methods. High-precision 3D geologic models and their ultimate derivative product
- a fully 4D analysis – is only possible when we can routinely produce high
resolution 3D maps. This project aims to contribute to this goal by: 1)
Developing SM model construction at map scale using a manned aircraft in two
settings (desert, arctic) where this technology should be transformative; 2)
Conducting live 3D mapping experiments with different software packages, based
on regional and local SM models acquired in the desert setting as well as
experiment with using unmanned aerials systems (aka drones) as a field tool
during 3D field mapping; and 3) Developing a bridge from GIS to the Strabospot
database, utilizing our expertise in the open source program QGIS with an
objective of providing a streamlined application for incorporation of legacy
paper map data into Strabospot aimed at senior researchers who hold most of this
archive. These tools will enhance the work of field researchers across the
geosciences, and prevent loss of legacy data as researchers
retire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.