* 2049673
* Larval dispersal capacity and realized connectivity: integration of physical transport models, larval plasticity, and gene flow in the north central Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Peter Marko, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 778,672.00

Many important marine species live on or attached to the bottom of the ocean as
adults, and they move between places and colonize new areas during microscopic
larval stages that drift with ocean currents. Most larvae are too small to find
or track in the ocean, so we know little about how long larvae can survive and
how fast they grow under natural conditions. This limits our ability to
understand how marine species colonize remote habitats, or how much potential
there is for long-distance gene exchange that can help populations adapt to
changing conditions in the sea. Because larvae are so hard to follow, their
movement is often estimated indirectly from transport models of ocean currents
and analyses of shared genetic variation among populations. These approaches are
rarely combined, however, and the larval component of transport models is often
based on unrealistic estimates of how long larvae can stay viable. This project
is simultaneously generating estimates of larval dispersal from population
genomic modeling and transport models of larval movement. The larval movement
models are grounded in data from larval rearing experiments that mimic the
natural food and temperature conditions that larvae experience in the North
Central Pacific. The combined approach is helping explain how marine species
colonize and persist in very isolated island areas and how likely they are to
exchange genes across vast oceanic distances. The project is providing
interdisciplinary training for three graduate students and several undergraduate
research assistants. In addition, the investigators are partnering with a
science outreach coordinator to engage Hawaiian high school students in field
and lab work. This activity is aligning educational goals and assessments with a
culture-and place-based framework for science education, Nā Hopena A‘o (HĀ),
developed by the Hawaii Department of Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central goal of this project is to understand rates and patterns of long-
distance connectivity between the Hawaiian archipelago and other remote island
chains of the tropical north central Pacific. Specifically, the investigators
are integrating empirically-derived data on larval life histories, biophysical
transport models, and population genetic inferences about gene flow to
understand how patterns of dispersal and connectivity in marine systems are
affected by the capacity of larvae of many species to prolong development and
delay metamorphosis. They are measuring planktonic larval duration under
environmentally relevant conditions to test the capacity of larvae to extend
development in the dispersal pathways leading to and from the Hawaiian Islands.
Results from these laboratory experiments, as well as water-column data gathered
over the past two decades, will be used in larval transport models that
incorporate estimates of temperature, food availability, and varying life-
history traits. Population genomic data gathered from the same species in the
field will assess the role of gene flow in shaping genomic structure between
Hawai'i and other isolated archipelagos and islands in the region, identify
larval dispersal pathways to and from Hawai'i, test contrasting historical
models of gene flow, and estimate rates of larval dispersal in and out of
Hawai'i. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Biological
Oceanography Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.