* 2049357
* Collaborative Research: Mixing and the Meridional Overturning Circulation in the Modern and Glacial Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Andreas Schmittner, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 612,636.00

Small-scale mixing in the ocean interior affects the large-scale global
meridional overturning circulation (MOC) and tracer distributions. However,
little is known about how and why mixing has changed in the past, nor what the
effects of those changes were on circulation, climate and biogeochemical cycles.
This project will examine ocean mixing in the modern and last glacial maximum
(LGM) ocean using a combination of numerical modeling and existing observations.
In the past, only mixing near sources of turbulence have been considered (near-
field effects), but mixing more distant from turbulence sources, carried away by
internal waves or wave/current/eddy interactions (far field effects) are now
possible to include. New parameterization concepts of diapycnal mixing will be
explored in the global coarse-resolution ocean component of an intermediate
complexity climate model. Parameterizations of mesoscale eddies will also be
evaluated. The model will be calibrated for the modern ocean with modern
observations including physical and biogeochemical tracer distributions, and
microstructure-based diffusivity estimates. Subsequently, it will be applied to
the glacial ocean in a suite of experiments that cover uncertainties in forcing,
circulation state and tidal energy input to the internal wave field. Glacial
sediment data will be used to evaluate the model simulations and test hypotheses
regarding effects of stratification, circulation geometry and tides on diapycnal
mixing and effects of southern hemisphere wind changes on the carbon cycle and
atmospheric carbon dioxide. The project would improve modeling of paleoclimate
and future climate, and foster collaborations between physical oceanographers
and paleoceanographers. New model code with user guide and documentation will be
posted online with a webinar on model use provided. The project will support an
early career post-doctoral investigator and a student. Personnel will be
involved in outreach activities at a local museum and in public discussion
forums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixing and the meridional overturning circulation
during the last glacial period remain controversial. Shoaling of the interface
between North Atlantic Deep Water and Antarctic Bottom Water and increased
stratification are two mechanisms that have been suggested to reduce diapycnal
mixing. On the other hand, a shift of tidal energy input from the continental
shelves to the deep ocean due to sea level lowering has been hypothesized to
increase diapycnal mixing. A parameterization of far field mixing effects will
be incorporated into the Oregon State University (OSU) version of the
intermediate-complexity University of Victoria (UVic) global climate model.
Tuning to modern ocean conditions using modern observations followed by
assessment of LGM performance using available paleo observations will permit the
examination of these science goals: to investigate how diapycnal mixing in the
LGM compares to modern magnitudes; how potential differences may have affected
the LGM MOC; and what the consequences of such effects would have been for the
global carbon cycle. The parameterizations representing far field effects,
tested and tuned in the OSU-UVic model, will also be ported to the newest
version of the Modular Ocean Model (MOM6) of the Community Earth System Model
(CESM), though extensive tuning, testing and evaluation with CESM is not
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.