* 2049931
* Understanding the protein composition and dynamics of the nuclear envelope in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2024
* Yangnan Gu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 12/31/2024
* USD 950,013.00

The nuclear envelope (NE) isolates and organizes the genome. It selectively
accumulates proteins that carry out vital cellular functions and represents the
hallmark of eukaryotic cells. Despite the increased appreciation of the NE as a
crucial structural and signaling platform, knowledge on the composition and
function of NE proteins is limited, particularly in plants, which significantly
limits our understanding of plant NE function and its critical influence on
various aspects of plant physiology and cell biology. This project aims to
assemble the inventory of NE membrane proteins in the model organism Arabidopsis
as a critical step towards a comprehensive understanding of the plant NE
constituents and functions. In addition, this project will investigate molecular
mechanisms that regulate the NE protein homeostasis through specialized
proteolytic system. This research will generate valuable NE-associated protein
databases and innovative protein identification tools for the plant and NE
biology research community and deeply engage STEM and URM undergraduates in
cutting-edge training in genetics, proteomics, cell biology, and molecular
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies discovered a range of novel plant
NE components and their significance in diverse biological processes, providing
new insights into conserved eukaryotic NE functions as well as NE-associated
mechanisms unique to plants. This project will deploy the newly developed
proximity labeling technology coupled with label-free quantitative mass
spectrometry to make rapid advances in establishing a precise and comprehensive
view of the protein landscape in the plant NE. Using a combined genetic,
proteomic, and cell biological approach, this project will also define key
regulatory components of a newly identified inner nuclear membrane-associated
protein degradation pathway that is critical in maintaining the NE function,
adding a new branch to the organelle-specific membrane-associated proteolytic
system in higher eukaryotes. This research promises to significantly advance our
understanding of fundamental biological principles underlying the nuclear
membrane and nuclear function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.