* 2049507
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Real Estate Speculation and its Impact on Agricultural Access to Water Resources in Contexts of Rapid Urbanization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Donald Nonini, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 24,954.00

In the past three decades, residential real estate markets have undergone
significant growth, consonant with the shift from industrial production to
financial markets as a principle locus of investment. Residential real estate in
particular has become more common, accelerating patterns of land speculation and
urbanization in areas undergoing agricultural decline. The socio-ecological
effects of these transformations are vast and include processes such as the
displacement and segregation of rural populations, livelihood change and work
precaritization, deforestation, water privatization, and increases in climate
vulnerability. In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate
student in anthropology in the methods of empirical data collection and
analysis, this doctoral dissertation project provides a scientific analysis of
the economic and political practices driving these processes of landscape
transformation as well as the experiences of rural communities in areas impacted
by rapid urbanization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research
project examines the relationship between real estate speculation and water
resource access among agricultural producers in a context of rapid urbanization.
It asks three questions about the processes of land speculation and real estate
development in rural areas: (1) How have different rural communities experienced
the pressures for urbanization and the process of deruralization implied by it?
(2) Which are the main groups acquiring residential property in the area and
what are the main uses assigned to those properties? (3) What are the
rationalities of governmental officials in prioritizing the urbanization of
water supply promoted by real estate actors? To answer these questions the
doctoral student will analyze the histories of two former agricultural
production properties which have been targeted as residential development sites.
The researcher will also conduct archival research, oral histories and semi-
structured with residents, state officials, developers, urban planners, and
other relevant groups. These histories will contribute to scientific
understanding about the relationship between rapid urbanization and the
financialization of real estate markets, and to what extent human-environment
relations are defined by the growth of global financial
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.