* 2049848
* Collaborative Research: Testing the timing and direction of mantle exhumation at the Iberia-Newfoundland margins with low-temperature thermochronology
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Michael Eddy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 46,149.00

The change from continents to seafloor is an important tectonic process that
leads to the formation of oceanic basins. Continental breakup results in extreme
thinning of continental crust and exposure of mantle lithosphere to the seafloor
before the start of seafloor spreading. The best-studied margin is the Iberia-
Newfoundland margin in the North Atlantic. Previous work on the Iberia-
Newfoundland margin provides the foundation for our understanding of the
structure of these basins. However, multiple models have been proposed, each
with slight differences. The timing, direction, and number of faults have direct
implications on the evolution of these margins, as well as subsequent seawater
alteration, which affects the habitability of the seafloor. This study will
address questions on timing and structure of faulting that leads to separation
of continents. This study will use the minerals apatite and zircon to evaluate
the timing and direction of faulting, as well as when the margin cooled enough
to allow key chemical reactions to occur. These key reactions are believed to be
critical to understanding the evolution of life on Earth. The project will
engage with a USC Communications PhD student to produce a podcast mini-series
that explores the scientific research in this proposal and scientific
communication practices for diverse audiences. In addition, a graduate student
in the PIs lab will initiate the first Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI)
poster session for graduate and undergraduate students from the Department of
Earth Sciences and Department of Marine and Environmental Biology at
USC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complex interactions between faulting, magmatism,
and serpentinization at hyper-extended margins have fueled geophysical,
geochemical, and numerical modeling investigations for decades. However, there
is still debate over first order questions about timing and mechanics of the
transition from continental breakup to mantle exhumation and seafloor spreading.
These include the temporal relationship of faults that accommodate mantle
exhumation, the number and directionality of faults in the exhumed mantle
section, and the thermal history of the lithosphere during mantle exhumation and
seafloor alteration. This project is the first comprehensive low temperature
thermochronology study to constrain the cooling history of the rocks exposed
within and adjacent to the exhumed mantle section of the Iberia-Newfoundland
margins, the only hyper-extended margin that has been systemically sampled. The
project will use zircon and apatite recovered from igneous intrusions, syn-rift
sediments, and exhumed continental crust from nine drill cores that make up a
horizontal transect across the exhumed mantle section. These data will be used
to track lithospheric cooling below ~200C (zircon (U-Th)/He) and ~80C (apatite
(U-Th)/He), within the thermal window of serpentinization and ophicalcite
formation, respectively. The results will be used to test proposed exhumation
models and address three overarching research questions: 1) What is the temporal
relationship between the faulting that accommodates mantle exhumation and
seafloor spreading? 2) Was the mantle exhumed along one major detachment or
multiple faults? 3) How does the timing of mantle exhumation faulting relate to
other tectonic and petrologic processes, including the onset of seafloor
spreading, serpentinization, and magmatism? These data will be used to evaluate
whether faulting, serpentinization, and/or magmatism occurred over progressive
exhumation from east to west or occurred in several locations simultaneously,
with key implications for the transition from continental breakup to seafloor
spreading and the relationship between magmatism, lithospheric extension, and
mid-ocean ridge development. The rates and extents of serpentinization and
ophicalcite formation will also have implications for understanding the
development of conditions suitable for life on Earth. The project will engage
with a USC Communications PhD student to produce a podcast mini-series that
explores the scientific research in this proposal and scientific communication
practices for diverse audiences. In addition, a graduate student in the PIs lab
will initiate the first Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) poster session
for graduate and undergraduate students from the Department of Earth Sciences
and Department of Marine and Environmental Biology at
USC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.