* 2049300
* Collaborative research: The Intergenerational Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Jenna Nobles, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 12/31/2023
* USD 174,032.00

This project examines the effects of COVID-19 exposure during pregnancy on birth
outcomes, over time, and across different groups defined by different sources of
disadvantage. The COVID-19 pandemic is a large shock likely to affect infant
health through multiple pathways including maternal infection, stress and
anxiety, economic hardship, and access to prenatal care. Because these factors
differ across groups in the United States, the impact of COVID-19 on birth
outcomes will likely be stronger among groups with fewer advantages and certain
demographic groups, exacerbating differences in the United States. These effects
are critical to understand because birth outcomes predict health and
socioeconomic attainment throughout the life course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study relies on causal inference techniques exploiting variation in infection
rates across time and place to capture the consequences of the pandemic on
differences in birth outcomes, in particular intrauterine growth restriction, a
key predictor of early-life cognition, education, and ultimately earnings. Birth
records obtained at the state level with early release are used to provide the
earliest possible evidence. Research focuses on six states that provide large
and diverse samples across areas where the pandemic has unfolded with
significant variation. Time-varying data on COVID incidence and mortality, and
local official responses are linked to these data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.