* 2049517
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the source and flux of dissolved organic carbon released from methane seeps to the deep-ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Laura Lapham, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2024
* USD 543,055.00

Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) is a key component of the oceanâ€™s food web and
carbon cycle, and carbon exchanged between oceanic DOC and the atmosphere has
influenced atmospheric CO2 levels on timescales ranging from recent decades to
the geologic past. Production by marine algae in the surface ocean is the
largest source of DOC and its effects on the ocean carbon cycle are widely
appreciated. However, the contribution of DOC from additional sources such as
rivers, hydrothermal vents, and methane seeps and their impact on ocean ecology
and chemistry are not well understood. Each source differs in terms of its
biological utilization and age, which affects the storage and distribution of
DOC among the ocean basins. Methane seeps located along continental margins are
particularly significant because they may transfer globally significant
quantities of carbon stored below the seafloor as natural gas and gas hydrate to
the oceans. This project will investigate the production, flux, composition and
potential for biological utilization of DOC at Hydrate Ridge, located offshore
Oregon. Hydrate Ridge is a prominent methane seep with massive accumulations of
gas hydrate and a node of the Ocean Observatories Initiative telecommunications
cabled array on the Juan De Fuca tectonic plate, which provides a continuous
stream of real-time regional oceanographic data. We will sample and chemically
characterize methane, DOC, and other materials to provide information about
where the materials originated (deep vs shallow), how they have been chemically
altered, to what extent they may feed deep ocean organisms, or contribute to the
long term storage of DOC in the ocean. Experiments and analysis will be
conducted using sediment cores and bottom water samples collected using either
the remotely operated vehicle Jason or the human occupied vehicle Alvin during a
7-day ocean expedition. Additionally, this project will place osmotically-driven
pumps on the seafloor to continuously sample fluids for approximately one year,
thereby allowing us to monitor the movement of methane and DOC expelled from the
seafloor to the ocean and constrain processes that regulate the release of
carbon to the oceans at methane seeps. This project will support one graduate
student and several undergraduates from a community college in Maryland and a
college located in a lower-income urban center in southeastern Massachusetts. We
will disseminate project findings to the public with a series of videos for
public TV. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will investigate the production,
flux and reactivity of methane-derived dissolved organic carbon (DOC) from
methane (CH4) seeps at Hydrate Ridge, Offshore Oregon. The study will address
four fundamental questions to determine the significance of CH4-derived DOC
within the ocean carbon cycle: (1) How much CH4-derived fossil DOC do seeps
contribute to the oceans? (2) To what extent is CH4-derived C incorporated into
DOC during anaerobic oxidation of CH4? (3) Is seep DOC bioavailable or
recalcitrant when released into the deep ocean? (4) How does the flux of DOC to
the water column vary over time? We will employ an interdisciplinary strategy
that includes in situ sampling, laboratory incubations, and a comprehensive
analytical geochemistry program. Data from the Ocean Observatories Initiative
Regional Cabled Array at Southern Hydrate Ridge will be used to provide context
for field and experimental data. The composition and abundance of organic and
inorganic chemical species along with the stable and radiocarbon isotope
composition of pore water, bulk sediment, and water column C pools will be used
to identify DOC sources and quantify fluxes from cold seeps characterized by a
range of advection rates. The centerpiece of the investigation will be a 7-day
research cruise to Hydrate Ridge to collect sediments, pore fluids, and water
column samples, and deploy OsmoSamplers for continuous time series fluid
sampling. The results will form the foundation for estimating the contribution
of CH4-derived DOC to the oceanic DOC pool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.