* 2049968
* CSR:Small: Rethinking Filesystem Encryption and Auditing in the Era of Byte-Addressable Non-Volatile Memories
* CSE,CNS
* 08/03/2020,07/31/2023
* Amro Awad, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 07/31/2023
* USD 286,105.00

Emerging Non-Volatile Memories (NVMs) promise convergence of memory and storage
into a single system that is both fast and persistent. Existing security
functions for storage systems were designed for slower storage devices, which
create a performance bottleneck for faster NVMs. This research will investigate
high performance security solutions for NVM based storage systems. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The first research thrust will focus on encrypting data for emerging
NVMs. The second thrust investigates implementation of auditing mechanisms for
NVM based storage systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will train
graduate and undergraduate students on architecting secure systems. The results
from this research will inform several undergraduate and graduate courses.
Students from underrepresented groups will be encouraged to participate in this
project. The results will be published in reputed conferences and journals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project data and results will be published and
maintained in both private and public repositories. The project will use Github
site: https://github.com/sacagroup/sacagroup.github.io. All project data, codes
and results will be maintained for at least 5 years after the end of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.