* 2049664
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Southeast Pacific and Southern Ocean Seawater Isotopes Determined from US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE and GP17-ANT Samples
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Amy Wagner, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2024
* USD 239,096.00

The stable isotopic composition of the oxygen atom in seawater (d18O) is
controlled by evaporation, precipitation, and riverine or glacial meltwater
input. Most of the deep interior water masses in the ocean are formed or
modified in the Southern Ocean and sink to fill the deep layers that circulate
throughout the world’s oceans. The d18O signatures in seawater can be used as
tracers for these sub-surface water masses once they sink to depth. The Southern
Ocean and South Pacific are critical locations for water mass formation and
thus, for understanding global overturning circulation, carbon cycling and
climate dynamics. However, data on the d18O of seawater, particularly in the
sub-surface, is virtually nonexistent for the South Pacific and Southern Ocean.
Moreover, our understanding of past temperature and oceanic processes based on
the d18O signature in marine carbonates (e.g. corals and foraminifera) have
relied on the assumption that variations in the oxygen isotopic composition of
the sub-surface water masses are nominal through time, which can be directly
tested on a wider basis using new technologies during this project.
Investigators will conduct analyses of seawater d18O from samples collected from
depth transects during the US GEOTRACES science expedition to the South Pacific
(GP17-OCE) and the Amundsen Sea sector of the Antarctic continental margin
(GP17-ANT). This ocean region is of particular significance because it is
experiencing rapid environmental changes in the past few decades, including the
fastest melting of ice shelves around the entire Antarctic. This project will
support the development of diverse involvement in teaching and outreach efforts
in a primarily undergraduate and Hispanic serving institution. The outreach
activities will provide ample opportunities to engage students from
underrepresented groups in both formal and informal settings.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;It is well-established from first principles that d18O and d2H of
seawater have a positive relationship to salinity, but regional variations in
the isotopic relationship of seawater to salinity are poorly constrained.
Temperature reconstructions relying on d18O in calcite microfossils biologically
precipitated in equilibrium with seawater and preserved in marine sediments are
only quantitative if the seawater d18O (d18Osw) in which that carbonate was
precipitated is known. Despite the reliance of these paleo-estimations on the
d18O of modern seawater, surface measurements are few and far between and sub-
surface data in the South Pacific and Southern Oceans is even more limited.
Filling this fundamental gap in data to quantify the influence of precipitation,
evaporation and glacial melt water on the d18O and d2H of interior seawater
masses is globally relevant to our understanding of ocean circulation and
broader climate dynamics. The development and improvement of new laser-based
spectroscopy techniques such as off-axis integrated cavity output spectroscopy
(OA-ICOS) and cavity ring-down spectroscopy, allows for seawater d18O and d2H
analyses to be run quickly and cost effectively compared to traditional IRMS
(Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometry). A core aim of this project is to compare and
contrast IRMS and OA-ICOS analyses to address accuracy, precision and offsets
between methods. Obtaining d18Osw directly contributes to the GP17-OCE stated
aims of characterizing near- and far-field trace element and isotope (TEI)
inputs and to the GP17-ANT stated aims of quantifying gradients in TEI
distributions and characterizing, glacial meltwater inputs in the Amundsen Sea
and Southern Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.