* 2049088
* CAREER: Multi-scale Assessment of Biomechanical Alterations in Tricuspid Valves Following Pregnancy
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Rouzbeh Amini, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 495,941.00

The four one-way valves of the heart open and close to prevent the backflow of
blood, and they do this more than three billion times during an average person's
lifetime. During pregnancy, the workload of the heart increases, and the total
volume of blood in the body rises by 40 percent to accommodate circulation in
the placenta. Such an immense increase in cardiac workload has been shown to
cause changes in the shape and structure of the heart valves. Currently, it is
not clearly understood how changes in the mechanical loads on the heart valve
during pregnancy lead to such modifications in shape and structure. It is known
that the cells in heart valves (and in other soft tissues) try to maintain a
stable equilibrium in their mechanical environment. Any deviations from the
normal environment can cause cells to respond in an attempt to restore this
balance. For example, cells may produce more proteins to build a stiffer and
stronger surrounding structure in order to lower the amount of mechanical strain
they experience. In this Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER)
project, the PI combines experimental measurements and computer simulations to
determine how changes in the heart's output and mechanical loading affect the
tricuspid valve (the least understood valve in the heart) at the cellular level.
The project is expected to widely impact the field of biomechanics, society in
general, and engineering education. Specifically, this research project is
expected to add knowledge of how mechanical loading affects cells and their
surrounding structure, which is useful for future studies of the heart valves
and other soft tissue. It will also provide useful information about how valve
dysfunctions are brought on by pulmonary hypertension, which is a major cause of
tricuspid valve disease in the broader public as well as in pregnant women. The
educational goals include engaging K-12 students via hands-on STEM activities
involving heart biomechanics during summer camp programs and monthly mentoring
sessions at the University of Akron. The PI will also incorporate the research
outcomes into courses offered at the University of Akron as well as
supplementary educational materials (including relevant homework assignments) in
articles submitted to scholarly journals for circulation to the scientific
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three scientific objectives.
First, to measure the effects of cardiac output, loading environment, and
extracellular matrix composition on the macroscale mechanical response,
microscale extracellular matrix realignment, and cell nuclei of tricuspid valves
before and after pregnancy in a bovine model. Second, to develop a mechanistic,
multi-scale finite element model to connect the mechanical environment of the
organized collagen and elastin components, the disorganized matrix, and the
cells to the tissue-level mechanical loading/deformation in tricuspid valves
before and after pregnancy. Next, to test the hypothesis that the complex valve
geometry and the complex microstructure of the extracellular matrix provide a
uniform homeostatic mechanical environment at the cellular/extracellular matrix
level in response to the chances in physiological mechanical loading that occurs
during and after pregnancy, along with the hypothesis that the alteration in the
valves following pregnancy is a mechanobiological remodeling response to restore
the tissue towards its pre-pregnancy mechanical state. And finally, to test the
hypothesis that to restore the homeostatic mechanical environment, proteins that
contribute to the stiffness of the extracellular matrix and nuclei are more
prevalent in tricuspid valves during pregnancy. The educational objective is to
inspire pre-collegiate students, especially those from underrepresented groups,
to pursue higher education and careers in STEM as well as to inspire
appreciation of multi-scale biomechanics within a general audience. This will be
accomplished by: 1) developing a summer camp outreach program for K12 students
that includes hands-on STEM activities; 2) implementing monthly mentorship
clinics at the University of Akron for pre-collegiate students; 3) developing
YouTube and iTunes videos to show experiments and simulations related to multi-
scale biomechanics. In addition, the research results will be integrated into
classroom materials that will be used at the University of Akron and
disseminated more broadly through publication in engineering education
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.