* 2049127
* Thermal conductivity of lower mantle minerals and outer core alloys studied by combined fast pulsed laser and optical spectroscopy techniques
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Alexander Goncharov, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 327,856.00

Thermal convection in the Earth’s mantle drives plate tectonics. This process
transports heat from within the planet, in its core and mantle, to the surface.
Heat transport through the mantle is crucial for maintaining the geodynamo in
the Earth's core, and the magnetic field which shields the surface from the
solar wind. Mantle dynamics depends on the rate of heat transfer by convection,
conduction (contact), and radiation (e.g., light). Quantifying the thermal
conductivity of mantle and core materials is, thus, critical for understanding
Earth’s thermal system, dynamics, and evolution. It is, however, challenging
because of the extreme pressures and temperatures prevailing in Earth’s deep
interior. Here, the researchers measure the thermal conductivity of lower-mantle
minerals and core Fe-rich alloys. They carry out experiments on synthetic
materials compressed at the tips of two opposing diamonds, which produces the
relevant high pressures. They use high-power lasers to heat up the specimens and
vary their temperature. Conductive and radiative thermal properties are
extracted using state-of-the-art spectroscopic techniques previously developed
by the team. The project gradually unveils the physics of thermal transport at
extreme conditions. It advances the Earth Sciences field, as well as adjacent
fields in Materials Sciences with potential energy applications. It provides
support and training to one postdoctoral associate at Carnegie Institution of
Washington, and outreach towards undergraduate and high-school students. The
project also fosters an international collaboration with European
scientists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The thermal conductivity of materials in
Earth’s interior is a key parameter in controlling the thermal history and
dynamics of the planet. Thermal properties constrain processes involved in
planetary accretion and differentiation, the thermal evolution of mantle and
core, and the generation of Earth’s magnetic field. Here, the team focusses on
constraining more accurately the heat flow through the outer core and core-
mantle boundary (CMB). Experiments in the laser-heated diamond anvil cell (DAC)
are combined with modeling of deep Earth temperature profiles. The team applies
transient heating and broad band optical spectroscopy, two novel techniques they
previously develop; these allow quantifying the conductive and radiative
conductivities of the thermal boundary layer. The researchers develop a new
technique – the "pulsed electric conductivity" technique – which applied in
combination with transient heating allows quantifying the thermal conductivity
of the outer core. These experiments are performed on Fe-rich alloys (including
the melts), and high-quality relevant minerals (e.g., single crystals of
bridgmanite) synthesized in large-volume devices or in situ in the DAC. The
starting materials are highly homogeneous glasses fused together in a gas-mixing
aerodynamic levitation laser furnace. The project outcomes will provide accurate
and consistent estimates of the heat flux through the core and the CMB. These
results have strong implications for the understanding of the present-day heat
flux at the CMB, the thermal history of Earth and heat transport mechanisms at
the bottom of the lower mantle (e.g., via
superplumes).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.