* 2049809
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Testing the Effects of Facial Sexual Dimorphism on Men’s Selective Attention, Implicit Association, and Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Carolyn Hodges-Simeon, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 02/28/2022
* USD 9,504.00

Faces are the primary focus of attention during human interaction. Although
humans find different people’s faces easy to recognize, faces are in fact highly
variable. One way in which faces vary is on the masculine-to-feminine dimension.
Masculine faces are those with broader jaws, thicker brow ridges and longer
chins than feminine faces. Studies have shown that people rate masculine faces
as belonging to more physically dominant and aggressive individuals. These
perceptions may affect decision making in everyday life, such as who we choose
to lead organizations or perform certain tasks. While previous studies have
aided our understanding of individuals’ perceptions of dominance, it does not
reveal why they do so. This project examines how faces differing in masculinity
capture attention, affect memory, and impact perceptions of threat. A hypothesis
is that faces with high levels of facial masculinity are perceived as more
threatening and that this increases their attention and memory for them. Results
of this research have the potential to inform our understanding of the cognitive
processes which underlie our face perceptions and provide a methodological basis
to conduct future studies to understand why highly masculine individuals are
treated with deference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments can provide tests of
the effects of facial masculinity on observers’ dominance and threat
perceptions. However, most experiments testing the effects of manipulating
facial sexual dimorphism on observers’ perceptions have relied on forced choice
paradigms, which have significant drawbacks. The current research uses an
enhanced methodology to examine the hypothesis that human attention
automatically prioritizes processing of masculine faces, and that observers’
selective attention to masculine faces is because they signal threat.
Participants in the study are college students. The basic experimental paradigm
has participants complete self-reported ratings of physical dominance, state and
trait anxiety levels, and their body dimensions (height, weight, grip strength
and chest strength). These measures, collected prior to the experiments, are
used to quantify participants physical dominance and anxiety and serve as
covariates in the analyses. Participants complete one of four experiments. Both
the Dot Probe and Flanker Task test if participants selectively attend to
masculinized men’s faces when they are not instructed to. For the Dot Probe
task, participants are presented with two faces varying in masculinity, which is
followed by the presentation of a target shape, either a square or diamond.
Participants must classify the shape as quickly as they can. For the Flanker
Task, participants judge the orientation of a centrally presented target letter
(i.e., upright, or upside-down) while ignoring flanking faces varying in
masculinity. The lexical decision task tests whether participants automatically
associate these faces with the concept of threat. Participants judge whether a
letter string is a word, while ignoring a simultaneously presented face varying
on sexual dimorphism. A portion of the letter strings are words related to the
concept of threat. Participants are assumed to be fastest to classify a letter
string as a word when it is a threat word, and the presented face has been
masculinized. In the rating recognition memory test participants are presented
with a sequence of men’s faces varying on sexual dimorphism and asked to rate
how dangerous each man appears. Participants then complete a recognition memory
phase, in which they are presented with another sequence of faces, some of which
were presented in the rating phase, and asked to judge whether they saw each
face in the rating phase. Better memory for masculinized faces that are
perceived as more threatening, assuming threat stimuli is more salient at
initial encoding, is assessed with the recognition memory
task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.