* 2049303
* Vagrancy and Colonization by Birds: Escape from Climate Extinction?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Lisa Manne, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2023
* USD 64,289.00

Wild birds often turn up in unexpected places, far away from where they breed or
usually migrate. These presumably lost individuals are called “vagrants”.
Historically, they have viewed as sad events – an unfortunate consequence of
something gone wrong. This project will explore an alternative perspective –
that vagrancy is a normal event, caused by young birds from rapidly growing
populations exploring the world for new, less-crowded places to live. This idea
will be tested by placing trackers on 50 Lesser Black-backed Gulls captured in
New York and Massachusetts, then recording their positions by satellite for
roughly 2 years. The species is not known to breed nearby. The closest major
breeding colonies are in Greenland and those colonies have been growing quickly.
Therefore, researchers expect the tracked gulls to be from Greenland and for
some to return there. In addition to tracking data, genetic testing will be used
to link individuals captured in New England to populations in Greenland or
perhaps Iceland. Data from this project will be useful in understanding birds’
abilities to respond to a changing climate. In particular, this work will reveal
the extent to which some seabirds actively explore and adapt to a changing
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use ICARUS GPS units to track
movements of 50 Lesser Black-backed Gulls trapped by cannon net at Fire Island,
New York and Nantucket Island, Massachusetts. Based on position data from the
GPS units, three predictions will be tested: (1) Wintering birds trapped in
North America will return to Greenland. This prediction is based on the
observation that the greatest population growth of Black-backed Gulls anywhere
during the period of largest increase of wintering birds in North America
(1990-present) was in Greenland. (2) Non-adult birds (&lt;4 years old,
determined by plumage) will engage in more exploratory behavior, as measured by
First Passage Time Analysis, than adult birds. (3) Birds trapped in North
America will be derived from Greenland populations. This will be tested by
population genetics, based on genetic analysis of feathers from birds captured
in New England with those from birds in Greenland, Iceland and western
Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.