* 2049298
* Clumped Oxygen Isotope Signature of Marine Dissolved Oxygen
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* David Johnston, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2023
* USD 545,517.00

The balance between photosynthetic production of oxygen and biological
consumption of oxygen in the marine environment plays a critical role in
regulating the composition of Earth’s atmosphere and the long-term stability of
Earth’s climate. The ability to accurately measure the production and
consumption of oxygen in the marine environment is central to building an
informed understanding of the past, present, and future of oxygen and Earth’s
climate. Measurement of the abundance of different oxygen isotopes (i.e.
oxygen-16, oxygen-17, and oxygen-18) in dissolved oxygen in seawater is a
powerful analytical tool that can be used to determine the magnitude of
photosynthesis and biological oxygen consumption. This is possible because
biological reactions that produce or consume oxygen tend to preferentially
utilize different isotopes of oxygen. This analytical tool has been used for two
decades to investigate ocean primary productivity, however, there is still
significant uncertainty in how biogeochemical processes such as respiration
preferentially select and utilize different oxygen isotopes. To remedy this
uncertainty, researchers at Harvard University will perform a lab-based
calibration and sea-going field deployment of emerging oxygen isotope analyses
that target molecules of oxygen that contain two rare oxygen isotopes inside of
one molecule (a.k.a. “clumps”, i.e. 17O18O and 18O18O). This work will quantify
the clumped oxygen isotope signatures of several of the most consequential
oxygen-involving reactions that occur in the marine ecosystem. These oxygen
isotope signatures will be used to refine current methods and assumptions for
the measurement of gross oxygen production in the global ocean. This research
will also help train the next generation of Earth scientists through the
mentorship of one graduate student and two undergraduate students. This project
will also facilitate the participation of researchers in content creation for a
national science competition for middle and high school students that reaches
thousands of students annually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The application of clumped
O2 isotope measurements to dissolved oxygen in seawater is poised to give a
greater mechanistic view of gross primary productivity and marine oxygen cycling
than previously attainable. To realize the analytical potential of clumped
oxygen isotope methods, these researchers will characterize the clumped oxygen
isotope effects associated with enzyme-level reactions, whole organisms, and the
marine water column. Enzyme-level studies will include isotope characterization
of a terminal-O2 reductase and enzymes that metabolize reactive oxygen species
such as superoxide and hydrogen peroxide. Organism studies will target common
and numerically abundant phototrophs and heterotrophs to explore the expected
breadth of isotope signatures and fractionation factors in the marine water
column. Marine water column dissolved oxygen samples will be collected during
one of multiple candidate cruises and analyzed using both traditional triple
oxygen isotope techniques and newly developed clumped oxygen isotope methods.
Lastly, they will employ the results of lab-based study of clumped O2 to build a
model for the interpretation of environmental data with the aim of improving the
accuracy and precision of field measurements of gross primary
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.