* 2049966
* Cues and mechanisms of daily cell wall thickening
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Samuel Hazen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 03/31/2024
* USD 812,614.00

Most plant biomass is made up of a thick wall that surrounds some types of cell.
A tree trunk or a corn stalk are mostly this form of secondary cell wall. This
growth, where plants increase in mass, is distinct from the type of growth that
results in changes in plant volume which is the result of changes in cell size.
The rate of volume growth often changes throughout the day, where stems may
elongate much more rapidly at the end of the night than any other time of day.
Plants respond to daily changes in temperature and light and their circadian
clocks play a role in orchestrating the timing of those rhythms. The goal of
this project is to understand the environmental cues and regulatory mechanisms
that control the synthesis of cell wall mass. Plant cell wall biomass is an
abundant renewable resource and the cornerstone to the pulp and papers, timber
and textile, and lignocellulosic biofuel industries. The knowledge gained will
enable conventional breeding and biotechnology approaches to improve the
production of ecologically and economically sustainable forestry and
agriculture. This project will also provide interdisciplinary training in
development, genetics, genomics, and biochemistry for graduate students and
facilitate an internship program with the National Technical Institute for the
Deaf. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project calls for genetic and biochemical
approaches to understand the environmental conditions and the molecular
mechanisms that control the timing of cell wall biosynthesis in the model grass
Brachypodium distachyon. Three integrated hypotheses will be pursued: (1)
Secondary wall biosynthesis is a time-of-day specific behavior. Several
observations support a model in grasses where the rate of cell elongation and
wall thickening is inversely timed and influenced by daily changes in
temperature. Rates of plant biomass accumulation, polymer precursor metabolites,
and cell wall gene expression will be quantified. (2) Gene promoter sequences
determine the timing of secondary cell wall gene expression. Although several
specific protein-DNA interactions that regulate wall biosynthesis have been
reported, the functional outcome of the presence of these sequences has on the
timing of gene expression remains unknown. The specific function of these DNA
sequences will be investigated in vivo with synthetic promoters and native
promoters using real-time monitoring of luciferase reporters. (3) Phytochrome
proteins play a role in time-of-day specific cell wall thickening. Phytochrome
protein dimers are reversibly active and inactive, and the rate of that process
is influenced by red/far-red light ratios and by temperature. This mechanism may
play a role in the regulation of secondary cell wall gene expression and wall
thickening rhythms. Wildtype B. distachyon and phytochrome mutants will be
examined for the effects of red/far-red light and temperature on stem secondary
wall thickness and associated gene expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.