* 2049567
* The Biophysics of Coral Reef Resilience: Hydrodynamic and Ecological Drivers of Coral Survival Under Extreme Heat
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Weifeng Zhang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,752,411.00

Coral reefs are among the most diverse ecosystems on the planet and support the
livelihoods of hundreds of millions of people around the world. Ocean warming
and intensifying heatwaves are killing coral reefs and there are urgent efforts
underway to identify and protect those capable of surviving future warming.
Coral reefs in the central equatorial Pacific have experienced three extreme
heat events over the last two decades. Initial observational data obtained by
the investigators show that coral mortality during each event was spatially
variable, implying that some coral communities have developed resilience to
thermal stress. In this study, the investigators are examining the role of fine-
scale variations in reef temperature and water flow in promoting coral
resilience by providing opportunities for genetic adaptation, by protectively
cooling corals through upwelling or internal waves, or by enhancing food supply.
Results will provide novel insights into the mechanisms by which coral
communities survive extreme heat and a new tool that allows scientists and coral
reef managers to identify resilient reefs for protection. Additionally, this
project is supporting an early-career scientist, graduate and undergraduate
research, opportunities for high school students in the United States to
participate in research, as well as participation by Kanton high school
students. Outreach will be conducted through presentations and a variety of
media, including film. The hydrodynamic model output will be made publicly
available, and project outcomes will contribute to a universal map of coral
thermal thresholds currently under development by the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ocean warming and intensifying heatwaves are
devastating coral reefs across the global tropics. Consequently, a coordinated
effort is underway to identify and protect coral communities that can survive
these changes. This interdisciplinary team of investigators is combining
oceanographic observations, 3-dimensional fine-scale hydrodynamic model
simulations, benthic surveys, and biological assays to investigate the role of
reef hydrodynamics in facilitating coral resilience to thermal stress on Kanton
Island in the central equatorial Pacific. The investigators are testing the
hypothesis that oceanographic and atmospheric forcing interact with reef
bathymetry to induce predictable fine-scale heterogeneity in water temperature
and flow across the reef. They are also testing the hypothesis that
environmental heterogeneity, in turn, facilitates coral survival of extreme heat
by providing opportunities for genetic adaptation, protective cooling, and/or
enhanced food supply. Results will provide insights into the biophysical
mechanisms underpinning reef resilience and a new tool with which to predict
resilience across a broad range of coral reef
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported with funds from the
Biological and Physical Oceanography Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.