* 2049636
* Translating from Kangaroo Rat Burrows to Geotechnical Engineering by Uncovering Fundamental Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Haluk Beyenal, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 640,590.00

This award supports research to understand the role of kangaroo rats' microbiome
in constructing resilient structures in extreme desert environments and how this
knowledge can be scaled up to human geotechnical structures in extreme
environments. Kangaroo rats construct elaborate burrows over multiple years and
occupy them for extended periods of time. The burrows remain open and stable in
desert sand and survive the harsh desert conditions, with extreme daily and
yearly relative humidity and temperature fluctuations and flash-flood events.
This research tests the hypothesis that the burrow microbiome is determined by
the microbial community in cheek pouches or feet of kangaroo rats and that
biofilms formed in this microbiome (i.e., burrow biofilms) are crucial to burrow
stability in stochastic, fluctuating desert environments. The fundamental
understanding gained from this project could translate to the design of
sustainable ground improvement techniques to be used in geotechnical engineering
practice, particularly in locations prone to landslides and substrate collapse.
The research will establish direct collaborations among researchers, graduate
students, and undergraduate students in geotechnical and geoenvironmental
engineering, bioengineering, and biology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research
will specifically test the hypotheses that (i) the suction stress characteristic
curve of burrow-biofilm-enhanced desert soil is a non-monotonic function of
saturation, due to water retention by both the soil and the biofilm, and
contributes to effective stress regardless of the extreme fluctuations in
humidity, saturation, and temperature, to maintain the stability of the burrows
and (ii) biofilms reduce the hydraulic conductivity of burrow ceilings, and
therefore prevent flooding of the burrows during storms. The experimental
program will include growing the burrow biofilms in the laboratory and
determining the strength of burrow-biofilm-enhanced soil over the entire range
of saturation and after multiple wet/dry and heat/cool cycles. The research will
also investigate how water retention by the cementing agent (i.e., burrow
biofilm) contributes to suction stress to maintain burrow stability under
extreme fluctuations in environmental conditions. This is important for
establishing the mechanistic basis for stability in sandy soils in arid
environments. In addition, the research will study how the hydraulic
conductivity of desert sand changes with the addition of burrow biofilm. Results
from this research will reveal how one of the most prolific ecosystem engineers
digs complex, stable, and sustainable underground environments in desert sand
and how an individualâ€™s phenotype extends from their microbiome, to burrow site
selection, and more broadly to landscape
biogeomorphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.