* 2049929
* Electric Vehicles: Economics of the Extensive and Intensive Margins
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Rapson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

The automotive industry and policymakers worldwide are placing significant bets
on transportation electrification. Motivated by the urgency to mitigate global
climate change, many governments worldwide have goals of phasing conventional
vehicles out entirely in coming decades. Despite these ambitious targets,
understanding of the factors influencing electric vehicle (EV) adoption and
utilization remains limited. Due to data limitations, there is scant empirical
evidence about how a key factor, relative gasoline and electricity prices,
influences EV adoption and utilization. By providing empirical measures of
customer responses to prices, this project is designed to provide critical
information on the feasibility and optimal design of incentives for electrifying
the consumer vehicle fleet. The project will build a first-of-its-kind data
platform that will link hourly electricity consumption, price incentives, and
vehicle ownership at the household level in the US’ largest EV market,
California. The project team will use these data, along with a randomized
controlled trial (RCT), to shed new light on determinants of EV adoption and
usage. The project will also test the impacts of electricity and gasoline prices
on EV purchases, as well as the timing and amount of consumption of both of
these fuels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using this novel research platform, this
project will contribute to several active areas of academic inquiry. One aspect
of the project will provide the first at-scale estimates of EV usage (the
intensive margin) derived from measures of household electricity consumption.
Since most households do not have a separate electricity meter for EV charging,
we will estimate household EV charging using empirical methods that will test
for the change in electricity consumption coincident with the registration of an
EV at a given household. Such a test requires first building a unique data set
merging high frequency micro-data on household electricity consumption with
vehicle registration and other data. This aspect of the project will show how
household EV electricity use varies across several important dimensions: hour-
of-day; the EV model and a household’s existing vehicle portfolio; and finally,
across electricity tariffs. A second aspect of the project will, in cooperation
with a California electric utility, run a randomized control trial that will
test how customers respond to incentives to participate in automated EV charging
programs. These programs provide electricity bill discounts in exchange for
utility control of charging levels and timing. Successful coordination of
distributed EV charging can be a valuable tool for optimizing the integration
into the grid of new electricity loads, such as EVs, as well as time-varying
renewable electricity production. A third part of the project will quantify the
role of gasoline prices and electricity prices on the purchase of EVs (the
extensive margin). This aspect of the project will examine homes close to the
borders of electric utility companies in order to compare EV adoption decisions
by consumers who face dramatically different electricity prices but that are
otherwise similar in important ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.