* 2049201
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Successive Disasters, Resilience, and Household Asset Management
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Florence Babb, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 25,034.00

While the COVID-19 pandemic has brought a range of regulations that exacerbated
existing housing tensions or created new ones, households already living in
conditions of socio-economic hardship or burdened by recovery from previous
disasters have been particularly affected. This doctoral dissertation focuses on
post-disaster asset allocation, specifically on housing and titles, to
understand not only how humans respond to disasters and subsequent initiatives,
but also how they create mechanisms for future resilience. It seeks to analyze
whether demographic differences in homeownership influence outcomes in socio-
economic capacity, social relations, decision-making, and personal autonomy
after a disaster. The COVID-19 dimension offers a rare opportunity to analyze
the factors associated with capacities to withstand different shocks. In
addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate student, this
project will also engage a wider audience by broadly disseminating its findings
to organizations and policymakers invested in disaster
relief.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ethnographic project centers on three
neighborhoods devastated by successive disasters (a natural disaster, followed
by COVID-19), and received differential post-disaster support. Post-disaster
housing is explored as a site for analyzing the intersections between macro-
level processes (disasters and subsequent initiatives) and their micro-level
effects (intra-household dynamics). The researcher will collect data through
participant observation, a survey and semi-structured interviews, to analyze a)
how has the well-being of households been influenced by their degree of
participation in post-earthquake initiatives; b) how does the response to
COVID-19 and associated regulations affect intra-household dynamics; and c) how
does successive disaster experience affect varied individual capacities and
responses to the pandemic. The project offers the opportunity to gain
comparative insights into how social relations are reconfigured within
households and communities amidst successive disasters. The collected data will
contribute to the anthropology of disasters, households, and assets. Focusing on
social relations at the intersection of housing and disasters, close attention
to COVID-19 will enhance the anthropological understanding of the social impact
of epidemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.