* 2049631
* Collaborative Research: Physical and biological controls on ocean carbon and oxygen uptake in the western North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Seth Bushinsky, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 749,270.00

Understanding the mechanisms that determine when and how the ocean takes up
carbon from the atmosphere is important to our fundamental knowledge of ocean
biogeochemistry and to our ability to model future climate. Air-sea fluxes of
oxygen are also relevant to climatic variability, and surface oxygen can act as
a tracer of biological carbon production and export as well as of important
physical processes. The Kuroshio Extension region of the northwest Pacific Ocean
is an area of strong carbon dioxide uptake and a site of wintertime watermass
formation, with Subtropical Mode Water formed to the south of the Kuroshio
Extension and lighter and denser Central Mode Water formed to the north. These
mode waters then sink below the surface, moving carbon dioxide to the ocean
interior. There are very few wintertime vertical profiles of any carbon system
parameter in these mode water formation regions and no fully resolved winter or
annual cycles of measurements. In this project, the investigators will deploy
robotic profiling floats to make these needed measurements. They will combine
the float data with numerical modeling to advance understanding of mode water
formation and air-sea fluxes of carbon dioxide and oxygen in this important
region. This proposal will fund an early career scientist and expand expertise
in and capability for biogeochemical profiling float operations at the
University of Hawaiâ€™i, providing a foundation for future work in autonomous
biogeochemical platforms. This proposal will fund a graduate student in their
Ph.D. work and multiple summer undergraduate researchers. Students will gain
exposure to the complementary fields of marine chemistry, ocean physics, and
climate models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will investigate carbon and
oxygen budgets in the northwest Pacific from the following: new float
observations of oxygen, nitrate, and estimated dissolved inorganic carbon;
longer-term float temperature and salinity observations for water mass analysis;
and model output. They will deploy biogeochemical Argo floats capable of
measuring pH in the heart of the Subtropical and Central Mode Water formation
regions in the Kuroshio Extension to provide vertical profiles of oxygen,
nitrate, and, especially, estimates of dissolved inorganic carbon. They will use
these observations to both calculate the drivers of air-sea carbon dioxide and
oxygen fluxes and to validate model output for further analysis. Western
boundary currents, such as the Kuroshio Extension, are areas of significant
carbon dioxide uptake, but the relative importance of biology and physics to
that uptake and its variability on large temporal and spatial scales is not well
understood. The project has three main goals: (1) to determine what fraction of
the CO2 and O2 uptake in the North Pacific is the result of mode water formation
and subduction, (2) to determine how the physical and biological processes that
drive air-sea fluxes vary spatially in the Kuroshio Extension region, and (3) to
analyze the drivers of interannual and decadal variability of mode water
formation and related gas fluxes in the Kuroshio Extension region and determine
how that variability is linked to the larger climate system. The new
observations will be evaluated in the larger context of multiple decades of
observations from ships and almost two decades of physical observations from
profiling floats. The team will use model output to diagnose physical drivers of
air-sea fluxes and to link the observed mechanisms to longer-term variability
and climate processes. The data collected will represent the first seasonally
resolved profiles of oxygen, nitrate, and derived DIC in a western boundary
current and will be of use to a broad community of researchers. This project is
jointly funded by the Chemical Oceanography Program, the Physical Oceanography
Program, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.