* 2049388
* Collaborative Research: Vitamin B1 Limitation and Advantageous Use of B1-related Compounds by Marine Bacterioplankton.
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ryan Paerl, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 574,051.00

Planktonic marine bacteria significantly impact global elemental cycling,
productivity, and water quality. Recent evidence shows that abundant and diverse
marine bacterioplankton require external vitamin B1 or precursors (B1 herein) to
survive, and addition of these nutrients stimulates bacterial production. This
suggests that it is favorable for most marine bacteria to rely on supplied B1,
making B1 dynamics an environmentally relevant test case to study nutrient
exchanges within the planktonic microbiome. Notably though, links between
extracellular B1 availability and the composition, function, and fitness of
marine bacteria are poorly understood. This project sheds light on 1) which
activities and interactions are modulated by B1 availability, and 2) the
benefits of exogenous B1 use by ubiquitous marine bacterioplankton. Experiments
are being conducted to address uncertainty regarding B1 limitation of natural
bacterioplankton, help predict plankton responses to natural or anthropogenic
increases in B1 and reveal more on the rules governing nutrient exchange between
plankton. Greater knowledge of the advantages of bacterial B1 use will benefit
fields beyond oceanography, such as synthetic biology which focuses on
streamlined microbial product generation. B1-deficiency in animals is a current
concern in marine ecosystems. Greater knowledge of costs and quotas at the
microbial level will position the larger community to ask deficiency questions
at other trophic levels. The teaching and training components of this project
include support for graduate students and a post-doctoral scholar. The major
outreach component is a newly conceived Mobile Aquatic Microbial Laboratory
(MAML) that seeks to improve public awareness of aquatic microbes and their
ecosystem impact, as well as convey concepts of nutrient limitation and why
cells need vitamins. Pre- and post-assessment and social distancing measures are
integrated into MAML, as are incentives for participants to share images via
social media and contribute to the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates the impact of vitamin B1 and B1 congeners on bacterioplankton in
marine ecosystems where vitamin limitation is poorly understood. The work is
conducted in the Neuse River estuary, the second largest estuary in the lower
USA, and in the offshore coastal ocean. Nutrient amendment experiments are being
conducted to test whether B1/congeners modulate bacterioplankton growth,
composition, and gene transcription (reflecting putative function).
Complementary lab-based experiments with wildtype and genetically engineered
bacterioplankton are being conducted to test whether use of exogenous
B1/congener significantly improves cell fitness and to address why reliance upon
exogenous B1/congener is so prevalent among wild bacterioplankton. Additional
lab experiments with isolates are being conducted to examine the protein-related
cost of B1 de novo biosynthesis versus exogenous B1/congener use as well as cell
quotas of B1 and precursors using mass spectrometry techniques. The work reaches
beyond recent genome-based extrapolations to address how exogenous B1/congener
availability shapes bacterioplankton metabolism, community structure, microbial
interactions, and fitness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.