* 2049293
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Numerical Study of Bed Shear Stress and Turbulent Boundary Layer Structure Induced by Breaking-Wave-Generated Vortices
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Francis Ting, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,671.00

This research aims to improve the understanding of breaking wave vortices
impinging on the seabed. This has broad impacts on the prediction of a wide
range of near-shore processes where wave breaking is fundamental in driving the
sediment transport and resulting morphological changes. Detailed laboratory
experiments will provide a high quality, comprehensive data set to test and
improve a numerical model to better resolve the effects of wave breaking and
eddy impingement on the bottom boundary layer structure. In return, the
validated model will provide more detailed information to help interpret the
measured data as well as a valuable research tool to model prototype wave
conditions not reproducible in the laboratory. This research project would
benefit society by enabling the development of better engineering tools for
coastal zone management and mitigation of coastal hazards. The project will
support two PhD students, one at South Dakota State University (SDSU) and
another at the University of Delaware (UD), and will provide an opportunity for
the new PhD program at SDSU to grow through research collaboration with an
established research center. The PhD student from UD will participate in a
portion of the experimental program at SDSU and work with the SDSU PhD student
on model/data comparison. He/she will also work for a period at the University
of Washington (UW) during the development of needed model extensions. To broaden
the impacts of the research on STEM education, the lead PI will design a new
technical elective on advanced fluid mechanics laboratory, which will be offered
to undergraduate seniors and graduate students. The course will include a suite
of experiments to give students hands-on experience with measuring bed shear
stresses in steady and unsteady flows using different experimental techniques
and approaches, emphasizing the importance of careful experimentation and
analysis to produce high-quality, reproducible results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to understand the structure of the bottom boundary
layer and determine the bed shear stresses induced by the impact of breaking-
wave-generated vortices on a plane beach. Laboratory experiments will be
conducted in a 25 m-long, 0.9 m-wide and 0.75 m-deep tilting flume equipped with
a programmable wave generator. The turbulent velocity fields under spilling and
plunging waves will be measured in a three-dimensional (3D) flow volume on
smooth and rough beds using a volumetric three-component velocimetry (V3V)
system. The measured data will be used to study the momentum balance in the
near-bed region and to develop more accurate methods for estimating the bed
shear stresses in the unsteady, non-equilibrium boundary layer associated with
breaking waves. The measured data will also be used to validate a multi-phase
(air-water) large eddy simulation (LES) scheme for breaking waves, already shown
to accurately describe the processes of wave breaking and eddy formation and
evolution, to better resolve eddy impingement on the bottom and resulting
modifications to the boundary layer structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.