* 2049657
* Rainfall variability, extreme events, and vulnerability in heterogeneous social and environmental systems
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Diana Liverman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 11/30/2024
* USD 396,593.00

This project investigates how farmers use observations and their perceptions of
rainfall variability to inform their agricultural decisions. This lack of
consensus between weather measurements and peopleâ€™s local perceptions of
changing rainfall patterns can result in farmers making inadequate choices about
strategic short- and long-term crop selection strategies. These choices can
endanger livelihoods and well-being. This project advances knowledge about
differences between measurements and perceptions of rainfall trends and how
farmers decide to act on this uncertain environmental information. From this
information this research will develop meaningful rainfall metrics in direct
collaboration with farmers that can be used to reduce their vulnerability and
enhance local adaptation strategies in anticipation of future droughts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large gaps exist in knowledge of where changes in rainfall
variability and extremes are occurring, when and how these affect individual
farmers and their agricultural decisions, and if these are currently represented
in instrumental datasets and by local climate services organizations. This
project quantifies recent trends in a range of different daily rainfall datasets
and deploys new weather stations to validate them in complex terrain. Local
perceptions and knowledge of past and present precipitation variability are
assessed using a set of surveys, focus groups, and interviews in agricultural
communities. This project will determine how local organizations integrate these
different and possibly disparate knowledge systems as part of their attempts to
help farmers become more resilient to rainfall variability. This project expands
knowledge of the cognitive frameworks that farmers use to understand and act on
their own observations of environmental phenomena in combination with the
information provided to them by other institutions and organizations. This
project generates knowledge necessary to improve agricultural decision-making,
reduce vulnerability, and build adaptive capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.