* 2049947
* RoL: Salivary proteome evolution as a framework to elucidate the mechanisms of functional change involving genomic structural variation
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Omer Gokcumen, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 723,602.00

Evolution underlies the amazing diversity of life. Understanding the specific
mechanisms through which evolution operates will help us to understand how new
traits, abilities, and forms emerge. Saliva can serve as an ideal candidate for
studying such evolutionary changes because it acts as the first interface for
food, microorganisms, and other foreign molecules entering our bodies. This
project will explore how new genes evolve and how they affect salivary function.
It will do so by comparing the genetic variation, gene expression levels, and
protein content of diverse mammalian species, focusing on salivary function. The
results of this project will shed light on fundamental questions about how
evolution operates, how new genes are formed, how their functions change over
time, and why the properties of saliva vary so much among mammals. State-of-the-
art approaches will be used and disseminated to a diverse group of graduate
students from different institutions through hands-on workshops. Additionally,
the research team’s efforts include hosting the annual Great Lakes Evolutionary
Genomics Symposium, hosting more than 100 trainees and faculty interested in
evolutionary genomics. The project will serve as a platform for the research
team to engage with the public, promoting STEM training and evolutionary biology
at both the national and international stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team’s
recent work underlined the importance of particular types of genomic structural
variants (SVs) in rapid salivary evolution. In this proposal, the research team
will use innovative long-read sequencing-based approaches to generate de-novo
assemblies and RNA sequences from the salivary glands of multiple mammalian
species. Three hypotheses will be addressed: 1) Rapid gene turnover underlies
the species-specific salivary proteome repertoires among mammals. 2) Gene
duplications are a major mechanism through which protein dosage and function are
fine-tuned in saliva. 3) Secreted proline-rich proteins are natural substrates
for novel mucin formation through the expansion of subexonic repeats. This study
will provide: 1) the most complete genomic and transcriptomic variation datasets
for mammalian salivary glands; 2) a novel methodological framework where long-
read sequencing data at the DNA and RNA levels will be integrated; and 3) a
comprehensive database of specific genetic variations that will be of
considerable evolutionary and biomedical significance for salivary phenotypes,
such as lubrication of the oral cavity, breakdown of dietary starch, and host
defense against pathogenic microorganisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.