* 2049481
* Collaborative Research: School family nexus and educational differences during the Covid-19 pandemic and beyond
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Thurston Domina, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 02/29/2024
* USD 149,934.00

In this project the adaptation of two crucial institutions in the lives of young
people -- family and school – in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic and
associated measures is investigated. Research involves documentation of
interactions between schools and families amid the crisis and analysis of the
processes through which schools facilitate the construction of social capital
among families even as they have closed school buildings and moved instruction
online. Subsequently, links are traced between these family/school interactions
and students’ learning experiences. Results will inform research and decisions
aimed at reducing disparities and fostering resilience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data consist primarily of three waves of survey of
teachers, parents, and principals for a county school district in a county with
considerable demographic and socioeconomic variation. These data are combined
with administrative data for the school district as well as data on parent-
teacher organizations and data from a statewide teacher survey of working
conditions. These data are used to address several research questions,
including: 1) how school and family collaboration varies with demographic and
socioeconomic status; 2) to what extent this variation is attributable to
differences in practices used during the remote learning period across and
within schools; 3) to what extent school and family collaboration facilitates
access to critical resources for students and their families; 4) to what extent
school and family collaboration mitigates learning losses associated with the
pandemic and related measures and how that varies by social group. This project
has been supported jointly by the Sociology Program and by the Science of
Broadening Participation Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.