* 2049305
* US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE and GP17-ANT: Atmospheric Deposition and Aerosol Fractional Solubility in Remote Ocean Regions
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Clifton Buck, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2024
* USD 488,656.00

Trace Elements are defined by their low concentrations in the open ocean and
their addition and removal rates are key uncertainties in our understanding of
ocean chemistry. In spite of their scarcity, trace elements can play an outsized
role in determining where living things thrive in the open ocean. Near the
coasts, these elements may be found in abundance because of features like rivers
which bring source material from the continents to the ocean. Far from land,
however, trace elements are scarce. The most significant source of these
elements to the open ocean may come from dust and other particles falling onto
the surface water either directly, or within rain droplets. An improved
understanding of this process will further knowledge of element cycling in the
ocean, including the carbon cycle. This project will sample the atmosphere of
the South Pacific Ocean and the Pacific sector of the Southern Ocean around
Antarctica. Input from the atmosphere to these waters is not well known and the
research results will provide much needed information to the scientific
community. This project will support an early career researcher as well as a
graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deposition and subsequent dissolution
of aerosols in surface waters remains a critical research area in the
oceanographic community. Much of the ocean remains poorly sampled and
improvements in flux estimates, chemical characterization, and fractional
solubility estimates are necessary to improve the understanding of this
important trace element source. This project will include a cruise in the South
Pacific Ocean and one in the Amundsen Sea sector of the Southern Ocean, both as
part of the GEOTRACES program. The cruise tracks will cover regions which lie
downwind of dust producing regions of Australia and where atmospheric deposition
could play a role in dictating distributions of trace elements in the water
column. The flux of aerosols across the air-sea interface is a key research area
within GEOTRACES and the broader oceanographic community. Flux from the
atmosphere to the ocean is highly episodic making the capture of this important
term difficult in the open ocean. Flux rates will be determined by the use of
the cosmogenic isotope 7Be, providing a rate estimate for time scales longer
than the cruise period. Aerosol trace element fractional solubility remains
poorly constrained and is one of the reasons that biogeochemical models show
poor agreement for marine trace element distributions. Aerosol dissolution will
be tested in several solution of varying chemistry to provide a range of
solubility estimates which are representative of conditions in precipitation,
surface seawater, and in more aggressive environments which provide a high-end
solubility estimate. Calculated terms like residence time are also poorly
constrained due to this uncertainty. This project will address these questions
by capturing bulk and size-fractionated aerosol samples as well as samples of
precipitation. The study will advance understanding of dust and soluble aerosol
trace element flux from the atmosphere to the ocean and provide contextual data
for complimentary studies associated with these GEOTRACES section
cruises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.