* 2049674
* Big Push, Distortions, and Economic Development
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Hugo Hopenhayn, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2024
* USD 473,000.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why are some countries poor and others rich? One
view emphasizes the role of resource misallocation in poor countries. An
alternative view emphasizes the role of coordination failures: Individual firms
do not find it profitable to adopt advanced technologies unilaterally, even
though everyone will benefit from coordinated adoptions. The latter view has a
long tradition in policy circles, known as the Big Push. The proposed research
bridges these two views in a quantitative framework using granular data. The
project explores the notion that the complementary in firms' technology adoption
decisions can powerfully amplify the effect of other sources of economic
inefficiency. This amplification operates even when there is no coordination
failure, and coordination failures can be thought of as an extreme form of
amplification. This mechanism not only helps explain the vast differences in
income per capital across countries, but also illustrates the conditions under
which reforms or industrial policies can have positive impact on the economy and
are more likely to succeed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
model elements that cause the complementary in firms' technology adoption
decisions, which is necessary for the equilibrium multiplicity central to the
coordination failure view. This research considers complementary rather than
multiplicity for implications to be more widely and robustly applicable as
equilibrium multiplicity hinges on several restrictive assumptions. The project
develops a model of entry and technology adoption by ex-ante heterogeneous
firms, which produce differentiated goods, are subject to idiosyncratic
distortions, and are connected to one another through input-output linkages.
Firms first choose whether to pay a fixed cost and enter the market. Active
firms can operate a traditional technology or, upon paying adoption costs, a
more productive modern technology. The input-output linkages are the source of
the complementary in technology adoption. The project identifies the conditions
under which the complementary in firms' technology adoption decisions supports
multiple equilibria, which are stronger than the conditions for amplification.
Utilizing microeconomic data, the project examines how complementary
substantially amplifies the effect of distortions on aggregate productivity,
sometimes through equilibrium multiplicity but also when the equilibrium is
unique. The project then extends the framework to multi-sector models and
dynamic models. The research further explores how complementary in technology
adoption may amplify economic shocks over the business
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.