* 2049443
* Integrative International Interventions: Militant Violence and Human Security in Contemporary Conflicts
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Hyeran Jo, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 05/31/2023
* USD 167,154.00

International actors, such as international organizations, non-governmental
organizations, as well as state actors, intervene in those internal conflicts in
a variety of ways, altering the conflict dynamics with implications for human
security. Under what conditions are international interventions effective in
reducing militant violence? The integrative international interventions
(Triple-i) project examines the humanitarian consequences of various
international intervention policies in reducing militant violence. The issues of
violence against civilians, violence against women, and violence against
children are the center of the inquiry. The project has three objectives: 1) to
identify intervention opportunities and challenges to human security in conflict
zones, 2) to develop an integrative theory of international interventions for
human security, and 3) to test and measure the efficacy of various measures
dealing with militant violence around the world. The PIs collect data for the
variety of international intervention efforts and militant group characteristics
and analyze the patterns of approximately 1,200 militant groupsâ€™ violence in
about 120 countries around the world between 1990 and 2020. The comprehensive
and systematic assessment of costs, benefits, and associated risks of
intervention measures is part of the analysis. Time-series intervention analysis
will be used to evaluate the choice and efficacy of intervention
measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs develop an integrative framework to study
the choice and efficacy of various international intervention measures, develops
a categorization for the conditions of engaging militants, the implementation of
a measurement strategy of militant adaptability, and a coding strategy for major
international interventions. Broader Impacts include a sharable database that
will be available to academics and policy makers and training for undergraduate
and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.