* 2049796
* Collaborative Research: Responses to complex disruptive events: Cognition in a socio-political context
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Elke Weber, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 503,918.00

Health and economic crises, extreme storms, and other complex and disruptive
events require decisions under high levels of risk and uncertainty. In these
contexts, individuals often turn to trusted sources, such as close relations,
community leaders, and political officials, for information about risks,
responsibility and how to best respond. Some of these public actors are
motivated to strategically highlight certain narratives surrounding such events,
which can in turn shape the risk perceptions, beliefs and responses of their
constituencies. Through a series of surveys, stakeholder interviews and social
media analysis, the research team examines the factors that shape how
individuals are impacted by, make sense of, and respond to extreme weather and
other climatic pressures; and how public officials and other elites frame these
events and communicate responsibility and blame. This research contributes to
interdisciplinary research and psychological, social, and political theory by
considering the interactions between individuals and the broader sociopolitical
context. This work has implications for communication and policy making around
complex, disruptive events, such as the COVID-19 pandemic or other global change
processes, and offers insights into how policy makers might tailor messages to
different contexts and audiences. Furthermore, the research uses a longitudinal
design to predict whether certain behaviors are a gateway for more costly ones,
or a scaffolding for raising environmental awareness, political engagement, and
social norm change. Coastal policy involves federal, regional, state, and local
institutions that have overlapping responsibilities, which can lead to
conflicting incentives. This work clarifies the net effect of these institutions
on individuals and their responses. Finally,the researchers co-develop many of
the study materials in partnership with local organizations and policy makers in
order to maximize the contribution of this study to improve the welfare and
livelihoods of front-line communities, and future generations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project evaluates individual and public
attributions of and responses to acute extreme weather events and climatic
pressures unfolding on longer timescales, such as sea level rise. The scholars
examine factors and processes that shape how individuals are impacted by, make
sense of and respond to extreme weather and other climatic pressures. They ask:
(A) In complex disruptive situations, how do perceived causal attributions,
risk, agency, response capacity, and behavior interrelate, and how do these
relationships depend on individual characteristics or experience? (B) How do
social and political influences affect individual decision-making, and are they
more influential when individuals are more uncertain about the cause(s) of an
event? (C) How do politicians and the media shape the narratives surrounding
these events, and what are the implications for individuals and society? (D) How
do behaviors feed back onto attributions, perceptions, and related behaviors?
These researchers use a mixed-methods approach that combines surveys,
qualitative interviews, administrative data and social media data to assess
multiple outcomes evaluated together for the first time. The research
contributes to psychological, social, and political theory by evaluating how
individuals, embedded in complex physical and sociopolitical environments, make
sense of and respond to ambiguous cues using social and public information. The
work also has implications for communication and policy making around disruptive
events, including pandemics and the looming crisis of climate change. Political
analysis provides insight into relationships between individuals and
politicians, and the importance of creating structures that mandate investment
in resilience and preparedness to counteract moral hazard. Coastal policy
involves federal, regional, state, and local institutions that have overlapping
responsibilities, which can lead to conflicting incentives. The work aims to
clarify the net effect of these institutions on individuals and their responses
in order to improve the welfare and livelihoods of vulnerable
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.