* 2049768
* Investigating environmental identity development among children in rural Alaska Native communities through intergenerational, culturally responsive community science programming
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Angela Lunda, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 01/31/2022
* USD 538,911.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand culturally responsive
approaches supported by appropriate technologies to broaden participation of
Indigenous students in STEM studies and careers. In this project, WGBH
Educational Foundation and the University of Alaska Fairbanks will work
collaboratively with advisors, library workers, public media professionals, and
families, educators, and community members from rural Alaska Native villages to
inform the research base on environmental identity, i.e., the empathy,
knowledge, and skills that children need to act responsibly for the environment.
Although environmental identity has come to be understood as an important
component in children’s future knowledge of and commitment to the environment,
little is known about how elementary school-aged children begin to construct a
meaningful environmental identity and how the adults in their lives can support
them in doing so, particularly among Indigenous children and families. The
project will address this research gap. Building on Molly of Denali, a PBS KIDS
animated children’s series that features an Indigenous lead character, the
project team will explore how children in rural Alaska Native villages relate to
their environments, how parents and other community adults conceive of
environmental identity and regard their role in nurturing it with children, and
how the project team can leverage these research findings, along with positive
perceptions of Molly of Denali, to create an intergenerational, community-based
learning program that engages Alaska Native families in environmental science
learning while contributing to children’s environmental identity
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design-based research project will unfold
over three phases: (1) formative research, during which the team will
collaborate with three communities to conduct initial research into how 6- to
8-year-old children from rural Alaska Native villages relate to their place and
environment; the role adults play in fostering this relationship, and how
community assets and technology resources are being used, or could be used, to
support science exploration in informal environments; (2) iterative co-design
and testing, during which the team will work closely with two rural Alaska
Native communities to develop, test, and revise an implementation model and set
of prototype multimedia resources for an intergenerational community science
program that supports environmental identity development; and (3) scale-pp
evaluation, during which Alaska-based evaluator Goldstream Group will work with
additional rural Alaska Native communities to assess the revised model and
resources and learn more about factors that could support or impede wider
implementation of finished materials across Alaska. The materials will be tested
with families from at least 4 communities engaging a total of 24 children. The
project will also include a process evaluation that will investigate the co-
design process. Across all phases, the project will engage children as active
researchers, capturing their lived experiences in nature via drawings,
descriptions, and child-led nature tours that employ portable cameras. Data will
also be collected from informal educators (e.g., library workers, public media
representatives), community members (e.g., tribal Elders, local STEM
professionals), and parents via interviews and focus group discussions.
Throughout, researchers will use qualitative approaches (e.g.,content,
narrative, discourse, framework analyses)to identify and describe behaviors
associated with environmental identity development and will share findings with
the field. This project is funded by the ITEST program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.