* 2049642
* TRTech-PGR: Spatiotemporal Mapping of Protein Life in Plant Cell Signaling, Trafficking, and Development with the Next-Generation Tandem Fluorescent Timers
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Hisashi Koiwa, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

Visualizing individual proteins in organisms based on their property is an
essential analytical process for studying the function of cellular proteins.
Upon biogenesis, proteins undergo a series of maturation and transport processes
as well as turnover with a unique rate, which are often regulated by
developmental and environmental cues. The longevity of proteins often determines
the amplitude of output signals, which determines the biological outcomes.
Because protein maturation, transport, and turnover could occur in cell-specific
manner and at specific subcellular domains, linking age information and location
information of proteins facilitate understanding the observation. However, to
date, no standard tools to visualize the age of proteins in living plant tissues
have been available. This project will develop a series of plant-optimized,
genetically coded sensor proteins, i.e., tandem fluorescent timer proteins
(tdFT), which change colors based on the protein ages. The operation principle
of tdFTs is simple and relies on differential maturation time between green and
red fluorescent proteins connected in tandem, and requires only conventional
fluorescent microscopy set up. Difficulty in identifying optimum configurations
specific to each application has been prohibitive for the broad application of
tdFT technology in plants. The project will generate a toolbox of validated,
user-friendly tdFT vectors for plant purposes. The developed tdFT will be
deployed to address fundamental questions in plant cell biology, including
transport and turnover of a cell wall biosynthesis protein and immunity
signaling proteins and cell lineage tracking during stomatal
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop analysis
pipelines for non-destructive visualization of spatiotemporal protein life in
plants and examine intracellular transport/turnover dynamics of key
traffic/signaling proteins in vivo. In living cells, dynamic spatiotemporal
distributions of nascent and aged proteins are integral parts of cellular
signaling. Conventional fluorescence-tagging strategies, which are prevalently
used for the research community, typically provide an endpoint profile of
protein distribution but lack the resolution in temporal dynamics of protein
maturation and trafficking. Essential regulatory processes attributed to protein
maturation and various post-translational modifications can only be imaged by
time-sensitive fluorescent tags. tdFTs produce time-specific fluorescent
signatures based on differential maturation times of GFP and RFP. These are an
intrinsic property of fluorescent proteins, which do not require special
instruments other than conventional epifluorescence or confocal microscopes. To
make tdFT technology widely available for plant research, this project will
develop a series of tdFT with various time ranges. Each tdFT will be validated
using a transient expression system in Arabidopsis and other plant species.
Characterized tdFT will be used to address fundamental questions in plant
biology, such as protein stability upon complex formation during plant immune
response, membrane protein turnover in the secretory system, and cell lineage
analysis during stomatal development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.