* 2049624
* Collaborative Research: Tradeoffs between phenology and geography constraints in response to climate change across species life cycles
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rebecca Asch, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 452,448.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are using
statistical and biophysical modeling techniques to examine the characteristics
and drivers of timing (phenology) and distribution (geography) of fish eggs,
larvae, and juveniles. They are focusing on the California Current and western
Gulf of Alaska regions of the Northeast Pacific. Changes in phenology and
geography are anticipated responses of marine organisms to global change in
climate, with consequences for food web interactions, species abundance and
productivity, and local extinctions. These responses, in turn, will have
important implications for marine conservation, resource management, and the
economies of coastal communities that depend on marine resources for sustenance
and livelihoods. Data analysis is in collaboration with fisheries scientists at
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and results will be of interest
to resource managers. One of the investigators is an early-career female
scientist, and the study provides training for REU students, other
undergraduates, graduate students, and a postdoctoral scientist. Educational
outreach includes development of online classroom and lab modules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this project is to examine
the drivers and characteristics of phenology and geography of fish early life
history stages (ELS) in the Northeast Pacific Ocean. Most research on how
climate change impacts marine organisms has focused on adult life history
stages, even though existing literature indicates that early life history stages
may be more vulnerable to climate stressors. During ELS, marine fish and
invertebrates can be limited in their ability to move in space and time due to
strong ecological, physiological, physical, and evolutionary constraints. For
these species, their ability to adapt to global change in climate through shifts
in distribution and phenology depends on the events that occur during the early
portion of their life cycle. Similarly, climate change impacts on organismal
distribution and phenology have principally been studied separately, without any
consideration of interactions between these two types of responses to changing
oceanic conditions. The investigators are conducting modeling analyses based on
ELS collected since the mid-1950s to test the null hypotheses that: 1) fish ELS
will experience similar spatio-temporal variability in relation to ocean climate
regardless of the life history strategy; 2) changes will be greater at the
leading edge of a species' distribution and that the start of the spawning
season will exhibit the greatest change in phenology; 3) species with large
distribution changes will have smaller changes in phenology, and vice versa; and
4) historical and future projections of fish distribution that include life
history information will be more skillful than those that do not include life
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.