* 2049886
* Emergent Advocacy Coalitions and SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine Hesitancy: The influence of beliefs and narratives on individual decision-making
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2021,09/30/2023
* David Abramson, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2023
* USD 660,000.00

The 2021 COVID-19 vaccine campaign is likely to be among the most important
public health initiatives in recent history. Its success in dampening the
coronavirus pandemic rests on its ability to persuade large portions of the
population to be vaccinated quickly. Unfortunately, individuals often act in
ways inconsistent with their best interests, whether in terms of voting
behaviors, financial decision making, or in this case, vaccination decisions.
Most communication strategies to persuade people to make better decisions
involve one or more of the following: providing information that supports
evidence-based decision making; employing influential spokespeople; utilizing an
expanded range of formal and informal media channels; introducing fear-based
messaging to promote action; and enhancing peopleâ€™s capacity to make evidence-
based decisions. Rarely do such communication strategies consider the strength
and influence of underlying belief systems. This may be particularly relevant in
those situations in which national advocacy groups have introduced counter-
narratives to sway public opinion or actions. The COVID vaccination campaign
offers an opportunity for examining how belief systems influence the adoption or
rejection of a protective behavior. This study focuses on three aspects of
belief and attitude formation: (1) the evolution of newly-formed advocacy groups
and coalitions endorsing pro- or anti-vaccine stances, (2) the deployment of
narratives and stories by these advocacy groups to advance their mission, and
(3) the power of these narratives, stories, and beliefs to persuade individuals
to accept, delay, or reject a COVID vaccine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
identifies distinctive advocacy coalitions operating at elite levels to
influence local stakeholder beliefs and policies, and develops a matrix of
policy and core beliefs based on content analyses of public documents. The team
also identifies and characterizes the policy narratives emanating from these
advocacy coalitions. Subsequently, the research samples and surveys 3,000 US
residents at two points in time to capture public opinion and decision making at
two moments in the vaccine development timeline. The team tests the influence of
policy narratives among individuals, and analyzes the contribution of aligned
policy beliefs with the vaccine behaviors of the study
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.