* 2049513
* The Network Structure of Misconduct
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Andrew Papachristos, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2024
* USD 219,847.00

In this project, recent developments in network science are employed to
investigate how the social connections of law enforcement officers affect
misconduct. Misconduct may generate mistrust, cynicism, and estrangement between
the community and law enforcement officers and, in some cases, between civilians
and the state, in addition to trauma and pain directly caused. This study
complements prior explanations of misconduct as the failure of individual
officers or as the consequence of organizational feature by investigating the
crucial ways social networks influence the actions, behaviors, and attitudes of
law enforcement officers and how understanding such networks might mitigate or
exacerbate misconduct. Findings will help to inform decisions and interventions
to minimize misconduct and thereby will benefit the public good.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, a data-driven approach to analyzing the
network structures of a large law enforcement agency is developed to determine
how social networks affect officer behavior and misconduct. Partnership networks
are recreated for the entire agency from 1980 to 2019 using data on officer
assignments and arresting behavior; these data then are combined with records on
more than 200,000 complaints filed against officers to create several network
datasets. Three research studies use these datasets. Study 1 examines the
structure and nature of officer networks and analyzes how individual,
departmental, and neighborhood factors are associated with misconduct. Study 2
analyzes the influence of network peer effects on misconduct. Finally, Study 3
creates and analyzes the development of officer trajectories of
misconduct.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.