* 2049469
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evaluating the Efficacy of Broadening Participation Efforts Beyond University Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Ulla Berg, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 16,632.00

Diversity promotion projects and equity programs aim to make a positive impact
on student and university life. While there is substantial data in the science
of broadening participation on the efficacy of these programs in STEM
educational settings, less is known about the afterlives of these programs when
students transition out of the university. This doctoral dissertation project
examines the social and economic dynamics of diversity programs among
marginalized youth in the U.S. as they transition outside of university
settings. In addition to supporting the ethnographic training of a graduate
student in anthropological analysis and rigorous data collection, the project
has the potential to document the long-term effects of university equity
programs, and its impact on these youth after graduation. The findings of this
study will enhance the public's understanding of the social and economic
dynamics of diversity recruitment in institutional settings, the impact of
equity programs in higher education. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
examines the long-term effects of university diversity and equity training
programs through 12-months of ethnographic research in a racially diverse U.S.
city that is also home to a major research university. The researchers will
follow a sample of students from two different historically underrepresented
groups as they encounter diversity programs both in the university setting and
after graduation. Following students out of the university as they enter
civilian life provides a much needed longitudinal dimension in understanding the
effects of the university's efforts to broaden participation among
underrepresented groups. This project will generate data deriving from
ethnographic fieldwork using a mixed-methods approach: ethnographic interviews,
oral/migration family histories, participant observation, surveys, and archival
work. The findings from this project have the potential to advance understanding
what factors enable and inhibit underrepresented populations' access to
universities and economic opportunities. The findings will inform scientific
debates on higher education and the long-term effects of diversity
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.