* 2049805
* New spatially explicit approaches for estimating malaria parasite migration
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Kathleen Stewart, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 405,515.00

This research improves the ability to estimate and map malaria parasite
migration pathways. It will do so by accounting for the spatial patterns present
in parasite genomic data as well as the spatial properties of features of the
landscape and built environment that are relevant for gene flow, for example,
features that serve to either impede or enable parasite migration. The
investigators consider how the spatial distribution of parasite genomic sampling
locations impacts estimated migration patterns and determine whether the mapped
migration paths are still meaningful even when there is an irregular
distribution of sampling locations. The research provides insights on how to
include locally known migration barriers as well as other relevant natural or
built environmental features into mapped migration estimates. As public health
officials work toward reducing and eventually eliminating malaria, local
information about factors driving malaria risk is important for prioritizing
resources and optimizing control and elimination strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be undertaken using computational
methods that generate estimated effective migration surfaces. These methods use
Markov chain Monte Carlo simulations to estimate migration and create migration
contours that can be mapped to show relative high or low areas of gene flow.
This research will integrate local spatial features to improve gene flow
estimates and account for possible barriers thereby reducing spatial uncertainty
that is commonplace in current maps of parasite migration. A set of analyses
will be undertaken to determine the robustness of parasite migration surface
estimates to varying spatial distributions of genomic data sample locations.
This research is expected to not only have a profound impact for local public
health officials tasked with eliminating P. falciparum and P. vivax malaria but
will transform the ability of a broader group of researchers to produce parasite
migration estimates for other kinds of species at local scales and provide new
computational tools for studying parasite migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.