* 2049177
* Quantification of sedimentary oxygen and carbon dioxide dynamics in a dry sandy beach affected by macroalgae deposition
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Markus Huettel, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 139,898.00

Sandy beaches provide habitat for endangered species, protect the coast, and are
appreciated for their high social and economic values. They are facing
escalating anthropogenic pressures through coastal development, nutrient
increases and global warming, which in recent years led to the development of
extensive seaweed blooms that deposit massive amounts of algae on sandy beaches
worldwide. This project investigates the fate of the deposited algae and their
influence on the biogeochemical environment of the
beach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The decay of the algae locally depletes oxygen in
the beach and produces toxic sulfides and high concentrations of ammonia that
harm beach organisms, pollute nearshore waters and deter tourists. Research in
this project quantifies biogeochemical and transport processes that control the
algal decomposition. Generating these data is prerequisite for developing models
that can predict the impact of the massive macroalgal deposition and thereby
support decision making and coastal management. The project research is tightly
linked to an educational component with instruction of graduate and
undergraduate students in marine biogeochemical methods, and a dedicated
outreach program informing the public about the seaweed issue and pathways to
reduce this problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project produces data on the
dynamics of oxygen and carbon dioxide distribution and interfacial gas flux in
the dry, supralittoral zone (between high tide line and dunes) of sandy beaches
and determines how distributions and fluxes are influenced by the degradation of
the macroalgae. Organic carbon and nitrogen profiling characterizes the
biogeochemical sedimentary environment at the two study sites, a carbonate and a
silicate beach. A set of laboratory experiments relates gas fluxes to the
degradation rate of buried macroalgal layers and the effects of gas exchange,
temperature and moisture. The data will allow estimates of the time frame of the
algal decomposition process and provide information on the degradation capacity
of sandy beaches. Since beach sedimentary O2 and CO2 dynamics and fluxes are
largely undescribed, the project data contribute to the mechanistic and
quantitative understanding of carbon and nutrient cycling in sandy
beaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.