* 2049736
* Collaborative Research:  Network Formation and Bargaining with Exclusionary Commitments
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Dilip Abreu, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2024
* USD 225,254.00

A lot of economic activity involves two-sided markets in which firms on one side
of the market form networks with firms on the other side. In many of these
markets there are small numbers of firms on each side, and contracts are
negotiated bilaterally. The equilibrium network structure and terms of trade are
intertwined and emerge through the strategic interactions of buyers and sellers
on both sides of the market. Examples include the market for health insurance in
which hospitals negotiate rates with health insurance providers, the market for
digital media in which TV stations and other content providers negotiate prices
with cable companies and streaming platforms, and manufacturing networks in
which downstream firms sign contracts with upstream suppliers. The broad goal of
this project is to investigate models of bargaining between multiple buyers and
multiple sellers in which each agent may potentially contract with several
others on the opposite side of the market. A narrower goal, and the one we will
first investigate, is to understand the role of exclusionary pre-commitments.
For instance, a seller facing multiple buyers may find it profitable to create
artificial scarcity by committing to trade only with specific subsets of buyers.
The research will offer new perspectives on exclusion commitments and how they
shape network structure and terms of trade for each link that forms. Providing a
systematic framework for analyzing exclusion commitments and network formation
in “thin” markets will expand the toolkit available to applied researchers in
health economics and other two-sided markets as well as to policymakers and
regulators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a general definition
of exclusion commitments compatible with flexible network formation, and will
provide powerful characterizations of optimal exclusion commitments for settings
without externalities. The research will reveal that flexibly trading with a
fixed number of buyers enables sellers to extract higher profits than
threatening to exclude particular buyers. In equilibrium, some buyers are
included with certainty and split the marginal surplus equally with the seller.
Buyers with lower valuations are excluded with positive probability; bargaining
with these buyers is driven by a novel sequential outside option principle. The
conclusions will be extended to settings with externalities in which agents on
the same side of the market are divided into different categories, and
valuations are interdependent within and across categories. In earlier
theoretical work and applications, there has been heavy reliance on the “Nash-
in-Nash” bargaining solution and closely related concepts. Preliminary analysis
suggests that this reliance might be excessive, and that the Nash-in-Nash
framework could lead to conclusions at variance with the predictions generated
by plausible and familiar bargaining protocols. Developing new models of
bargaining between multiple buyers and sellers based on natural protocols will
contribute to an area that still lacks a settled
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.