* 2049130
* A Networked Improvement Community Approach to School-wide Transformation, Teacher Agency, and Minoritized Students’ Climate Science Learning and Belonging
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Karina Garbesi, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,496,842.00

Incorporating urgent issues of social and environmental justice into
environmental science teaching can harness youth’s real-world interests and
improve their engagement, learning, sense of belonging, and career interests.
This may be especially true for students who are directly experiencing the
intertwined burdens of structural racism and environmental injustice. This
project will adapt and extend successful Solar Suitcase curricula that
explicitly link technology learning experiences to environmental science and
social purpose. Examples include carbon-neutral energy technologies for
electricity generation and transportation, off-grid solar power for disaster
preparedness and response, and apps allowing for direct participation in science
and supporting community outreach for local resilience projects. Situated in a
largely Latinx community, this project explores the transformation of school-
wide pedagogy for a high school and feeder middle school through Networked
Improvement Community (NIC). The NIC, comprised of teachers, students,
community-based organizations, and university faculty, will engage in co-
development and improvement science research. If as successful as the focus
groups that envisioned it, this project will offer an innovative approach to
school-wide transformation. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Critical
transformation learning (CTL) provides the theoretical framework for this
project. CTL focuses on how people think, behave and relate to the natural
environment, and to the local and global community. As such, CTL-driven
educational practices directly address students’ lived socio-historical
experience while also considering the climate crisis and its adverse impacts on
students’ engagement in learning and connection to society. The team will
develop and maintain an NIC that draws on partnerships between teachers,
principals, students, community-based organizations, and university faculty.
Research participation will include two schools and their principals, 28
teachers and 600 students. Using iterative improvement cycles the NIC will co-
create, test, and improve an integrated climate-justice/climate-science
curriculum to support student learning, including environmental content
knowledge, STEM and ICT engagement and belonging, and related career interest.
The curriculum development and implementation are a major activity of the NIC,
and the curriculum will be shared widely. However, the primary outcome sought is
school-wide transformation, including teacher and student identity as agents of
change in the community based on STEM engagement and knowledge. The project will
draw on surveys, interviews, audio recordings, classroom observations, field
notes and hierarchical linear modeling to investigate whether and how co-
creation through an NIC can lead to rapid educational innovation that optimizes
whole school, teacher and student outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.