* 2049784
* Optimal Public Transportation Networks: Theory and Evidence.
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Benjamin Olken, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2024
* USD 419,968.00

Transportation system designers face complex tradeoffs around the number,
design, and service frequency of routes, which impact transportation safety and
efficiency. This research project will study how to design the best public
transport network in congested large urban areas. It leverages high-resolution
data and several modern economic methods to determine the best network
structures and discusses how the best network shape depends on city structure
and commuter preferences. In developing recommendations for the best network
design and studying its rollout, this project will also provide valuable
insights for efficient bus systems during the COVID-19 pandemic and beyond. More
broadly, it will provide insights into the design features of public bus systems
in congested large urban areas in the developed world as well as in emerging
market mega-cities, to the benefit of millions of daily public transport riders
worldwide. The results of this research project will provide inputs into urban
transportation designs that improves urban transportation, decrease communing
cost, hence improve worker productivity, leading to faster economic growth. It
will also improve the wellbeing of commuters as well as contribute to slowing
the pace of climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-part project develops
a model of an optimal urban bus transit system and estimate the model with a
large, innovative data collected by the PIs for the project. The first part
develops and estimates a travel demand model of public transport in a large
densely populated and congested urban area. The project will use high-resolution
micro data on ridership and commuting, variation induced by large historical
route network expansion, and a system-wide randomized experiment that the PIs
have conducted, to estimate the degree to which commuters value key parameters
such as fast connections, direct connections, and frequent service. The second
part will use numerical optimization techniques to compute the optimal public
transport network and to synthesize how the optimal network shape depends on
factors such as the commuter preference parameters, city structure, and the
policy objective. The project connects and expands upon classic topics in the
transportation economics literature, such as travel demand estimation and
increasing returns in public transport, by employing rigorous causal estimation
and studying actual empirical variation in an entire citywide network of routes.
The quantitative methods and qualitative insights from this study have the
potential to inform public transport network design in densely populated urban
areas in developed as well as developing countries around the world. The results
of this research project will provide inputs into designs that will improve
urban transportation, decrease communing cost, hence improve worker
productivity, leading to faster economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.