* 2049256
* The Political Wealth of Nations
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Marko Klasnja, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 05/31/2024
* USD 140,083.00

Political elites across the globe are considerably wealthier than the
populations they represent. Many worry that wealthy citizens may be advantaged
because election campaigns are expensive or because holding office requires
giving up a job that only the wealthy may afford. There are also concerns that
wealthy politicians may skew policies toward their economic interests—interests
that may differ from much of the population. But how serious are these concerns?
This project systematically collects data on the wealth of political elites in
countries around the world to assess generally how (financially) representative
politicians are of their citizens. The project analyzes such questions as the
extent to which less expensive campaigns help the less wealthy candidates win,
and how much the wealth of a country’s political elite influences its social and
redistributive policies. The study’s results help us better understand the
causes and consequences of economic inequality, policy-making and representation
in different types of political systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the lack of
comparative data on politicians' wealth, there is virtually no existing larger-N
cross-national work on how political institutions affect the disparity between
the wealth of elected representatives and their constituents. This leaves our
understanding of the causes and consequences of representational inequalities
incomplete, as it is difficult to ascribe broad causes and extrapolate from
existing single-country studies. This project collects data on politicians'
wealth in fifty-one countries and creates comparable datasets of constituency
and citizen wealth. Combining these data in novel ways with other cross-national
datasets, the project examines through statistical analyses, natural
experiments, and quantitative case studies a number of related research
questions, such as the effect of campaign finance regulations and electoral
rules on politician wealth, and the relationship between politicians' wealth and
a country's social safety net policies. The resultant database helps facilitates
research on political representation and policy-making, and may be used to
inform policy decisions about the design, implementation, and uses of office-
holders’ financial disclosures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.