* 2049022
* Preparing High School Students for Careers in Machine Learning through Mentored Scientific Research
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Irene Lee, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,480,386.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is quickly becoming ubiquitous in STEM and across
industries, and the education field is grappling with how best to teach AI
concepts to K12 audiences. Simultaneously, the AI professional community suffers
from a lack of diversity that excludes women and people of color from a dynamic
section of the economy and a path for upward mobility. Equally important, a lack
of diverse perspectives can risk automating discriminatory practices based on
biased algorithms and biased data sets. For over a decade, the Science Research
Mentoring Program, a STEM workforce development initiative of the American
Museum of Natural History, has provided New York City high school students from
underserved populations with the experience of working closely with scientists,
increasing access to science fields and careers through research opportunities
and mentorship. In this project, the Museum, in partnership with the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, will undertake a three-year research
project to innovate within this well-established program by creating
opportunities for high school students to learn and apply machine learning (ML),
a subset of AI, to scientific problems in the natural sciences. The project
responds to the imperative to prepare a diverse student body for a workplace
that will require a sophisticated understanding of AI and ML by advancing
students' skills and knowledge of ML, promoting awareness of AI and
computationally-demanding STEM careers, and fostering positive dispositions
towards these fields. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this
project, 120 students will participate in a four-week Summer Institute
specifically focused on developing skills and understanding of ML applications
and careers, and 30 of these students will subsequently work in research labs
over the academic year with scientists who use ML. A design-based research
approach will be used to develop and refine the Summer Institute informed by a
team consisting of science educators, scientists, AI experts, and program
alumni. Student participants will be recruited specifically from partner
organizations that primarily serve Black, Hispanic/Latinx, and first-generation
college-bound students. A mixed-method research study will gather data on
students' acquisition of ML knowledge and skills, attitudes toward and
perceptions of AI, and AI career awareness and interest using pre-post survey
instruments, artifact review, semi-structured observations, and interviews.
Research findings will be disseminated through conferences, articles, and social
media. The curriculum and research tools will be publicly available and readily
scalable, leveraging the New York City Science Research Mentoring Consortium, a
network of 24 research and cultural institutions serving 500 students
annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.