* 2049042
* CAREER: Hillslope Morphology Never Stops: Validating Hillslope Evolution Models on Transport Limited, Low Relief Landscapes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Bradley Miller, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 07/31/2026
* USD 303,747.00

Conventional agricultural practices are causing erosion rates that exceed the
rates of soil production and threaten agricultural sustainability (Montgomery,
2007). Although climate models predict continued increases in the severity of
floods and losses in crop productivity, they currently do not include the
feedback loops for how the landscape changes over time. Virtually all models
predicting impacts of climate change rely on topographic and soil maps that are
assumed to stay the same. We know these assumptions are incorrect, but those
static inputs are used because they are the best data available. The ultimate
goal of this project is to assemble an erosion-deposition model for landscapes
where the rate of sediment transport, not rate of weathering, limits the amount
that those processes change the topography and soil properties of hillslopes.
The recent implementation of highly accurate, remotely sensed elevation
measurements more than a decade apart offers a unique opportunity to validate
such a model at the regional scale. This knowledge is crucial for incorporating
landscape change into models that predict impacts of climate change, such as
effects on flooding and crop productivity. The model will also be used to
generate scenarios of landscape change from real landscapes, which can be
explored and employed as an educational tool through a publicly accessible, web
map interface. Training and curriculum materials will be developed in
collaboration with educators experienced with delivering Earth Science content
to diverse student audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major barriers limiting
the use of hillslope erosion-deposition models to predict topographic change for
low relief landscapes are the disciplinary divides between geomorphology and
soil science as well as the absence of data for full validation. Geomorphology
studies tend to focus on high-relief landscapes. In contrast, soil scientists
typically investigate lower relief, agricultural areas in the context of mass
removed and effects on soil properties, such as carbon content. Therefore, an
integrated landscape model is needed that combines the theories of geomorphology
and soil science to predict landscape change in the areas that currently
experience the most active erosion and that are crucial to securing food and
feed needs in the future. The PI will study hillslope erosion-deposition models
and calibrate them to multiple landform regions within the USA Corn Belt. These
models will be validated and evaluated through the elevation differences
observed between the 2009 and 2020 LiDAR-based elevation data collected for the
state of Iowa. This project is jointly funded by the Geomorphology and Land-use
Dynamics (GLD) Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.