* 2049117
* Collaborative Research: Improving the accuracy and uncertainty associated with estimated pCO2 from pH sensors on autonomous profiling platforms
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Yuichiro Takeshita, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 05/31/2024
* USD 793,881.00

Understanding how much anthropogenic carbon dioxide the ocean is taking up from
the atmosphere - and how this uptake changes over time - is critical for
understanding the habitability of our planet. Uncertainties in the size of the
ocean carbon sink remain large, mainly because of sparse measurements of surface
water carbon dioxide (pCO2) measurements from ships. Profiling floats equipped
with sensors for biogeochemical (BGC) measurements such as pH – which can be
used to estimate pCO2 – have the potential to greatly improve the amount of
surface carbon dioxide observations across the world’s ocean, particularly in
regions and times of year where shipboard measurements are scarce. The number of
BGC floats deployed worldwide is expected to rapidly increase in the coming
years through programs like the Global Ocean Biogeochemistry Array (GO-BGC) and
the Southern Ocean Carbon and Climate Observations and Modeling program
(SOCCOM2). However, there are still fundamental issues that need to be resolved
before we can take full advantage of this emerging, powerful global
observational network to improve our estimates of how much anthropogenic carbon
the ocean absorbs every year. The overarching aim of this project is to improve
the accuracy and precision of pCO2 estimates that are derived from profiling
float data. The project will support a postdoctoral researcher and three
undergraduate summer interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to improve
the accuracy and uncertainty associated with float-based estimates of pCO2 by
addressing the outstanding questions and issues that could lead to systematic
biases in these calculations. Specifically, the investigators aim to answer the
following questions: 1) What causes the pressure-dependent discrepancy between
bottle and float pH? 2) What is the source of the internal inconsistency of the
thermodynamic marine inorganic carbon model, which affects the accuracy of pCO2
computed from pH measurements? 3) What are the global spatiotemporal patterns of
acidification rate at 1500 m, and how do we model the patterns accurately? The
team will conduct a series of laboratory studies to quantify key thermodynamic
constants, test the hypothesis that organic compounds are a substantial
contributor for the internal inconsistency, and determine a robust protocol to
accurately calculate pCO2 from pH. Furthermore, an open-source, global algorithm
will be made available that accurately predicts region-specific anthropogenic
carbon estimates, which is necessary to accurately correct float pH sensor drift
globally. Finally, to assess the improvement in accuracy of float based pCO2
estimates based on these efforts, the team will conduct a series of field
validation experiments using Spray underwater gliders equipped with the same pH
sensor as profiling floats, and a Wave Glider, an autonomous surface vehicle
that is equipped with a pCO2 analyzer calibrated with gas standards with an
accuracy of plus or minus two microatmospheres. Over the course of the project,
the team will test 16 different pH sensors to better constrain the potential
systematic biases for the float based pCO2 estimates. The activities outlined
here will lead to more accurate estimates of pCO2 from floats, as well as better
constrained uncertainties, and ultimately lead to better estimates for air-sea
CO2 flux from the global network of BGC profiling
floats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.