* 2049416
* US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE: Nitrate isotopic signals of the Southern Ocean's circulation and biogeochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Daniel Sigman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2024
* USD 486,515.00

The U.S. GEOTRACES GP17-OCE section is an upcoming water sampling and
measurement campaign that will focus on the Southern Ocean, the ocean around
Antarctica. The Southern Ocean appears to play an outsized role in Earth’s
climate and environmental conditions. For example, it appears to strongly
affect: (1) the biological productivity of the surface ocean across the globe,
(2) the levels of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere, and
(3) the concentration of oxygen (O2) in deep ocean waters. In GEOTRACES
GP17-OCE, water samples and water-borne particles will be collected from the
surface to the ocean bottom. On these samples, a suite of new, technically
advanced chemical measurements will be made to better understand the physical,
chemical, and biological processes of the Southern Ocean. The project described
here will contribute to GP17-OCE by measuring the stable isotopes of nitrate in
the seawater samples. Nitrate is the primary form of nitrogen in the sea that is
available to photosynthetic life. This nitrogen is an essential nutrient for the
ocean’s phytoplankton (floating, single-celled algae). Phytoplankton are the
base of the marine food web, and the sinking of dead phytoplankton causes carbon
dioxide to be stored in deep waters, away from the atmosphere. There are
multiple forms (“isotopes”) of both the nitrogen and the oxygen atoms that make
up nitrate. The heavier isotopes are nitrogen-15 and oxygen-18, and the lighter
isotopes are nitrogen-14 and oxygen-16. When phytoplankton use nitrate to build
their tissue, the lighter isotopes are converted slightly faster. As a result,
the isotope ratios of nitrate show the fingerprints of biological nitrate use
and of the degradation of the nitrogen in phytoplankton tissue back to nitrate.
The nitrate isotope measurements made in this project will provide a three-
dimensional picture of the physical transport and biochemical conversions of
nitrate through the ocean regions from which the samples are collected. This
will address how nitrate is supplied to Southern Ocean surface waters, what
proportion of the supply is consumed by Southern Ocean phytoplankton, and what
controls the amount of nitrate that flows from the Southern Ocean into the
subtropical, tropical, and equatorial ocean to fuel phytoplankton productivity
in those regions. Because phytoplankton consume carbon dioxide and nitrate in a
given ratio, the information on nitrate will also indicates how the Southern
Ocean impacts the carbon dioxide concentration in the air. The key lessons from
this work will be distilled for middle and high school science teachers. This
will be done in the context of a workshop for teachers lead by the project’s
principal investigator. The workshop will focus on ocean monitoring and the
powerful tools that are available to the general public to visualize, present,
and interpret environmental data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. GEOTRACES
GP17-OCE section will provide the opportunity to generate complementary data
sets of trace elements and isotopes (TEI) across the South Pacific and the
Southern Ocean from Tahiti to the Amundsen Sea, and to the Chilean shelf. For
all stations of GP17-OCE, the investigators will measure the delta15N and
delta18O of nitrate in full depth profiles and the delta15N and concentration of
dissolved organic nitrogen and the concentration of dissolved organic phosphorus
in a subset of samples from low-nitrate shallow waters. These measurements will
address two sets of topics, with implications both for modern ocean processes
and for the interpretation of paleoceanographic nitrogen (N) isotope data from
the Southern Ocean and other ocean regions. First, a mechanistic understanding
of Southern Ocean physical, biogeochemical, and carbon cycle processes requires
seasonal models that simulate conditions in both the Antarctic and the Sub-
Antarctic zones (AZ and SAZ, respectively). To yield robust information, these
models must simultaneously simulate a comprehensive suite of geochemical
measurements that trace nutrient transport (e.g., upwelling and mixing),
nutrient consumption, export production, and remineralization. GP17-OCE will be
unique among nitrate isotope data sets in the complementary trace elements and
isotopes that can be applied to their interpretation, providing the opportunity
to apply such seasonal models in a multifaceted, data-rich context. This will
help to address longstanding questions regarding (1) in situ nutrient and carbon
cycling and (2) physical and biogeochemical exchanges between the summer surface
layer, the underlying remnant winter mixed layer, and the deeper ocean. For
example, what proportion of the nitrate in the SAZ surface derives from the AZ
vs. wintertime mixing with the underlying thermocline, and given other
constraints on the wind-driven circulation, what does this imply for eddy-driven
transport rates across the Polar Frontal Zone? Second, mid-depth waters formed
in the Southern Ocean – Antarctic Intermediate Water and Subantarctic Mode Water
– sustain life in the low latitude surface ocean by injecting nutrients into the
global ocean’s thermocline. A central question in global-scale chemical
oceanography is how this Southern Ocean nutrient source compares with the input
of nitrate to the low latitude thermocline by vertical mixing and the widespread
upwelling of deep water. Nitrate deriving from the Southern Ocean surface is
elevated in delta15N whereas deep nitrate is not. As a result, the delta15N of
the nitrate in the global pycnocline reflects the fraction of pycnocline nitrate
that derives from the Southern Ocean surface vs. the low latitude deep ocean.
The data from GP17-OCE will help to better constrain this fraction by providing
new data for both the Southern Ocean sources and the isotopic characteristics of
the South Pacific interior, within and below the
pycnocline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.