* 2049518
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Strain Adaptive Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Andrey Dobrynin, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2024
* USD 459,861.00

Non-technical Description: The advent of soft robotics, wearable electronics,
and personalized medicine has sparked a demand for synthetic materials that
mimic the mechanical responses of living tissues. Living tissues are unique as
they are soft at touch, yet resistant to deformation. This strain-adaptive
stiffening represents one of Nature's defense mechanisms that prevents
accidental tissue rupture and imbues a characteristic feeling of firmness.
Various molecular and macroscopic constructs have been explored to reproduce the
tissue mechanics; however, they fail to integrate softness and firmness on a
molecular scale. This project aims at the development of a materials design
platform that harnesses architectural codes for programming the grand variation
of mechanical responses, ranging from that of ultra-soft brain tissue to super-
firm skin. Through closed-loop collaboration of soft matter theoreticians,
synthetic chemists, and experimental physicists, this design-by-architecture
approach will inspire new directions in synthetic chemistry and soft-matter
physics towards creation of novel molecular architectures with encoded
structure-property correlations. In line with the mission of the Materials
Genome Initiative, this approach will constitute the foundation for a materials
design search engine that will guide and accelerate the synthesis of tissue
replicas with targeted mechanical properties. The novel classes of materials
will catalyze fundamental shifts in many technologies, including - but not
limited to - soft robotics, active camouflage systems, and biomedical devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Conventional gels and elastomers
cannot replicate tissue's strain-adaptive stiffening. Transition from the super-
soft to super-firm mechanical response upon deformation requires a hierarchical
organization of different structural motifs that trigger a cascade of
deformation mechanisms at different stress levels. As such, the project will
address three fundamental and increasingly complex challenges. First,
theoretical modeling will establish universal correlations between network
architecture and mechanical properties such as stiffness and firmness, and will
form quantitative guidelines for encoding precise mechanical "phenotypes" in
designed polymeric systems. Second, introduction of self-assembling moieties
into network architectural code will empower polymer assemblies with strain-
adaptive stiffening. Third, incorporation of dynamic crosslinks will impart
programmable viscoelastic response and extend the platform to strain-rate
responsive mechanical phenotypes. Fulfillment of the project goals will yield a
molecular code - collectively enabling the programmable and efficient
development of next-generation of tissue-like synthetic materials with both
strain- and strain rate-adaptive mechanical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.