* 2049681
* STEM Graduate Recruitment, Licensure, and Mentorship to Prepare Teachers for Rural Tennessee School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Elliott Elliott, University of Tennessee Martin
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 02/28/2026
* USD 812,548.00

This project aims to address the national shortage of science and mathematics
teachers. Because of the shortage, fewer students receive high quality
instruction in STEM. Thus, many students graduate from high school without the
skills needed for college and careers in today’s technology-driven world. This
project aims to be part of the national solution by addressing the shortage in
rural high-need school districts in West Tennessee. The project intends to
recruit 25 individuals who hold undergraduate degrees in STEM fields, including
STEM professionals. They will receive stipend support to become licensed
educators as they complete a one-year master’s degree in education. This year of
graduate school, followed by a mentored, one-year practicum while employed in
rural high school classrooms, will prepare them as teachers. The need for more
STEM teachers results both from too few teachers entering and too many leaving
the teaching profession. This project intends to address both issues. Financial
support will lower the cost of entry to the teaching profession to address the
problem of too few entering teaching. Proper preparation and mentorship are
expected to address the problem of too many leaving
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of Tennessee at
Martin includes partnerships with Gibson County Special School District,
Lauderdale County School District, and Obion County School District. The project
goals over five years include recruiting 25 individuals with bachelor’s degrees
in mathematics, computer science, biology, chemistry, physics, geoscience, or
engineering and preparing them to become highly effective teachers. Research
shows that compensation and preparation influence the decision to become and to
remain a teacher, regardless of content area. Through quantitative measures,
interviews, and surveys, the project intends to examine how financial and other
factors motivate individuals with STEM degrees to become teachers. The
preparation includes Growth Mindset and the Classroom Organization and
Management Program in addition to education coursework, early clinical
experiences, implicit bias awareness training, and preparation for the edTPA
assessment of preservice teachers. The project will examine the effects of
graduate education coursework and of mentorship on these individuals’
effectiveness in and persistence in the teaching profession. The project expects
to have a broader impact of increasing access to effective STEM education for
students in rural high-need schools. External evaluators from RMC Research
Corporation will assess achievement of project goals. Project findings will be
disseminated through conferences and journals of national educator associations
by project investigators. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.