* 2049061
* Supporting the Scientific Practice of Data Analysis through Creative Investigations of Long-Term Ecological Datasets
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2025
* Andee Rubin, The Learning Partnership
* Standard Grant
* David Daniel
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,624,664.00

This project will focus on research and development for a new professional
development model to support teachers in engaging middle school and high school
students in independent data analysis research projects, using local ecological
data. While there has been a tremendous explosion of publicly available datasets
on all facets of environmental science, teachers and students often have limited
access and exposure to learning opportunities in data analysis to make good use
of them. This project seeks to address this challenge through a professional
development model that engages teachers as apprentices to ecological scientists
and provides the teachers with the support they need to engage their students in
data-based ecological research. The dissemination through the partnership
network will extend the reach of the program to thousands of students from a
diversity of racial and socioeconomic contexts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
Learning Partnership, in collaboration with Technical Education Research Centers
(TERC), Forward Learning, and the Luquillo Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER)
program at the University of Puerto Rico, will build on the foundation of the
Data Jam model, which has been applied across the LTER network. This project
will engage students in the process of exploring, analyzing, and summarizing
long-term data about El Yunque rainforest in Puerto Rico. The goal of this
project is to understand how best to help teachers develop the capacity to
mentor students to be able to ask their own scientific questions and engage in
data analysis to develop evidence for their questions. The project will directly
impact a total of 100 teachers and 2500 students from rural regions of Puerto
Rico over a four year period. Each summer, 25 teachers will have extended
opportunities to explore data trends, develop visualizations, set up datasets,
and ask research questions using long-term data from the Luquillo LTER. During
the school year, teachers will be mentored remotely by a Luquillo LTER scientist
to help teachers address scientific issues that emerge from the studentsâ€™
projects. The scientists will also serve as role models for the students.
Teacher and student outcomes will be measured using observations, surveys, case
studies, and rubrics that measure the quality of the resulting student Data Jam
projects. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.