* 2049887
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Resilience for Whom: A Climate Mobility Framework for Evaluating Equity Outcomes in Climate Resilience Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Elizabeth Anderson, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 22,715.00

Sea level rise is increasing extreme sea level events, including high-tide and
storm-associated floods, which will drive migration and displacement of
residents within coastal communities. Recent studies have focused on the macro-
economic implications of climate-driven migration and displacement, but there
remains a large research gap in our understanding of the multiplicities of
climate related movement, or climate mobilities within a given locality.
Mobility considerations encompass the social and economic disparities within
coastal communities that may impede the ability of residents to cope with
climate migration outcomes. There is a pressing need to understand local
dynamics of climate migration as experienced across the spectrum of
vulnerability to highlight equity considerations in sea level rise adaptation
planning.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this research is to examine the
intersection of sea level rise related exposure risk and socio-economic
vulnerability and their combined impact on potential future climate migration
outcomes through the creation of a novel climate mobility framework. The climate
mobility framework distinguishes between four sets of communities - stable,
migrating, displaced, and trapped- to assess potential inequities within sea
level rise adaptation planning given deep uncertainty and competing societal
demands for funding. This research has three primary objectives: (1) develop a
conceptual framework that considers the multiplicities of sea level rise related
movement, (2) test this framework among current residents of Miami-Dade County,
FL though a mixed methods approach that includes spatial analysis and primary
data collection through interviews and surveys, and (3) facilitate a process of
co-production with government officials and community leaders to understand how
the framework can advance equitable decision making for future climate
resilience policy. This research employs publicly accessible datasets such as
the U.S Census American Community Survey to develop socio-economic indicators of
vulnerability, and integrates novel measures of exposure risk such as the
Parallel Raster Inundation Model, or PRIMo, which provides high resolution
regional compound flooding assessments for robust decision making. The climate
mobility framework should be transferable to coastal communities in the United
States and other societies where property rights and land-use tenure exist. The
conclusions and proposed solutions that emerge from all phases of this research
are likely to be relevant for coastal communities
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.