* 2049965
* Transitioning MorphoBank to a sustainable, permanent home for phenotypic data in phylogenetics research
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Tanya Berardini, Phoenix Bioinformatics Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 617,216.00

Scientists use the tools of phylogenetics to study this diversity and ask
questions about how species evolve and how they are interrelated. Such research
addresses fundamental questions about the characteristics of living organisms,
and helps scientists and the general public understand when, where and how
traits like flowers and behaviors like the ability to fly first arose. Such
questions can be answered by collecting data on the detailed morphology, anatomy
or other traits of the phenotype of many different species, organizing the data
into ‘matrices’ and using the data to build phylogenetic trees that reconstruct
evolutionary changes over time. These matrices and phylogenetic trees are the
foundation for new discoveries in a wide range of scientific disciplines
including animal and plant biology, bacteriology, anthropology and paleontology.
MorphoBank is the only web-based software package for this work, and before it
existed, researchers built matrices on their personal computers, a practice that
limited the ability to collaborate and communicate, and to disseminate and reuse
data. Because MorphoBank serves as an archive as well as a research tool, this
software allows phylogenetics research to advance more quickly by facilitating
the combination of old and new data. MorphoBank guarantees that integrated data
are readable by both computers and humans and makes its data freely available to
anyone worldwide, thereby opening up a new avenue for the public to access the
direct products of scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MorphoBank is a
broadly used community tool to support basic biological research. Recognizing
that the tool must be sustained long term, in 2018 MorphoBank began the
transition from grant-based support to a sustainable membership-based financial
model in partnership with the non-profit scientific database organization,
Phoenix Bioinformatics. Over the next three years MorphoBank’s leadership team
will complete a transition to full membership support. MorphoBank will do this
by growing its membership support from university libraries and museums while
maintaining the core software and continuing to serve a growing US and
international research community. The award will support software maintenance,
data curation and scientific leadership, while MorphoBank ramps up its
membership support sustainability plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.