* 2049448
* Collaborative Research: Economic Downturns, Global Pandemics and Parliamentary Elections
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Ora John Reuter, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 01/31/2023
* USD 191,599.00

Under what conditions do voters withdraw or withhold their support from
governments and how do economic and pandemic stressors affect popular support
for governments and political leaders? This project advances understanding of
how electoral rules, electoral integrity, perceptions of regime popularity and
longevity, and the nature of electoral alternatives shape government support.
Using surveys timed to Russia’s 2021 parliamentary election and including
questions from the Comparative Study of Electoral Systems, this project extends
the longest running election study in an autocratic setting and the only
covering an extended period of retreat from democracy. The data from this
project are an important resource for scholars of authoritarianism, comparative
electoral behavior, and political parties, and its findings are also relevant to
journalists, policymakers and the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing
scholarship gives good reason to believe that declining popular support can
undermine regimes around the world. However, the precise nature of these
processes and the long-term developments that lead to regime change remain
poorly understood. This study uses a nationally representative panel survey
conducted before and after Russia’s 2021 State Duma election to advance
knowledge on two of the most consequential forms of political behavior and
politically salient metrics of a regime’s popular support: turnout and vote
choice. The project’s theoretical contribution focuses on key differences in how
voters process information about government performance and assess available
political alternatives, with special attention to how polarization, preference
falsification, and voters’ emotional states affect their interpretation of new
information during crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.