* 2049579
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Relationship Between Ocean Surface Gravity-Capillary Waves, Surface-Layer Hydrodynamics, and Air-Sea Momentum Flux
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Christopher Zappa, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 164,729.00

Ocean surface waves mediate the transfer of momentum, heat, and gas across the
air-sea interface. Yet there exist very few detailed observations of the role of
short ocean wave growth and directionality in mediating these exchanges. This
project is to analyze a large set of ocean surface wave, near-surface
hydrodynamics, and air-sea momentum flux data collected at the Air-Sea
Interaction Tower (ASIT) between late 2019 and early 2020. The proposed work
will help to resolve fundamental aspects of the relationship between air-sea
momentum flux, ocean surface waves, and near-surface hydrodynamics. The results
will be incorporated into classroom material for a new course on physical air-
sea interaction at the University of New Hampshire and an existing course at
Columbia University. Additionally, the results will be made available to K-12
teachers in the New York City area through the LDEO program "Earth2Class (E2C)
Workshops for Educators". &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will quantify the
relationship between wind forcing and the directional growth and relaxation of
short surface gravity and gravity-capillary waves. The air-sea momentum fluxes
will be addressed by combining the observed thermal skin advection and short-
wave propagation data with the atmospheric turbulent stress profile and
subsurface velocity profile. One of the outcomes of this project will be to
produce a new parameterization for the ocean surface current response to wind
forcing that incorporates turbulent stress and the ocean surface wave
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.