* 2049100
* Cold Fog Amongst Complex Terrain (CFACT)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Eric Pardyjak, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,171,902.00

The project, Cold Fog Amongst Complex Terrain (CFACT), is to investigate cold
fog formation in mountain valleys. Fog consists of tiny water droplets or ice
crystals suspended in the air at or near the Earthâ€™s surface and is considered
as a type of low-lying cloud. Fog forms in high-elevation complex terrain as
frequently as over water bodies but is less understood. Because of its impacts
on visibility, fog is the second most common cause of weather-related aviation
accidents after strong wind events. Fog forecasts have significant impacts on
human activities, transportation, air quality, human health, and agriculture.
Despite the impacts of fog and historical fog research, fog prediction remains a
challenge for weather prediction because of complex interactions between land,
water, and atmospheric conditions in fog formation. Poor fog forecasting skills
reflect a lack of understanding of fog formation, development, and dissipation,
which is the focus of the research. This study is expected to contribute to
improving fog forecasting in mountainous regions, enhancing public awareness of
fog-weather conditions, and information for decision-making. The project
involves the participation of multiple institutions nationally and
internationally with graduate and undergraduate training in both classrooms and
the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of the CFACT project are
to 1) investigate cold fog development and environment conditions in complex
terrain with latest observation technology, 2) improve microphysical
parameterizations and visibility algorithms used in numerical weather prediction
(NWP) models, and 3) develop data-assimilation and analysis methods for current
and next-generation (e.g., sub-kilometer scale) NWP models. The field project
will be conducted in Heber Valley, Utah, during January and February 2022 with
deployment of a network of ground-based in-situ instruments and remote sensing
platforms to obtain comprehensive measurements of thermodynamic profiling, cloud
microphysics, physical and chemical properties of aerosols, and dynamics of the
environment. The Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model with various
physical parameterizations and coupled land-atmosphere data assimilation
capabilities will be used to facilitate the studies for improved fog prediction
with NWP models. It is anticipated that the efforts will result in 1) improved
understanding of cold-fog processes in complex terrain, 2) an evaluation of the
bulk nucleation conditions that affect cold-fog microphysics related to
visibility prediction, 3) identification of knowledge gaps in the micro- to
synoptic- scale kinematic and thermodynamic processes associated with cold-fog
life cycles in heterogeneous complex terrain, 4) understanding of interactions
between physical (e.g., particle growth, nucleation, condensation, radiation)
and dynamic mechanisms (e.g., turbulence, vertical air velocities, and wave
motions) during the lifecycle of a fog event, 5) an evaluation of how land-
surface conditions, especially snow on the ground, affect near-surface and
boundary-layer atmospheric processes including the critical role of the surface
radiative balance in cold-fog formation and evolution, and 6) improvement of
microscales to mesoscales NWP-model simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.