* 2049163
* RAPID: Online Educational Resources on the Science of Vaccines
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Amy Shachter, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 199,425.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing science-based
educational resources on the development of vaccines. In the context of the
COVID-19 pandemic, colleges and universities have a unique and timely
opportunity to provide information about how vaccines are developed and how they
work. This project will integrate information about the development of a
COVID-19 vaccine into videos and supporting teaching materials. It will
disseminate these materials widely to colleges and universities, as well as to
the public at large. The project will also provide workshops about how to
communicate the scientific information neede to make informed decisions about
the vaccine. Broad public access to the videos and workshops will be achieved
through 1) a YouTube channel including videos and supporting material, 3)
partnerships with National Center for Science and Civic Engagement’s project
Science Education for New Civic Engagement and Responsibilities (SENCER),
BioQuest/QUBES, American Association of Engineering Education (ASEE), and Hawaii
and Pacific Islands Campus Compact (HIPICC) and 4) virtual workshops. To reach
diverse communities, project materials will be produced in both Spanish and
English and project personnel intend to implement outreach strategies for
Indigenous (Native American, Native Hawaiian, and Native Pacific Islander)
communities. Project workshops will be open to all educators with potentially
thousands of individuals engaging with project materials. The project evaluation
and research components will make important contributions to understanding the
impact of a rapid science education response to the COVID-19
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create four module toolkits: 1)
Framing an Understanding of Science, 2) The Science of COVID-19, 3) Vaccine
Science, and 4) COVID-19 Science Communication. Each module toolkit will consist
of 3-5 instructional videos, 3-5 public informational videos, and supporting
materials including assessments, discussion questions, and activities. All
materials will be open source. The dissemination plan is grounded in the
Diffusion of Innovation theory of change. The project partners will disseminate
the materials by providing links to the course materials on their websites and
by providing opportunities to host workshops related to the educational
materials at their meetings. Virtual workshops will be held to support adoption
and posted on the YouTube Channel for asynchronous viewing. Workshops will be
conducted to reach diverse communities including Indigenous communities. The
project evaluation will involve surveying project participants to evaluate if
the project has met its primary goal of effective education about vaccine
development. Pre- and post- surveys will be developed and conducted to determine
if the use of the educational resources impacted students’ understanding of
COVID-19 vaccines. In addition, the project will address the following research
questions: Can long-standing science education efforts – SENCER, BioQuest, ASEE
- be leveraged to effectively disseminate national COVID-19 vaccine educational
resources? Can such an effort reach Hispanic, Native Hawaiian, and Native
American communities that often lack access to this information? To address
these questions, the results of the evaluation surveys as well as interviews and
focus groups with project participants will be used. A focused study of project
outreach in Indigenous communities will be conducted. This RAPID award is made
by the IUSE program in the Division of Undergraduate Education: Education and
Human Resources Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.