* 2049073
* Resolving Sediment Connectivity between Rivers and Estuaries by Tracking Particles with their Microbial Genetic Signature
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Jinjun Kan, Stroud Water Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 04/30/2024
* USD 454,385.00

Sea level rise is not only climbing our coastline and sculpting our saltmarshes,
it is also pushing ocean tides far inland where they sweep up rivers and roll
across their fringing forests. Treasured for their biodiversity, beauty, and
other services they provide society, these freshwater wetlands will evolve from
forest to marsh to open water as sea level rises. The pace of this transition
over the coming decades isn’t yet known, and it is likely that even small
changes in the interaction between coastal landscapes and their rivers will lead
to very different impacts affecting public lands, private property, and
environmental management of watersheds and estuaries. Society will be better
positioned to adapt to these impacts by preparing in two ways. First, exploring
how the settling of mud, silt, and sand from rivers and estuaries builds the
elevation of tidal wetlands, especially wetlands at the farthest upstream reach
of tides, will help pinpoint where (and possibly when) major changes to these
wetlands will occur. Second, educating coastal populations on why their coastal
landscapes are changing and training them to measure and monitor these changes
will strengthen local decision-making and empower scientists and coastal
managers to more precisely target environmental
protections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will measure the immediate source
of suspended sediment in the fluvial tidal and saline zones of estuaries,
particularly during river floods. These measurements will help answer
notoriously challenging questions about the connectivity of rivers with their
estuaries, such as “how far do river-borne particles travel into estuaries
during river floods, and what proportion of the suspended sediment do these
particles comprise in the saline estuary?” The answers will reveal as much about
the time scale of particle movements as the spatial scales of river and
estuarine influence. The recent origin of sediment particles will be assessed
using high throughput DNA sequencing of the particle-associated microbial
community. The advantage of this technique is that sediment particles of
identical mineralogy and chemical composition can be traced to their most recent
source (freshwater, tidal freshwater, benthic, wetland, saline estuary).
Synoptic surveys of particle-associated microbial DNA along the riverine-
estuarine transition of two tributaries of the Chesapeake Bay will be
interpreted using results from laboratory incubation and mixing experiments with
suspended sediment from various sources and water matrices. The spatial and
temporal patterns of sediment mixing will be generalized and applied to predict
vulnerability of freshwater tidal wetlands on the US east
coast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.