* 2049004
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Quantifying the role of microbial extracellular vesicles in marine dissolved organic matter production and consumption
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Steven Biller, Wellesley College
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2024
* USD 560,615.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial production and
consumption of organic carbon play critical roles in the marine food web and
global carbon cycling. Bacteria release organic matter in a variety of chemical
forms and in diverse contexts, ranging from individual molecules to small
aggregates and larger biological particles. In recent years we have come to
understand that most, if not all, marine microbes release nanoscale structures
called extracellular vesicles from their surfaces. These discrete particles,
which are abundant in the oceans, are capable of transporting multiple classes
of organic molecules between organisms and can serve as a potential nutrient
source for other microbes. Extracellular vesicles thus represent a potentially
important component of marine microbial food webs, but the magnitude and
dynamics of this contribution are unknown. Further, the packaging of material
within vesicles may influence the accessibility of this organic material as
compared with truly ‘dissolved’ substances to different groups of marine
organisms, potentially biasing nutrient exchanges. Broader impacts of this work
is providing hands-on research experiences for female undergraduate students -
including those from groups historically underrepresented in STEM fields - and
training in data analysis tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to advance the understanding of the role that extracellular vesicles play in
marine dissolved organic carbon pools and microbial food webs. To determine the
contribution of vesicles to organic matter release by marine microbes, the
investigators are quantifying the fraction of excreted carbon and nitrogen
associated with vesicles released by multiple marine cyanobacteria and
heterotrophs. The project is examining how vesicles are ‘consumed’ by
heterotrophs to calculate a mass balance of vesicle utilization and produce
detailed gene expression data to explore how cells respond to the presence of
vesicles. Finally, experiments with coastal and oligotrophic marine communities
are providing insights into which organisms utilize vesicles in the field, and
whether they are broadly accessible to all microbes or are instead
preferentially consumed by a subset of microbes. Collectively, these experiments
are opening up a new area of research into the mechanisms underlying the
microbial loop and provide foundational insights into the roles of extracellular
vesicles in ocean ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.