* 2049799
* Broadening Participation in Economics: The AEA Summer Program with Inclusive Mentoring
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Omari Swinton, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,650,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds Howard University
as the host of the American Economic Association Summer Training Program. The
goal of the AEASTP is to help talented undergraduate students advance their
technical skills and conduct research in economics in preparation for studies at
the doctoral level. Organizers make special efforts to recruit students from
groups under-represented in the economics profession. The program combines
research experience with intensive coursework and career mentoring in a
residential experience. Instructors in the program include both leading
economists and a cohort of Summer Fellows, graduate students in economics who
serve as mentors for the students. Fellows get training in inclusive teaching
methods and benefit from access to the faculty instructors, who work with both
students and fellows as research mentors. AEASTP students will participate in
research experiences at a number of federal agencies and non-profit
organizations in the Washington DC area, and the instructional staff will
include economists employed by the Federal Reserve Bank Board of Governors. The
awardee institution will partner with the Women’s Institute on Science, Equity,
and Race (WISER) to provide year-around mentoring for AEASTP
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The road to successful Ph.D. study in
economics can be a rocky one, especially for students coming from minority-
serving institutions and institutions that do not have a strong research focus.
Obstacles include undergraduate economics curricula that are often oriented
towards the most popular student career goal - business - than Ph.D. study, a
lack of familiarity with the application process, and financial limitations. One
consequence is that several important demographic groups are under-represented
on economics faculties in the U.S. Over the course of this award, a strong
cohortof students will be able to successfully advance to become mature
researchers in economics and related social sciences. Their experiences will be
instrumental in their later careers in allowing them to use a strong
professional network to help them foster a more inclusive environment in their
own teaching and research efforts. By broadening participation in the economics
profession, the program will have a positive and lasting impact on shaping
professional research agendas in economics and related fields to the benefit of
the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.