* 2049553
* Scaling up commons dilemma experiments for research and education
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2025
* Michael Simeone, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2025
* USD 518,159.00

Many of the challenges facing contemporary society are collective action
problems involving shared resources (known as “commons”). Examples include
emission reductions to reduce risks of climate change, and mask-wearing to
reduce the spread of COVID-19. In collective action, there is often tension or
conflict between the goals of the community and the goals of the individual.
Wearing masks and hand washing during the COVID-19 crisis reduces the spread of
the virus and flattens the curve, although it might be an inconvenience for the
individual. This project investigates three fundamental puzzles in this research
area. First, what makes communication so effective at stimulating cooperative
outcomes? It is known that communication, even if participants have no ability
to enforce promises, has a major positive effect. The goal of the project is to
understand what aspects of communication content explains successful
cooperation. Second, how does a group’s size impact the ability of its members
to cooperate? With smaller groups, it is easier to identify who is free riding.
However, small groups may not have sufficient person power to monitor resource
appropriation. Third, how do groups that address collective action problems cope
with uncertainty and surprises. Various events in 2020, such as the pandemic,
are testament to the importance of understanding collective action under
uncertainty. Researchers have investigated risk and collective action, with
known probabilities of events, but there is a gap in the understanding of how
groups cope with unknown unknowns. To address these puzzles, there is a need to
scale up controlled behavioral experiments. This project builds a robust
platform for “commons” research that also serves as an engaging educational
game. The project is mentoring many graduate and undergraduate students, with
diverse backgrounds, in research design, data collection, analyses, and
programming. Project outcomes include educational resources for college level
courses, as well as a special K12 version of the game with accompanying
educational material for teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transdisciplinary
research team expands a web-based experiment, the Port of Mars, where a group of
players make decisions to invest in shared infrastructure and perform actions
that benefit themselves and have consequences for the group. The platform
enables the conducting of large-scale controlled experiments with in-game chat
communication and random events that introduce uncertainty and variance into
each play-through. A large number of participants (both college students and
members of the general population) take part in a tournament, coined “Mars
Madness”, where they compete to become the champion of Port of Mars. Six
experimental designs test hypotheses on communication, group size and
uncertainty. Data collected during the tournaments is used to train machine-
learning models that classify communication data into functional categories
which help to better understand how communication among players relate to group
performance. In the various tournaments group sizes vary between five and fifty
players and they make possible to evaluate the impacts of uncertainty on
collective action by controlling players’ knowledge of events and adjusting the
thresholds that trigger events. Furthermore, the studies show the extent to
which participating in the behavioral experiments improve the understanding of
collective action problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.