* 2049474
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: New Forms of Sociality and Community Construction within Digital Spaces
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Akil Fletcher, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 13,914.00

How is the internet changing the ways people create and build connections? By
some measures, the internet has hosted platforms that are said to exacerbate
social divisions and attenuate the features of daily interaction responsible for
reinforcing social ties. By other measures, the internet has increasingly become
a key platform for personal expression, fundamentally transforming the way that
people communicate, and fostering opportunities for new forms of sociality. This
doctoral dissertation project examines how online platforms are being leveraged
to create and maintain communities among individuals who are socially
marginalized. Because these contexts are relatively new, and by some measure
anonymous, the project has the potential of helping scientists better understand
what creative processes are necessarily to the formation of new and durable
social networks. In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate
student in anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection
and analysis, data and findings from the projects with be shared with companies
and other organizations to help optimize interaction and communication. The
project also broadens the participation of groups traditionally underrepresented
in science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation
research project asks whether there are significant differences in the way that
biases and stereotypes emerge and proliferate within virtual spaces, and the
ways that forms of community are creatively constructed within contexts of
adversity. How is community formed, sociality constructed, and identity curated
in digital contexts? Using an online communication and digital distribution
platform specifically designed as an application for building communities, the
researcher will track the navigational patterns and behaviors of its users. Data
collection and analytical strategies include individual and group interviews,
nine months participant observation within five different online interactive
environments, and narrative and textual analysis of forum and message board
archives. The collected data will contribute to theoretical debates about social
formation, identity construction, and the science of broadening participation in
science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.