* 2049991
* Carbonate system dynamics and biogeochemistry in a changing Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Penny Vlahos, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 272,619.00

The Arctic is an important sink for atmospheric carbon dioxide, a powerful
greenhouse gas. However, as the Arctic warms and the extent of summer sea ice
declines (in a few decades, it is expected the summer Arctic Ocean will be ice
free), it is not clear the degree to which this will change. The investigators
will explore how carbon dioxide chemistry along the ice margins (marginal ice
zone: MIZ) waters differ from that in the open ocean. Taking water samples on
the RV Sikuliaq between May 20 to June 14, 2021, from the Bering sea to the MIZ
in the Chukchi Sea, the investigators will measure several components of the
carbon dioxide system in seawater, including the total concentration of carbon,
and determine how much acidity the water can neutralize. This study will provide
a better understanding of the complexities of arctic biogeochemistry and its
changing role in carbon sequestration and ocean acidification in a warmer world.
The investigators will produce a podcast series during the research cruise to
share their experiences and findings for community
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic Ocean summer sea ice is predicted to
retreat such that in just a few decades the new norm will be ice-free summers.
Taking water samples on the RV Sikuliaq between May 20 to June 14, 2021, from
the Bering sea to the marginal ice zone in the Chukchi Sea, the area where open
water becomes progressively more ice-covered (and ice melt is a significant
signal), presents a unique opportunity to better understand the complexities in
arctic biogeochemistry and its changing role in carbon sequestration as the
summer ice edge recedes. By examining the internal consistency of the carbonate
system/models, the work will lead to an improved understanding of the controls
on ocean acidification and ocean-atmosphere CO2 exchange. The investigators will
examine important carbonate system measurements such as dissolved organic and
inorganic carbon, that when coupled with parallel mercury measurements being
taken on the Sikuliaq, will improve our understanding of the relationships
between dissolved elemental Hg and DIC in the Arctic, both in the open water and
under the ice. The investigators will generate hands-on videos and materials for
citizen science groups with a focus on polar regions. Finally, the investigators
will create a cruise podcast series that will comprise five to ten minute
podcasts for the public on the changing arctic, what itâ€™s like to be a young
oceanographer, and themes related to the study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.