* 2049670
* Workshop:  Aligning AI and U.S. Advanced Manufacturing Competitiveness
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2021
* James Davis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 98,280.00

The Workshop on Aligning AI and U.S. Advanced Manufacturing Competitiveness will
convene the advanced manufacturing research and practitioner communities,
relevant companies, federal agencies and national laboratories and the
Manufacturing USA Institutes and experts in artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning (ML) applications, information technology, and computer science
to comprehensively assess the role of AI in manufacturing competitiveness. The
workshop, held under the auspices of the Subcommittee on Advanced Manufacturing
and the Subcommittee on Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence of the
National Science and Technology Council, seizes on a moment of opportunity that
results from the converging effects of the accelerating digital transformation
of the global manufacturing industry, major global competitiveness drivers for
both advanced manufacturing and AI/ML, and the sustained impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic on manufacturing supply chains. When taken together, there emerges a
need to: accelerate a U.S. manufacturing consensus on resilient manufacturing as
a priority, address how the digital transformation of manufacturing shapes and
is shaped by that transformation, and focus national attention on AI/ML
technologies in the context of the nationâ€™s manufacturing priorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be a professionally-managed, virtual
teleconference that will emphasize the following manufacturing priorities
related to digitalization: manufacturing ecosystem and supply chain
restructuring, connectedness, visibility, interoperability, and agility in
preparing for and responding to global and national disruptions; greater
performance and precision in advanced process and machine operations as key
assets in resilient manufacturing ecosystems; a safe and healthy, broadly-
skilled, and data-savvy workforce that can be more flexibly deployed; and
industry data flow and exchange, cyber opportunity, and national cyber and data
security. The workshop will generate a cross-stakeholder consensus on what roles
AI has and can have in improving U.S. manufacturing competitiveness and
promoting collaboration by the advanced manufacturing and AI/ML research
communities in formulating a national strategy that encompasses the workforce,
technology and implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.