* 2049803
* Collaborative Research: Optimal Parental Leave Policies in the Presence of Statistical Discrimination and Child Development
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* George-Levi Gayle, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This research project will use large data sets and modern economic theory and
measurement methods to investigate the best parental leave policies for the US.
It develops and tests a sophisticated theory of parental leave policy that
accounts for how households and businesses make decisions about labor supply and
demand as well as whether and how many children to have, taking into
consideration government parental leave policies. This model provides a formal
economic framework for analyzing arguments on several sides of the debate.
Rising female workforce participation and reduction in gender gaps in schooling
and earnings are some of the most important changes in labor markets over the
past few decades in high income countries. While several competing parental
leave policies have been proposed for the United States, there is not much
research to guide which of the competing proposals will be best for the United
States. In addition to studying the best parental policy for the US, the project
will also train graduate and undergraduate students in cutting-edge economic
research. The results of this research project will provide guidance on how best
to establish efficient parental leave policies for the US, thus improving the
operations of the labor market. It will also help to establish the US as a
global leader in parental leave policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a large
empirical literature on parental leave policies; however the evidence does not
provide a unique verdict on the efficacy of these policies. On the one hand,
these policies may foster gender equity and child development by enabling
working mothers to combine careers and motherhood. On the other hand, these
policies may have long-term negative consequences for women as they may inhibit
women from building up their careers due to losses in work experience. This
project addresses the optimal design of parental leave policies and various ways
of funding them by presenting a theory of how households make decisions
regarding fertility, labor participation and the allocation of resources, how
leave policies affect these decisions, and how profit-maximizing firms respond
to these policies. The project provides a framework for the assessment of the
optimality of paid family leave policies combining quasi-experimental policy
variation with an explicit, structural modeling of the mechanisms through which
female employees and their employers may respond to these interventions. Unlike
earlier research, this research considers statistical discrimination, household
bargaining, and child development together in a general equilibrium model of the
labor market. The semi-parametric, structural difference-in-difference approach
of the project facilitates rigorous testing of the various mechanisms through
which both sides of the market respond. The results of this research project
will provide guidance on how best to establish parental leave policies, thus
improving the operations of the labor market. It will also help to establish the
US as a global leader in parental leave policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.