* 2049909
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Heterogeneous Effects of Student Loans
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Menaka Hampole, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past 15 years,
outstanding student debt in the U.S. has increased more than fivefold. This rise
in student debt has led to intense political debate and a wide variety of
proposed solutions, from universal free college to targeted need-based reforms.
This project will examine the role of student loans in occupational choice,
using novel hand-collected data on labor market outcomes by focusing on the
effect of financial aid programs called Loan Reduction Programs. The project
will further explore mechanisms to understand how Loan Reduction Programs
affects occupational choices and how these choices differ across the
distribution of family wealth. The outcomes of the proposal will have important
implications for designing student loan policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
an emerging debate on student loans. While estimates for the average student can
serve as an argument to increase financial aid overall, such estimates do not
address the more complex and pressing problem of how best to allocate financial
aid. To design better allocation policies, it is important to explore who is
constrained by student debt. The project will use staggered implementation of
Loan Reduction Policies across 88 universities from 1998 to 2019 as an
instrument for changes in student debt. The research will analyze whether the
effect of student debt on labor outcomes differs across the student population
in relation to certain demographic characteristics. The project, for example,
will examine whether students from low-income families are more constrained in
their labor choices, and whether these students are more likely to choose
occupations that require additional human capital accumulation when they receive
more financial aid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.