* 2049554
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP17-ANT: Constraining the Neodymium (Nd) Isotope and Rare Earth Element Cycles near the Amundsen Sea Continental Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Xinyuan Zheng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 05/31/2024
* USD 472,927.00

Trace elements in seawater are relevant to climate and human society, because
they can act as essential nutrients for marine ecosystems or useful chemical
fingerprints for a variety of oceanographic processes. The international
GEOTRACES program is intended to identify processes and quantify fluxes that
control the distributions of key trace elements and their isotopes in the global
ocean, and to establish how these distributions could respond to changing
environments. Neodymium (Nd) isotopes and rare earth elements (REEs) are notable
examples of such key elements because of their utility in tracing past and
present ocean mixing and sources of trace elements to the ocean. In this
project, investigators will participate in the US GEOTRACES science expedition
GP17-ANT to the Amundsen Sea sector of the Antarctic continental margin, and
analyze Nd isotope ratios and REE concentrations in samples collected from this
expedition. This region of the ocean is of particular significance because it is
experiencing rapid environmental changes in the past few decades, including the
fastest melting of ice shelves around the entire Antarctic. Measurements from
this project will advance our understanding of ocean processes that cause
melting of local ice shelves, and also will shed new light on nutrient sources
that sustain the unusually high biological productivity in the upper ocean of
this region. This project will contribute to support the development of diverse
involvement in Antarctic research, teaching and outreach efforts across career
levels. The outreach activities will provide ample opportunities to engage K-12
students, students from underrepresented groups, and general public in
discussions of ocean sciences and the Antarctic environment in both formal and
informal settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US GEOTRACES GP17-ANT cruise to the
Amundsen Sea provides an exceptional opportunity to study marine biogeochemical
cycles of trace elements and their isotopes in relation to the Antarctic
continental margin, fast iceshelf melting, productive polynyas, and water mass
processes in an area especially susceptible to ongoing climate change. This
project will study sources and processes that regulate the distribution of Nd
isotopes and REEs in seawater in this region. Specific sources and processes
that will be studied, and quantified where possible, include: (1) water mass
transport and mixing; (2) slope exchange; (3) aerosols; (4) sea ice; (5)
subglacial meltwaters; (6) sediments and shelf exchange; (7) particle
interactions. Nd isotope and REE concentration analyses will be conducted on a
suite of carefully selected seawater, particulate, sediment, aerosol, and sea
ice samples to constrain the nature and relative significance of these different
controls, providing a comprehensive understanding of Nd isotope and REE cycling
in the Antarctic margin. These results will not only provide critical
constraints on water mass processes and lithogenic inputs that are directly
relevant to understand all other trace element biogeochemical cycles in this
region, but also improve the utility of Nd isotopes and REE patterns as useful
tracers for studies of modern and ancient oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.