* 2049249
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Political Economy of Migration and Identity
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Joelle Julien, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 10/31/2023
* USD 25,181.00

Political turmoil, ecological disasters, and economic crises have led to an
increase in migration. What impact do these mass movements have both on national
and regional policies, and on the experiences and identity of newly arrived
populations? This doctoral dissertation project investigates how national
policies that attempt to exclude versus integrate newly arrived populations
affect migrant identity and experience, and how this feeds back on policies and
national identities. The project tests and synthesizes theories of governance,
migration, and identity, and supports the training of a graduate student in
anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a multi-sited ethnographic study with
working-class, newly arrived migrants in two contexts, where attitudes toward
and policies affecting migrants differ. Specifically, the doctoral student will
carry out participant observation in organizations serving working-class
migrants and will conduct informal open-ended and semi-structured interviews
with migrants and other important stakeholders affecting and affected by
migration. These findings will be complemented by textual analysis of local,
mainstream, and alternative presses that provide concrete documentation of
migrant-relevant policies, supports, and information. The resulting research
findings will allow for greater understanding of the dynamics and consequences
of transnational migration governance; the cultural, economic, and political
significance of integration versus exclusion for migrants; and the implications
of mass population movements for identity at local, regional, and national
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.