* 2049898
* 3rd International Conference on Microbiome Engineering
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Mark Mimee, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 11/30/2021
* USD 17,049.00

Microbiomes consist of diverse microorganisms and viruses that exist in every
environment on Earth ranging from the deep ocean to human skin. Microbiomes are
highly complex since they contain hundreds to thousands of members and change as
a function of time, space and environmental context. By compartmentalizing
functions in different organisms and coordinating these activities, microbial
communities can perform bio-transformations more efficiently than single
populations. Environmental perturbations can alter the composition and functions
of microbiomes. Microbiome engineering aims to design targeted interventions to
predictably alter microbiome properties or wire together interacting microbial
strains with desired functions from the bottom-up for biotechnological,
agricultural and therapeutic applications. It is within this framework that the
3rd International Conference on Microbiome Engineering is designed. The
conference will occur December 7-8, 2020 making use of a virtual delivery
platform. This international conference brings in experts in industry and
academia worldwide to discuss the challenges in microbiome engineering and the
future of the field. The conference is the third in the series, following the
success of the previous ones held in 2018 and 2019. The 3rd International
Conference on Microbiome Engineering provides a venue for: (1) Scientific
presentations from a diverse group of researchers on an interactive virtual
platform, (2) Encouraging active participation by graduate and undergraduate
researchers who represent the future of the field, (3) Bringing scientists and
engineers together to provide an atmosphere and venue to discuss their
disciplines and approaches, and to motivate new research directions that would
overcome barriers limiting the development of microbiome modeling and
engineering. (4) Focus on increasing the participation of underrepresented
groups in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 3rd International
Conference on Microbiome Engineering aims to create a platform for the sharing
of groundbreaking knowledge in the field. The conference draws attendees from
academia as well as industry to allow new knowledge from the laboratory to
potentially be utilized to manufacture new products. The conference allows for
active participation with question and answer sessions as well as a panel
discussion. The networking opportunities at the conference allow attendees to
exchange their ideas and fosters an environment for future
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.