* 2049926
* Molecular Control of Vascular Meristem Initiation and Activity
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Huanzhong Wang, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 12/31/2024
* USD 371,174.00

The plant vascular system plays essential roles in transporting water and
nutrients to all growing organs. In addition, woody fibers of the vascular
system provide mechanical support for plant upright growth. Xylary wood also
forms the majority of plant biomass on earth and serves as feedstock for biofuel
production. Therefore, the vascular system is important to plant growth and
development and woody biomass production. Despite the importance of the vascular
system, it is challenging to study vascular initiation because the vascular
tissue is buried under layers of other cell types and inaccessible for direct
microscopic observation. The vascular system is initiated from a region named
the rib zone that is located below the plant growing tip. This research
investigates how plants initiate vascular bundles and identifies genes that
regulate vascular cell division using recently discovered genes and genetic
methodologies. Outcomes of this research include a better understanding of
vascular tissue formation and the regulation of cell proliferation in vascular
tissues. This project integrates research and education by engaging under-
represented undergraduate and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
vascular system transports water and nutrients and has allowed plant species to
successfully colonize various of terrestrial environments since they evolved 450
Million years ago. The vascular system initiates from the apical meristem rib
zone and organizes as vascular bundles. Cambial cells from vascular bundles
proliferate and then differentiate into phloem and xylem. Understanding the
regulation of vascular meristem initiation and activity is of great interest to
plant biology research. Further, xylary wood serves as a renewable feedstock for
biofuel production. Despite the importance of vascular tissue, there is a
knowledge gap in our understanding of the initiation and activity control of
vascular meristem. This project builds on the identification of a novel C2H2
transcription factor High Vascular Activity (HVA) to dissect the regulatory
mechanisms of vascular initiation and meristematic cell proliferation. The first
aim is to investigate the molecular function of HVA in regulating vascular
initiation using deep imaging approaches. The second aim is to elucidate the
functional mechanism of HVA in modulating vascular meristem activity. The third
aim is to determine the function of HVA in xylem cell differentiation using
genetic, biochemical, and transgenic studies. Overall, this project will lay the
ground for molecular dissection of vascular meristem initiation and cambial
proliferation in the stem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.