* 2049333
* Active preference learning to aid public decisions
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Alexander Davis, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2024
* USD 408,988.00

When individuals need to choose between options, such as whether to buy an
electric or hybrid car, they must first characterize those options, for example
in terms of price or miles per gallon, then select the option that best
satisfies their preferences. This can be a daunting task when there are many
options, complex ways of characterizing those options, and when individuals are
unsure about how to make tradeoffs among them. Decision aids help individuals
formulate such decision problems by providing a simple characterization of the
risks, costs, and benefits of the available options. Yet, many important
decisions involve multiple decision-makers, such as a family purchasing a car, a
group of friends choosing a movie to watch, or even members of the public
choosing the future of energy policy for their city, state, or country. In this
research we generalize the individual decision aid to a public decision aid,
that helps groups of heterogeneous decision-makers come to consensus using
information about individual and group choices. To do this, we combine methods
from active preference learning with the use of social welfare functions that
map individual to group preferences. Our two public decision aids 1) learn
individual preferences by asking the minimum number of questions of a decision-
maker to precisely learn preferences, 2) efficiently learn group social welfare
functions, and then 3) make recommendations to groups based on the learned
individual and group preferences. Using this approach, we aim to answer three
research questions: 1) What choice rules do individuals and groups use for
energy and environmental policy? 2) What active learning methods can best
estimate those choice rules? 3) To what degree does heterogeneity in social
preferences affect group consensus? The research forwards fundamental knowledge
of decision-making by combining theories and models at the intersection of
behavioral decision research, decision analysis, active machine learning, and
techno-economic analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project forwards research
into the conceptual, methodological, and empirical foundations of a public
decision aid approach for helping groups of stakeholders come to consensus on
public policies. To do this, the project combines active preference learning
methods that select the most informative choice sets to learn preferences, with
social welfare optimization, that learns a mapping from individual to group
preferences based on group behavior. Three aims advance this research. Aim 1
develops a novel twinned neural network architecture that can actively learn the
individual preferences of decision-makers across many different types of
behavioral choice rules, using simulations and prior data to test the
architecture against strong benchmarks. Aim 2 extends that architecture with a
homogeneous degree 1 penalty to learn group social welfare functions from group
choice behavior, using simulations to test the neural network against social
welfare function priors established in pilot research. Aim 3 collects new data
in two contexts. The first tests the best individual and group active preference
learning approaches in an online randomized experiment for US federal energy
policy. The second uses a field experiment to help Chilean regulators prioritize
environmental inspections. The results expand scientific understanding of the
capability and efficiency of methods for learning individual and group
preferences, and help practitioners use the most effective methods for reaching
group consensus in energy and environmental public
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.