* 2049460
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Factors Influencing Cooperation and Adversity in Water Infrastructure Management
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Peter Habib, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 24,368.00

This research examines what forces contribute to cooperation or adversity in
contexts of resource scarcity and population displacement. While population
displacement is often characterized as contributing to tension in the host
contexts to where these populations are displaced, less understood are the
conditions that promote cooperation and solidarity, especially in circumstances
of protracted displacement and shared residence. This dissertation research
addresses these questions by investigating the role of communal water
infrastructure, such as public water taps, water truck deliveries, and wells, in
promoting cooperation, or instigating tension, between residents of various
social, religious, and economic backgrounds. In addition to supporting the
training of a doctoral student, the findings from this project will be shared
with organizations, development practitioners, and policy
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation project examines the
factors influencing access to water and the maintenance of communal water
infrastructure. This project compares two localities: one marked by citizen-
displaced population cooperation and solidarity, and another by continued
tension. Both localities contain similar communal water infrastructures which
serve as routine gathering sites for both citizen and refugee residents. This
project therefore investigates how a shared dependence on infrastructure can
enable cooperative relations. In addition to examining how residents' social
worlds frame their encounters, this project explores how infrastructure
breakdown, repair, and neglect reconfigure social relations. Ethnographic
research methods are employed, including participant observation, interviews,
and archival research among resident populations, as well as with non-
governmental actors who oversee the infrastructure. This research contributes to
contemporary social science and anthropology by better understanding the role of
communal infrastructure in mediating and reconfiguring cooperative and
conflictual social relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.