* 2049793
* REU Site: Interactive Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* James Henderson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 354,683.00

This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The Interactive
Biomaterials Research Experiences for Undergraduates site (REU Site) trains
cohorts of students from across the country in state-of-the-art biomaterials
research to prepare them for future careers in biomaterials science and
engineering. This REU Site (1) engages students in independent, leading-edge
biomaterials research projects conducted in multidisciplinary and collaborative
laboratory environments; (2) provides mentoring opportunities and network-
building experiences to excite participants about the societal impacts of
careers available to them following graduate education; (3) prepares students to
be effective communicators to public and scientific audiences, and (4) creates a
welcoming and diverse training environment that promotes the inclusion of all
participants. Complementing training in cutting-edge research techniques,
students receive one-on-one mentoring from faculty advisors and graduate student
mentors and participate in technical writing workshops and team-building
activities. A signature element of the REU Site is its career mentoring
initiative for doctoral-level industrial and academic career paths, further
emphasizing the importance and benefits of graduate education in STEM
disciplines. Students also give regular presentations about their research and
deliver a formal presentation at a culminating, university-wide research
symposium. The REU Site leadership especially encourages the participation of
students with limited research opportunities, women, underrepresented
minorities, and disabilities to expand their access to these career-enhancing
opportunities. With the support of faculty and graduate student mentors and
their peers, students develop and enhance their skills in essential areas such
as networking, working in research teams, and communicating orally and
technically in various formats. Best practices emerging from this REU Site are
broadly disseminated via the web and educational publications to enable
replication at other future REU sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
Biomaterials are increasingly designed to be stimulus-responsive, where their
properties can change in a controlled way in response to thermal, chemical, or
mechanical stimuli in their environment. These interactions between materials
and the biological environment, which occur at atomic, molecular, cellular,
microscopic, and macroscopic levels, dictate biomaterialsâ€™ performance both in
vitro and in vivo. The research projects available to students advance knowledge
of these fundamental interactions in areas that include: shape memory and
stimulus-responsive polymers, nanoparticle drug delivery, the collective
behavior of bacterial biofilms, cell-biomaterial interactions, stem-cell
research, biocompatible soft robots, 3D printing of microfluidic devices, and
computational modeling of biomaterials. These hypothesis-driven,
multidisciplinary research projects draw upon the collective expertise of
faculty, and in many cases, foster collaborative research across faculty
laboratories, academic departments, and institutions. Faculty mentors are highly
qualified to mentor undergraduate students in their laboratories; each has a
vast array of modern facilities, equipment, and computational resources at their
disposal for training these students in cutting-edge research using analytical
and computational techniques. Students develop technical skills and expertise to
appreciate the complexity of these interactive biomaterials and understand how
to harness these materials for advanced technologies, preparing them to pursue
advanced study for careers in various sectors and
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.