* 2049047
* Larval orientation, dispersal and connectivity in a brachyuran crab under ocean acidification and elevated temperature
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Zuo Xue, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2025
* USD 922,033.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stone crab fishery is a
multimillion-dollar commercial industry in Florida, which may not be sustainable
given forecasted climate change and the predicted increases in extreme weather
events. Stone crab larval swimming behavior and survivorship are negatively
affected by reduced pH (ocean acidification) and elevated temperatures. These
conditions are expected to become more common and widespread along the western
Florida coast and may impact the supply of larvae that settle into and replenish
both unfished and fished populations. Changes in larval dispersal could lead to
recruitment failure; however, the extent of such an outcome is currently
unknown. The goal of this study is to develop models that forecast the abundance
and distribution of Floridaâ€™s stone crabs under future climate scenarios.
Laboratory experiments are quantifying how temperature and pH affect larval
survivorship and behavior. Results from the laboratory studies are being
integrated with information on ocean currents and chemistry into a biophysical
model. This model predicts the effects of climate change on the stone crab
population by combining projections of the physical and chemical environment
with climate-induced changes to larval behavior. The broader impacts include
relevance to sustainable management of the stone crab and other coastal
crustacean fisheries, training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, and educational outreach. Curriculum development is occurring in
partnership with Title-1 schools, and high-school students are developing short
documentaries to be entered into a marine science film festival at Florida
Southern College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many coastal habitats, ocean
acidification (OA) is occurring at an accelerated rate relative to end-of-
century projections, largely due to localized wetland degradation, increased
runoff, and eutrophication, all of which amplify variability in coastal pH. The
ability to project future persistence of marine species and the sustainability
of coastal fisheries depends on understanding how the combined effects of
acidification and elevated temperature impact population connectivity and
recruitment. Even small changes in planktonic larval survivorship, behaviors, or
dispersal can lead to large population changes; however, predicting these
changes requires understanding the biology of the organisms within the context
of how the physical and chemical environment is changing. When exposed to
reduced pH and elevated temperature conditions similar to those expected at the
end of the century, some larvae not only experience increases in mortality, but
they also change their swimming behavior, which in turn alters their dispersal
in the coastal ocean. This study is quantifying the combined impacts of OA and
elevated temperature on the dispersal and connectivity of a brachyuran
crustacean, the stone crab. Controlled laboratory studies are measuring the
effects of changes in pH and temperature on larval vertical swimming behavior,
development, and survivorship. The results from the laboratory studies are being
integrated with high-resolution spatially and temporally realistic hydrodynamic
and carbonate chemistry projections in a coupled biophysical model to predict
modifications to larval dispersal and their impact on population connectivity
and persistence under different environmental conditions. This study is
providing new insights into how larval behaviors affect the resilience of a
crustacean metapopulation by quantifying dispersal patterns and connectivity,
potential population fragmentation, and overall recruitment under current and
future climate scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.