* 2050742
* REU Site: Research experience through collaborative teams in bioprocessing for conversion of waste into products of value
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sushil Adhikari, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2024
* USD 391,099.00

Closing the loop on biological wastes is a critical global challenge given the
expectation that the Earth will support roughly 9 billion people by 2050.
Biological wastes are rich resources that contain a range of nutrients as well
as water. Many of the molecules found in bio-waste can be transformed into
products of value to society – fertilizers, protein, energy, clean water,
medicine, and advanced biomaterials. This project promotes scientific progress
and advances the health, prosperity, and welfare of the nation, consistent with
the NSF’s mission. It does this by engaging cohorts of budding researchers into
research projects aimed at converting biological waste materials back into
products of value. At the same time, it trains student participants on how to
conduct research and, of equal importance, how to communicate that work to the
broader community. Participant students will be recruited from populations that
are underrepresented in technical fields, as well as populations who currently
lack access to research opportunities. The outcome will be a better-trained,
diverse scientific workforce, which will help deliver solutions that benefit
both people and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to establish a new REU site that integrates undergraduate students in
team-based research projects focused on converting biological wastes into
products of value. The proposed REU site will provide a 10-week summer research
experience for ten students each year, over a 3 year period. REU students will
be paired with faculty teams working in four different areas: 1) use of fish
waste for sustainable aquaponics vegetable production, 2) upgrading wastewater
nutrients into zooplankton fish feed, 3) transforming cellulose into sensors for
infectious disease detection, and 4) conversion of lignin into adhesives and
carbon fiber. As the most abundant biopolymers on Earth, cellulose and lignin
are widely available in a range of waste biomass resources. REU student
participants will not only gain research experience through this project, they
will also receive training on teamwork and communication best practices through
a suite of professional development opportunities. These efforts will yield two
major outcomes: 1) a cohort of young researchers, many from underrepresented
groups, who have strong understanding of interdisciplinary team-based research,
and 2) publications showcasing the work of these students to the broader
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Division of Engineering Education and Centers (Directorate for Engineering), and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.