* 2050406
* Preparing Highly Qualified, Diverse Secondary STEM Teachers for High-Need New York Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Marion Ben-Jacob, Mercy College
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 03/31/2026
* USD 773,970.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing highly qualified,
diverse STEM teachers who are committed to teaching in high-need school
districts. In K-12 schools nationwide, the demographics of teachers do not match
those of their students. This project aims to address this disparity by
recruiting, preparing, and supporting a diverse group of 16 teacher candidates
in mathematics, biology, chemistry, earth science and physics to teach in high-
need school systems. Undergraduates will be recruited from current STEM majors
at Mercy College and will complete a five-year dual degree program in which they
will earn a BS in a STEM major and an MS in Adolescent Education. In addition,
post-baccalaureate STEM degree-holders will be recruited to pursue an MS in
Adolescent Education and teaching certification. Through coursework, field
observations, clinical residencies, and vertical professional learning
communities, the future teachers will work to be explicitly anti-racist, who can
actively break down barriers and address inequities in school communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Mercy College (a Hispanic-serving
institution) includes partnerships with Urban Institute of Mathematics,
Democracy Prep Bronx High School, Yonkers Public Schools, Port Chester-Rye City
School District, the City School District of New Rochelle, the Charter School
for Educational Excellence, and New Visions Charter High School for Advanced
Math and Science, as well as the State University of New York at Purchase and
Sarah Lawrence College. It will take a social justice approach to supporting
teachers’ agency, self-efficacy, and retention. Project goals include to: 1)
recruit a diverse group of 16 prospective mathematics and science teachers from
two groups: undergraduate mathematics or science majors who will complete a
BS/MS degree program with teacher certification and STEM professionals who will
complete a master's degree program with teacher certification; 2) help teachers
in high-need districts implement strong, student-centered STEM pedagogy; 3)
identify the qualities and competencies that administrators of high-need schools
consider to be necessary for new teacher success and persistence in teaching.
Project research will explore best practices related to recruiting
underrepresented minorities into STEM teaching, improving teacher retention in
high-need schools, and understanding administrators’ perspectives on how to best
prepare teachers to work in high-need schools. The project will also advance
knowledge of how to promote social justice within STEM teacher preparation,
along with authentic integration of technology and engineering in science and
math classrooms. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers
in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.