* 2050547
* Connecting Mathematics Teacher Education to Real World Contexts: Attracting and Retaining  Diverse Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Tariq Akmal, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 05/31/2025
* USD 895,743.00

This project aims to serve the national need of increasing the ability of
mathematics teachers from diverse communities to teach effectively in high-need
school districts. Research demonstrates that traditional teacher preparation
programs continue to fall short in recruitment, preparation, and retention of
secondary mathematics teacher candidates from communities that have not
historically been well represented in the teaching profession. The project seeks
to prepare graduates to enact culturally responsive teaching practices and to
showcase mathematics as a human activity that can be applied to address issues
of equity and social justice, such as income inequality, climate change, and
racism. The project seeks to increase the diversity and number of secondary
mathematics teachers who adopt human perspectives and practices to meet the
needs of learners in high-need schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at
Washington State University includes partnerships between the Colleges of Arts
&amp; Sciences and Education, two campuses (Pullman and Vancouver), two regional
Educational Service Districts (ESDs), Washington State Mathematics Fellows as
virtual mentors, and mentor teachers from nine high-need local school districts.
Project goals include: (1) recruiting 24 undergraduate mathematics majors over
three years to pursue teacher certification; and (2) preparing mathematics
teachers who will persist in teaching and can effectively meet the needs of
students in high-need school districts. The project features both an
undergraduate (Pullman campus) and a graduate (Vancouver campus) pathway.
Grounded in theoretical perspectives of mathematics and mathematics teaching as
humanizing activities, project activities will promote asset-based perspectives
of students, mathematics learning environments that intellectually challenge all
students and foster positive mathematical identities, and the use of mathematics
to connect to the community and to promote social justice. Institutional data,
edTPA scores, surveys regarding critical thinking and diversity preparedness,
course artifacts, and focus group interviews will to be used to generate
understanding of how programs can inspire prospective mathematics teachers to
embody core humanizing principles. Broadly, the project hopes to serve as a
model for humanizing mathematics teacher preparation as it promotes policies and
narratives in mathematics and mathematics teaching that serve the needs of
individuals from backgrounds underrepresented in STEM fields. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.