* 2050733
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Stuart Tessmer, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2024
* USD 293,143.00

The Physics and Astronomy Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program
at Michigan State University (MSU) offers students the opportunity to conduct
advanced research in world-class facilities while being directly supervised by
faculty who are recognized experts in their discipline. In addition, peer-
mentoring and professional development are key components of the program. This
program consists of a 10-week research experience for the period of 2021-2024
for 12 REU participants each summer. The main goal is to bring the excitement of
forefront physics research to undergraduate students, and to foster their
development into outstanding scientists by helping them develop professional
skills. Especially targeted are underrepresented students in physics and
students from smaller colleges that do not have extensive research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program offers undergraduate students
the opportunity to do forefront research in a field of physics – nuclear,
condensed matter, high-energy, astrophysics, biophysics, or physics education.
Each student in the program will work on a well-defined research project under
the direction of a faculty mentor. Students choose their projects from a list
suggested by the faculty. A wide variety of projects, both experimental and
theoretical, are available. In nuclear physics, MSU is the site of the National
Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory and the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams,
major centers located within a few steps of the Physics and Astronomy
Department. REU students also have access to state-of-the-art research
facilities such as the Keck Microfabrication Facility, the MSU High Performance
Computing Center, the SOAR Telescope Remote Observing center, and numerous
single-investigator laboratories in condensed matter physics, biophysics, and
physics education. Many faculty participate in international collaborations and
have access to data from facilities such as neutrino and cosmic ray
observatories and high-energy particle accelerators. The department’s
theoretical faculty often collaborate with the local experimental groups and
have provided excellent research opportunities for REU students. In addition to
the faculty mentors, the REU program provides peer-mentoring, several
professional-preparation workshops, including preparation for graduate school,
and an optional short course on machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.