* 2050457
* Creating a Minor in Education as a Pathway for Science, Math, or Computer Science Majors to Obtain Teaching Licensure
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2021,09/30/2022
* Reid Riggle, St. Norbert College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2022
* USD 118,360.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing highly effective
science, math, and computer science teachers for high need middle and secondary
schools. It will do this through creation of a new pathway toward teaching
licensure for STEM majors. Significant to this project is the realization that
many students do not begin college knowing their long-term career aspirations.
This project intends to lay the foundation to enable students who decide to
become teachers later in their college years to successfully pursue teaching
certification without significant additional time to degree. In addition to
providing the principal investigators with information they can use to create
and submit a Noyce proposal, this Capacity Building project may yield
information to encourage similar efforts across Wisconsin and the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a partnership between St. Norbert’s
College, a four-year private Catholic Liberal Arts College, and Northeast
Wisconsin Technical School (NWTS), a two-year public college that prepares
students for careers in science and technology. The project goals include
development of: (1) a pathway for geology, physics, mathematics, computer
science, environmental science or chemistry majors to obtain an undergraduate
minor leading to Wisconsin state education licensure; (2) a general education
introductory course that satisfies licensing requirements, with a teaching-
focused field experience; (3) a strong partnership with NWTS leading to transfer
students matriculating to St. Norbert's College; and (4) strengthening community
partnerships to increase the number of qualified STEM teachers. This Capacity
Building project proposes to build a pathway to teaching for STEM majors
starting at NWTS. In addition to creating a minor in education, the project’s
intellectual merit includes the creation of a single class that satisfies
general education requirements, provides foundational knowledge on adolescent
development requisite for licensure, and provides students with an extensive
internship experience to aid them in discerning if STEM teaching is an
appropriate career trajectory. The project’s broader impacts include the
creation of a model that can be adopted by other institutions for the purpose of
providing a low-risk entrance into STEM education experiences. The work will be
evaluated through targeted formative and summative evaluation that involves
qualitative and quantitative approaches. Work will be disseminated through
national, local and regional channels for institutions with similar licensure
requirements. This Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers
in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.