* 2050772
* REU Site: Sensory Ecology: An Integrative Approach
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2024
* John Layne, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2024
* USD 346,398.00

This REU Site award to the University of Cincinnati (UC), located in Cincinnati,
OH, will support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2021-2023. It is anticipated that a total of 24 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. There is an
increasing need of a workforce with high-level training in STEM which this site
will help to meet through supporting students in their development of skills,
content knowledge, and professional networks. Assessment of the program will be
done through the online SALG URSSA tool to ensure that goals are met. Students
will be tracked after the program in order to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site in Sensory Ecology focuses on research
about how animals acquire and respond to information about their environment.
The UC Department of Biological Sciences has a nationally recognized strength in
Sensory Biology and Behavior, so students can expect cutting-edge research that
integrates the experimental and mechanistic study of sensory processes with the
conceptual approaches of psychology, neurobiology, ecology and behavior.
Research projects may center on topics such as genomics and development of
sensory systems, neural mechanisms of sensory system function, mechanisms of
animal movement/dispersal, evolution of sensory systems, and computational
modeling of sensory system function and the impact of the environment. A
structured program of multi-level mentoring in research and an educational
program in professional development and responsible conduct of research will
develop students’ conceptual and professional skills and prepare them to pursue
their diverse career goals. Students will also work in multidisciplinary teams
with digital media and communications to produce digital content highlighting
the importance of their scientific work to society. Dissemination of their
research will occur via scientific presentation, educational digital media
and/or publication. More information about the program, including application
material, is available by visiting http://artsci.uc.edu/bio-reu, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Stephanie Rollmann, stephanie.rollmann@uc.edu, or the co-
PI (Dr. John Layne, john.layne@uc.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.