* 2050145
* Resources Accessed to Cultivate and Enhance Resilience (RACER)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Julie Luft, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The project aims to serve the national need to understand the persistence and
retention of newly hired secondary STEM teachers in high-needs settings. Towards
that end the project aims to study cohorts of Noyce Scholars that have graduated
from three different programs. The project team recognizes that teacher turnover
is problematic, and that it is often a result of burnout. Central to
understanding burnout is the resilience of the subjects and their access to
resources. Therefore, this project intends to see how newly hired teachers
access the resources around them to cultivate and enhance resilience. When newly
hired teachers are resilient through their acquisition of resources, they can
improve their instruction and knowledge, stay in teaching longer and,
ultimately, ensure student learning. The results of this study will reveal how
productive a resource orientation is to the persistence of newly hired teachers
and the importance of developing resilience in the early years of teaching.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Kent State University includes
partnerships with Eastern Washington University and the University of Georgia.
Project goals include identifying the resources accessed by newly hired Noyce
teachers over time (during two consecutive years in their first five years of
teaching), describing the development of resilience, and developing a model to
illustrate the relationship among resources, resilience, and burnout. The
Conservation of Resources theory serves as the theoretical framework. This
theory and a multidimensional view of resilience provide a more nuanced picture
of the personal and contextual factors that influence the persistence of novice
teachers. Data will be collected from thirty newly hired Noyce teachers. Over
the course of two years, surveys, interviews, observations, and reflections will
be collected and analyzed to answer three sets of research questions. First,
what resources do newly hired Noyce teachers access, and how does resource
access change over time? Why are the resources useful? Second, how is resilience
developed and portrayed in newly hired Noyce teachers? Finally, what is the
relationship between types of resources, resilience, and burnout in newly hired
Noyce teachers? The Intellectual Merit of this proposal resides in understanding
how newly hired Noyce teachers access resources and their development of
resilience. The Broader Impacts of this proposal reside in better ways to
support newly hired science and math teachers in high-needs districts. For high-
needs school districts, persistent teachers continue to support learners in
experiencing success in mathematics and science, instead of leaving the
profession. For teachers, knowing what resources to access can improve their
well-being and instruction in mathematics and science. For students, having
resilient teachers can enhance learning for those who have historically
experienced teacher turnover and are left behind intellectually in STEM. An
Advisory Board comprised of experts external to the project will serve to
determine the adequacy of the research and progress of the project towards
achieving its intents. Presentations at regional and/or national meetings, as
well as publications in journals and on the Internet (e.g., social media,
Research Gate, and university websites) will be the primary mechanism for
project dissemination of findings. This Track 4: Noyce Research, or Capacity
Building project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.