* 2050771
* Control of Vortex Breakdown and the Blue Whirl
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Elaine Oran, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2024
* USD 420,001.00

Fire whirls are dangerous, rapidly whirling flames that arise naturally in
wildfires. When they do occur, they can be up to a kilometer tall and very
destructive. Fire whirls can lift and throw burning material and generate fast
winds that quickly spread the fire. Under the right controlled laboratory
conditions, however, a fire whirl can transition into a beautiful, benign,
small, blue flame called a blue whirl. These blue whirls can burn many different
types of hydrocarbon fuels, either in gaseous or liquid form, while producing
minimal pollutants and no soot at all. Such green-combustion properties are
optimal for burning hydrocarbons, which make blue whirls a potential source of
truly clean combustion energy. To use the blue whirl for practical applications,
though, more needs to be understood about its structure, how it forms, and how
to control it. This research project aims to understand how the blue whirl
evolves naturally from a fire whirl and how to control it. The results of these
investigations should reveal how to bypass the dangerous fire-whirl stage for
creating the blue whirl, and the research should provide fundamental knowledge
about swirling flows, which would benefit other related systems. This research
project will train several early-career researchers, including a postdoctoral
researcher and several graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies
led to the discovery of the existence of the blue whirl, its flame structure,
and some of its dynamic properties. An important observation was that the blue
whirl emerges from a fire whirl that goes unstable through a process known as
vortex breakdown, which is a fluid transition leading to various possible modes
of swirling flow. The objective of this research project is to focus on the
vortex-breakdown transition and use large-scale numerical models to investigate
whether it is possible to control the evolution to different modes. More
specifically, the researchers will consider several different types of swirling
flows subject to vortex breakdown. One type is a swirling flow with localized
heat changes in the region of vortex breakdown. Here, the researchers hope to
investigate and quantify how heat changes introduced into the vortex-breakdown
process affect the transition to different modes. Another type of swirling flow
to be investigated is a chemically reactive flow that produces flames such as
the blue whirl. The researchers anticipate finding information on how to control
the blue whirl and to enable its use for power generation and fuel spill clean-
up. These studies will provide a fundamental understanding of the system that is
needed to control vortex breakdown in other related applications, such as
controlling instability on highly swept wings and swirl combustors. The new
numerical algorithms and physical models developed from this research project
will add to the general computational ability to simulate low-speed reactive
complex flow systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.