* 2050138
* A Family of Diagnostic Models for Evaluating Learning Progressions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Matthew Madison, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 194,099.00

This research project will develop psychometric methodology to empirically
evaluate developmental progressions. A developmental progression describes a
theorized or observed sequence of cognitive, psychological, or behavioral
developments in an individual or group. In educational settings, learning
progressions describe the increasingly sophisticated ways of reasoning that
develop as students learn about specific content domains over time. Despite
their prevalence and utility, quantitative methodological developments to
evaluate learning progressions have stagnated. This project will advance the
fields of psychometrics and learning sciences by providing a modern,
multidimensional, and longitudinal framework for modeling developmental
progressions. Although the project focuses on educational applications, the
developed methods will be widely applicable in disciplines across the social and
behavioral sciences. The project will train a graduate student from an
underrepresented group. Free and easy-to-use software will be developed for
researchers to utilize in their own examinations of learning progressions. The
results and products stemming from this project have the potential to change the
way researchers design, interpret, and analyze assessments in the empirical
evaluation of developmental progressions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
will use a diagnostic classification model (DCM) framework to model learning
progressions. DCMs are multivariate psychometric models that classify examinees
into specified levels of categorical latent traits (e.g., basic, proficient,
advanced). DCMs have become attractive in educational settings because they
provide much desired diagnostic and criterion-referenced score interpretations
in the form of classifications. Recently, DCMs have been developed for
longitudinal contexts that provide criterion-referenced interpretations of
student growth. To model learning progressions, the developed model will combine
a generalized longitudinal DCM with the hierarchical DCM designed to model
attribute hierarchies. This fusion of modeling frameworks allows for the
simultaneous examination of attribute hierarchies and student learning over
time, which together comprise the basis of a learning progression. Simulation
studies will guide and inform the practical application of the developed methods
with respect to data requirements (i.e., number of items or sample size), test
design, model fit, and factors impacting the accuracy, validity, and reliability
of model-based inferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.