* 2050417
* REU Site: for Community College Students at TAMU-Commerce
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ben Jang, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2024
* USD 351,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to Texas A&amp;M
University - Commerce, located in Commerce, TX, supports the training of nine
community college students for 10 weeks per year in 2022-2024. This program,
funded by the Division of Chemistry, uniquely addresses the needs of the
Northeast Texas region and the neighboring areas with a focus on community
college students, a large fraction of which are minority and first-generation
college students. The REU site provides a wide variety research projects within
the chemical sciences, alongside professional development training that develops
students' communication skills and explores careers within the chemical
sciences. Ultimately this site aims to develop a diverse "pipeline" for STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) studies enrollment and
training to produce a more inclusive and robust STEM workforce in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects planned for this site span the
field of chemistry, with examples including the development of synthetic
receptors to sense or extract polyfluoroalkyl substances; the development of
recyclable ionic liquid-supported organocatalysts; and the exploration of new
approaches to biomass conversion. These topics represent critical research areas
in the chemical sciences today and both the skills assimilated in these research
studies and the knowledge gained from these pursuits are expected to bolster the
national research endeavor in chemistry. The program includes early visits in
the spring semester to match students with projects and to start the formation a
close cohort. Close management of the summer program is supported by weekly oral
presentations, weekly faculty mentor discussions, progress and final reports,
and a final symposium, including both oral and poster presentations. In
addition, three workshops are scheduled to improve studentsâ€™ presentation and
scientific writing skills and training in the important area of research
ethics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.