* 2050915
* REU Site: Biological Data Science for Community College Students:  Transition to Academic and Research Independence
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2025
* Corey Cleland, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2025
* USD 507,184.00

This REU Site award to James Madison University, located in Harrisonburg, VA,
will support the training of 10 undergraduate students in a 10-week program
during each of 2021-2023 summers. It is anticipated that a total of 30 rising
second year students, primarily from community colleges, schools with limited
research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be trained in
the program. Student research, the cornerstone of the program, will address
various aspects of biology and biochemistry. Students will learn how to design
experiments, conduct research, and analyze data. The program will facilitate the
students’ transition to independence through research experiences that will
support the progression of community college students into STEM programs at
four-year institutions and foster their subsequent academic and research
success. Assessment of the program will be done through the online SALG URSSA
tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will conduct research on diverse
topics in biology and biochemistry, including visual and movement neuroscience,
protein structure, biological education, snake ecology, molecular genetics, cell
migration, marine ecology and auditory communication in birds. All projects will
require the students to apply data tools to interpret the results. Training in
bioinformatics, data analytics, R programming, image analysis and data
visualization is included in the program. In addition to data science training,
students will also participate in workshops on effective applications to four-
year institutions, careers in Biology and Biochemistry, diversity and inclusion,
and scientific presentations. At the end of the program, students will present
their research findings to their peers, and many will present their work at
scientific conferences. Included in the program are educational trips and
cohort-building activities. Participants will be selected by the Principal
Investigator and potential faculty mentors based on an online application. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.jmu.edu/biology/reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Corey Cleland at
clelancl@jmu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Bisi Velayudhan at
velayubt@jmu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.