* 2050841
* REU SITE: Collaborative Research: Nanoscale Detectives -- Elucidating the Structure and Dynamics of Hybrid Perovskite Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* David Mitzi, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2024
* USD 160,944.00

Hybrid materials, incorporating both organic and inorganic components, are
currently being engineered to create new materials with properties controlled by
nanoscale composition and morphology. The Research Triangle Research Experience
for Undergraduates (RT- REU) will leverage the strength of collaborative
research on hybrid materials, specifically hybrid perovskites, together with the
integrated nanotechnology tools of the RTNN to provide a state-of-the-art
research experience on a timely research topic that has direct and tangible
technological applications (e.g. solar cells, lighting, lasers). Undergraduate
participants in this program will conduct novel research under the guidance of
an experienced faculty mentor at UNC-Chapel Hill, NC State University, or Duke
University. A heavy emphasis during recruiting will be placed on students from
underrepresented groups as well as those who have limited opportunities to
pursue research at their home institutions, aiming for 75% of participants to
meet these demographics. In addition to the in-lab research experience, student
activities include synchronous and asynchronous instruction in hybrid
perovskites and nanoscopic characterization techniques, professional development
and enrichment activities, networking and social activities, and experience with
oral and written communication of their research. Each REU participant will be
also paired with another participant working in a similar area at a different
institution in the REU site collaboration. This integrated program will enhance
inter-institutional collaboration, advance research projects, and provide a
diverse research experience for REU
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three objectives for
this REU program: (1) To provide a hands-on research experience in hybrid
perovskite materials that reinforces student knowledge of cutting-edge
characterization techniques and analytical tools that can be used to evaluate
the nanoscopic structure of hybrid perovskite systems; (2) to foster student
interest in pursuing a career in STEM fields, especially those from
underrepresented groups; and (3) to develop communication and networking skills
in each of the participants. Student participants will gain exposure to and
experience with state-of-the-art synthesis, modeling and characterization tools
as applied to a contemporary research topic on hybrid organic-inorganic
materials. Students will gain new perspectives on engineered hybrid material
systems and will directly apply this knowledge to the improvement of system
designs and/or the investigation of novel properties and applications. Students
in the program will be exposed to advanced tools and techniques in RTNN
facilities and will not only become users themselves but will also bring their
knowledge, expertise, and connections to their home institutions. The proposed
program will also connect students to other sites in the National Nanotechnology
Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI) network, which will help students to build a
scientific network and support system for future STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Engineering Education and Centers (Directorate for Engineering), and the
Division of Materials Research (Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.