* 2050030
* Seismic Retrofit of Horizontal Lateral Force Resisting Systems in Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Matthew Eatherton, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 04/30/2024
* USD 422,308.00

This project aims to advance understanding of the vulnerabilities in the
horizontal lateral force resisting system of concrete buildings subject to
seismic loads and create new approaches for fiber reinforced polymer retrofit
through patterns of targeted strengthening and enhanced ductility. The
horizontal lateral force resisting system, consisting of the diaphragm, chords,
and collectors, often requires retrofit during renovations, when penetrations
are cut in the slab, or in older buildings when deficiencies in the in-plane
load path, strength, or ductility are discovered. Externally bonded fiber
reinforced polymers are increasingly being used to improve diaphragm performance
because they are easier to install and do not increase the building weight as
compared with conventional concrete and steel strengthening. However, because of
their relatively large size and other factors, little research has been
conducted to understand how externally bonded composites can be best used to
retrofit deficient horizontal lateral force resisting systems. The new retrofit
approaches to be developed in this research are important for their potential to
increase infrastructure resilience to natural hazards such as earthquakes, as
well as improving infrastructure sustainability through adaptive reuse rather
than demolition and reconstruction. This project will provide training for
graduate and undergraduate students and will curate a social media microblog to
excite and inspire individuals underrepresented in science and engineering. This
award will contribute to the National Science Foundation (NSF) role in the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP). Data from the project
will be archived and made publicly available in the NSF-supported Natural
Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot
(http://www.designsafe-ci.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives are
to (1) elucidate efficient patterns of triangulated targeted strengthening that
are not constrained to orthogonal building axes, (2) enhance cyclic behavior of
axial elements in the floor through new concrete confinement techniques, and (3)
establish force transfer between the horizontal and vertical systems that may
not occur along orthogonal lines. The new fundamental knowledge will unlock
opportunities related to nonorthogonal elements, more efficient force flow
patterns, and optimization that will be used to advance new design and analysis
approaches for diaphragms. The research plan consists of integrated
computational and experimental tasks that include: (1) using topology
optimization and strut and tie concepts on a set of archetype buildings to
develop targeted strengthening approaches, (2) a large-scale experimental study
to investigate behavior of existing and retrofitted floors, (3) validation of
computational models that can capture the behavior of complex concrete floor
systems with and without composite retrofitting, (4) evaluating retrofit
approaches using computational models, and (5) synthesizing generalizable design
strategies that can be applied to practical diaphragms. The research impact will
be broadened through wide dissemination of the research results to the academic
community, practicing engineers, and appropriate building code
committees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.