* 2050850
* Elucidation of RNA-Based Mechanisms of Long-Term Memory Storage
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* David Glanzman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 01/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

How our memories persist more-or-less unchanged for years, decades, and, in some
cases, for lifetime remains poorly understood. The project investigates the
mechanisms that underlie long-term memory. A guiding hypothesis of the project
is that memories are not stored in the brain as changes in the connections
between neurons but, rather, as modifications in the nuclei of neurons. A major
goal of the project is to identify the processes that mediate the nuclear
modifications that encode long-term memory. Data from the proposed project could
facilitate the development of novel treatments for disorders of memory,
including Alzheimer’s disease and posttraumatic stress disorder. In addition,
the project enhances the scientific literacy of high school and undergraduate
students from underrepresented or economically disadvantaged backgrounds. This
goal is accomplished through formal lectures on the neurobiology of memory to be
offered in UC Santa Barbara’s Summer Research Academy (SRA), as well as giving
high school students in the SRA and undergraduates associated with UCLA’s Brain
Research Institute Brain Research Institute Summer Undergraduate Research
Experience (BRI SURE) the opportunity to participate in guided research in the
Principal Investigator’s laboratory during the
summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, the principal investigator has discovered
that long-term memory (LTM) in the marine snail Aplysia appears to be stored in
neurons by nuclear changes. One type of nuclear change that has been implicated
in LTM storage in Aplysia is epigenetic changes; however, genomic changes may
also play a critical role in encoding LTM. A type of genomic change that may
mediate LTM is retrotransposition. The proposed project investigates the
potential involvement of retrotransposons in LTM in Aplysia. Specifically, the
investigators test whether retrotransposition is required for a type of synaptic
memory, long-term facilitation (LTF) of Aplysia sensorimotor synapses in
dissociated cell culture. To accomplish this objective, the investigators test
whether inhibitors of reverse transcriptase and of DNA double-strand breaks
disrupt LTF. The project also identifies species of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs)
that trigger nuclear changes that encode a form of non-associative memory in
Aplysia, long-term sensitization (LTS) of the siphon-withdrawal reflex. Both
RNA-seq and small RNA-seq will be performed on RNA extracted from the identified
sensory and motor neurons dissociated from the central nervous system of LTS-
trained and untrained animals. Differential expression analyses on the RNA-seq
data is carried out to identify potential memory-inducing ncRNAs; the mnemonic
potency of the candidate ncRNAs then is assessed through bioassays performed
using sensory and motor neurons in dissociated cell culture. Data from the
proposed project can, potentially, significantly alter thinking about how the
brain encodes memory. This, in turn, could lead to new approaches to artificial
intelligence (AI). At present, models of machine learning in AI are heavily
influenced by synaptic models of memory that are based on neuroscientific
findings. Finally, results from the proposed project may facilitate the
development of novel treatments for disorders of memory, including Alzheimer’s
disease and posttraumatic stress disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.