* 2050934
* ERASE-PFAS: Collaborative Research: Development of Quantitative Tools to Assess the Mechanisms and Full Potential of UV-ARPs for the Treatment of PFASs in Water
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Garrett McKay, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 349,011.00

PFAS (per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances) are a group of man-made chemicals
that have been widely used for many decades. PFAS contain numerous carbon-
fluorine bonds that makes them extremely stable. This stability has led to them
being called “forever chemicals.” The broad use of PFAS has resulted in
widespread contamination of soil and water. This finding is of great concern, as
PFAS exposure have been linked to serious health effects, such as cancer and
birth defects. The urgency of this problem is made greater because PFAS are
resistant to most conventional chemical and biological water treatment
processes. One new technology that has shown promise for PFAS destruction in
water is Advanced Reduction Processes (ARPs). ARPs produce electrons in water,
which can react with PFAS to degrade halogenated compounds like PFAS. The goal
of this project is to determine the potential of ARPs for remediating PFAS
contaminated water. This goal will be achieved through research to: i) identify
the important reactions occurring in the electron-based PFAS destruction
process, and ii) develop quantitative tools for predicting PFAS degradation in
ARP systems. Successful completion of this research holds promise to develop new
technology to effectively treat PFAS contaminated water. Additional benefits to
society result from increasing the Nation’s STEM workforce through the
engagement and training of graduate and undergraduate students in research, as
well as training of high school STEM teachers during summer training
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrated electrons are one of the strongest known
reductants. Recent studies show that the hydrated electron is capable of
reducing fluorine atoms in PFAS, including PFOA and PFOS, to non-toxic fluoride.
However, a significant barrier preventing application of hydrated electrons for
PFAS destruction is the lack of quantitative knowledge of hydrated electron-
based processes in real-world waters. The goal of this project is to develop the
quantitative data and tools necessary to assess the full potential of
Ultraviolet-based Advanced Reduction Processes (UV-ARP) by addressing the
underlying mechanistic limitations of hydrated electron-based PFAS degradation.
This overall goal will be realized by focusing on three complementary objectives
to: i) characterize the hydrated electron-based destruction efficiencies of
parent PFAS and absolute fluoride yields, ii) develop the quantitative methods
needed to predict PFAS degradation rates by UV-ARPs in real-world waters, and
iii) use these quantitative tools to develop a “best case” UV-ARP treatment and
compare this optimized system to other PFAS degradation technologies. These
objectives will be accomplished using state-of-the-science time-resolved and
steady-state radiolysis, combined with bench-scale UV-ARP experiments and
kinetic modeling. The research will be integrated with education and outreach
through high school STEM teacher training programs and engagement of
undergraduate researchers at a primarily undergraduate institution. Additional
benefits to society result from the sharing of research findings and
recommendations for water treatment practitioners through partnership with the
Orange County Water District, one of the largest full-scale advanced water
treatment facilities in the Nation. Successful completion of this research will
advance the fundamental science and engineering potential of ARPs for PFAS
treatment in real-world waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.