* 2050113
* Removability in Geometric Function Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Malik Younsi, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2024
* USD 121,411.00

Conformal maps are functions or transformations of space that, locally, preserve
angles. The study of the geometric properties of such maps has led to the
development of Geometric Function Theory and has proven over the years to be of
fundamental importance to a wide variety of problems in analysis, geometry,
probability, physics, and engineering. More recently, much attention has been
devoted to the study of maps, or functions, that are a generalization of
conformal maps, called of quasiconformal maps, where a controlled amount of
angle distortion is allowed. Quasiconformal mappings possess subtle properties,
making them very useful in a wide variety of settings. In many of these
applications, one must deal with maps that are (quasi)conformal in a given
planar region except possibly for some “exceptional set” of points inside the
region. The question whether the exceptional set is negligible and small enough
to be ignored leads to the notion of conformal removability, central to this
research project and closely related to fundamental questions in complex
analysis and other areas. The principal investigator has no doubt that many more
fruitful connections should come to light as progress is made toward a better
understanding of removability. This project will also consider several other
problems in Geometric Function Theory, some with applications in the field of
numerical vision. An important portion of the proposed research involves
numerical computations and constructive methods. In addition to enhancing
computational infrastructure, this has the potential to build interdisciplinary
connections.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The first proposed activity deals with the
study of the relationship between removability and the rigidity of circle
domains in Koebe’s uniformization conjecture, building upon the pioneering work
of He and Schramm. The principal investigator plans to pursue the study of this
surprising connection. The second proposed activity is devoted to the study of
conformal welding. The principal investigator proposes to work on several
constructive aspects as well as on the relationship between the non-injectivity
of conformal welding and removability. Finally, the third proposed activity
involves the study of the properties of analytic capacity. The principal
investigator first suggests to further investigate the subadditivity of analytic
capacity. This part of the proposal involves numerical computations using a
program developed by the principal investigator together with an undergraduate
student. The principal investigator also plans to study the behavior of analytic
capacity under holomorphic motions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.