* 2050018
* RUI: Smelling in water and air: Evolution of olfaction in plethodontid salamanders
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* John Reiss, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 04/30/2024
* USD 397,608.00

This project focuses on how the olfactory system of amphibians is modified to
function in water and in air. The emergence of vertebrate animals from water
onto land was one of the major transitions of vertebrate evolution. For many
living amphibians, this historical transition is mirrored by a current
developmental transition, as they metamorphose from an aquatic larva to a
terrestrial juvenile. Like other sensory systems, the olfactory system must be
able to adjust and function in both environments across this developmental
transition. This project breaks new ground by examining olfactory morphology and
gene expression patterns across eight related salamander species with a wide
range of life histories, ranging from typical larvae with metamorphosis, to
direct development with no free-living larval stage, to secondarily re-evolved
larvae. The study will answer the following questions: (1) Are patterns of
olfactory organization consistent across species with the same developmental
mode, regardless of evolutionary history? (2) Are water-sensing olfactory
components lost in terrestrial, direct-developing species? (3) Do species that
have re-evolved a larval period regain water-sensing olfactory components? This
work will take place at Humboldt State University, an Hispanic Serving
Institution located on the rural northern coast of California. It will directly
support 15-20 undergraduate and two graduate students in hands-on research,
enhancing their skills and thereby furthering their careers and job prospects.
The research will be integrated into classes, benefitting approximately 300
students per year. A public outreach component will involve lectures to local
community members, increasing scientific literacy on evolution and development
and promoting appreciation for this understudied group of
vertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine how the evolution of
alternative developmental modes impacts olfactory system structure and function
in the most speciose family of salamanders, the plethodontid or lungless
salamanders. Olfactory morphology and gene expression patterns of eight
plethodontid species and one outgroup species that span a wide range of
developmental modes will be examined. Techniques used will include traditional
histology to compare the basic structure of the olfactory organs, transmission
and scanning electron microscopy to establish morphological classes of olfactory
receptor neurons and supporting cells, microCT scanning and 3-D reconstruction
to provide a visual image of overall olfactory organ anatomy, neuronal tracing
to establish pathways of olfactory receptor neuron connection to the brain, and
protein and mRNA localization of olfactory marker genes. This work will for the
first time elucidate patterns of olfactory evolution with respect to olfaction
in water and air, in larvae and adults, within an explicit phylogenetic
framework. By doing so, it will allow a better understanding of how the
olfactory system evolves in living amphibians, and of changes associated with
the evolutionary emergence of tetrapods onto land. A total of 15-20
undergraduates and two graduate students will participate directly in the
project, and the research will be incorporated into five courses that enroll
approximately 300 students. The research will also be presented to the public at
the institution’s natural history museum and at a science lecture series at a
local coffeehouse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.