* 2050674
* REU Site: CAS: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Sustainable Chemistry and Catalysis at Arizona State University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ryan Trovitch, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2024
* USD 312,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award to Arizona State
University, located in Tempe, Arizona, supports 8 students for 10 weeks of
research and professional development during the summers of 2022-2024. In this
program, supported by the Division of Chemistry, participants will have the
opportunity to design and apply 'green chemistry' transformations in the fields
of organic chemistry, inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, and
biochemistry. The participants will be introduced to leading practices in
sustainable chemistry and catalysis, take part in professional development
workshops to enhance graduate school and industrial career preparedness. REU
students at this site will have the opportunity to network with scientists
pursuing a variety of career paths. This project aims to broaden STEM
participation by encouraging students to consider how chemical research can lead
to positive environmental outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this REU program,
students will participate in individual research projects that focus on
sustainable chemistry. Topics include the development of new base metal
catalysts for coupling and C-H functionalization reactions; the computational
screening of environmentally friendly solvents; the use of enzymes for hydrogen
evolution and halogenation catalysis; and the development of sustainable methods
for the preparation of inorganic materials. Notably, these projects will be
explored within shared laboratory space, allowing for team-based mentoring and
collaboration. Workshops on sustainable chemistry research, scientific writing,
presentation skills, and networking will be offered alongside team-building
activities. Project mentors will maintain contact with students through virtual
meetings and seminars following conclusion of the program. To increase diversity
within the chemistry workforce, this site also aims to recruit underrepresented
students from local community colleges and tribal colleges throughout the
Southwestern United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.