* 2050017
* LTREB: Testing tipping points in a model rocky intertidal meta-ecosystem  – Climate-change, increasing variances, and response mechanisms
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* Sarah Gravem, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 04/30/2026
* USD 473,519.00

In recent decades, ocean ecosystems, long thought to be immune to change, have
undergone disruptions to their structure, diversity, and geographic range, yet
the actual underlying reasons for such changes in oceanic biota are often
unclear. Coastal intertidal zones (i.e., the shore between high and low tides)
have long served as important ecological model systems because of advantages in
accessibility and ease of observation, occupancy by easily studied and
manipulated organisms of relatively short lifespans, and exposure to often
severe environmental conditions. This research will address the stability of a
well-known rocky shore system along the Oregon and California coasts. Prior
long-term research indicates that, although casual observation suggests these
systems are stable, in fact, they may be on the cusp of shifting into another
state, losing iconic organisms like mussels and sea stars, and becoming
dominated by seaweeds. These changes might be comparable to losing trees and
large predators from terrestrial systems. This study would result in the
training of undergraduates and graduate students, including individuals from
under-represented groups. Additionally, this study would include outreach to the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will focus particularly on
impacts of increasing and more variable warming on community recovery. For
example, climate oscillations (e.g., El Niño), coastal upwelling, and
particularly temperature have all changed in recent decades in ways leading to
increased stress on intertidal biota. In apparent response, coastal ecosystems
evidently have become less productive, organismal performance (growth,
reproduction) has declined, and key dynamical processes (species interactions)
have weakened. The new research will pursue these strong hints of an impending
“tipping point” by (1) continuing the projects that led to the insights of
increasing instability, (2) adding new projects that will pinpoint ecological
changes, and (3) expanding the region of work to include locations in
California. Research will assess whether or not sea stars recover from wasting
disease, experimentally test if species interactions are indeed weakening,
quantify the annual inputs of new prey and changes in abundance, diversity,
stability, and resilience of intertidal communities, and document changes in the
physical environment. Using field observations and experiments, the research
will provide insight into impacts of environmental change, particularly warming,
on the future of coastal ecosystems, and more generally, into possible future
states of Earth’s ecosystems. Using these data, we will test the hypothesis that
direct and indirect effects of climate change are driving, or may drive these
systems into new, alternative states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.