* 2050276
* A Community College-Directed Capacity Building Project to Increase Certified Secondary School Science, Mathematics, and Technology Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Peggy Bullock, Klamath Community College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 03/31/2023
* USD 74,987.00

This project aims to serve the national need of building the capacity to
increase the number of highly skilled, licensed STEM high school teachers. To do
so, the project intends to lay the foundation for a pathway from high school
through community college to STEM teacher certification. An important expected
contribution of this project is identification of barriers facing rural high
school students from low socioeconomic backgrounds to become licensed STEM high
school teachers. This information is important because the project will first
invest time in understanding the needs and the challenges facing the community
and the students who will be served by this pathway. A key project activity will
be building the necessary relationships among the local school districts, four-
year institutions, and the community college leading the effort. This Capacity
Building project is expected to yield a Track 1 Noyce proposal that will support
students from high school, through a local community college, to four-year
institutions to obtain their high school STEM teaching license.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is led by Klamath Community College (KCC), a
two-year, open access, public post-secondary institution. KCC is partnering with
Southern Oregon University (SOU), a comprehensive, public university, and the
Oregon Institute of Technology (OIT), a public, four-year polytechnical college,
as well as local educational agencies. The project aims to create the
infrastructure for a “grow-your-own” pathway for students in high school,
community college, or four-year institutions to become licensed secondary school
STEM educators for rural South-Central Oregon. It will conduct a needs
assessment, create formalized partnerships including dual-enrollment and
articulation agreements, and systematically gather and analyze data that will
guide the creation of a pathway for the licensing of secondary STEM educators.
The project’s intellectual merit includes understanding the role of community
colleges in identifying and addressing the needs of STEM high school teachers
from a local, rural community with a poverty rate almost twice the national
average. The project’s broader impacts include the potential to motivate other
community colleges to engage in capacity building for similar efforts. Project
outcomes include evaluating current practices for recruiting undergraduate
students to become STEM high school teachers. The project intends to disseminate
findings through local and national channels including conferences focusing on
STEM teacher education. This Capacity Building project is supported through the
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.