* 2050676
* Extending and Enhancing the STEM Teacher Pipeline through a Community of Learners and Virtual Lesson Study
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* Virginia Oberholzer-Vandergon, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 02/28/2026
* USD 715,953.00

This project aims to serve the national need for a greater number of highly
prepared math and science teachers working in high need urban schools. To do so,
the project intends to recruit undergraduate STEM students who are disposed to
support students in high-need schools in a way that reduces educational gaps in
the current system. These future teachers will receive scholarships and be
immersed in a supportive community of learners engaged in developing equitable
educational practices. Through this community, the project will support and
enhance the development of the teacher candidates. An innovative aspect of the
project is its engagement of undergraduate STEM students in teacher preparation
activities beginning in their first year in college. These activities will
provide students with expanded opportunities to work with and learn from
experienced teachers. The project also builds on previous Noyce awards by adding
support for Noyce alumni in their first year of teaching to help ensure that
their teaching career gets off to a good start. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project at California State University Northridge is in partnership with the Los
Angeles Unified School District, the second largest school district in the
country. Project goals include the recruitment, support, and development of at
least 35 new STEM teachers over the five-year duration of funding. Since a
typical teaching career touches the lives of 3,000 students, these Noyce
Scholars have the potential to impact more than 100,000 secondary-level STEM
students. The Noyce Scholars will be mentored by alumni from previous Noyce
projects and interact with a STEM teacher-in-residence at the university. During
their student teaching, the Noyce Scholars will be able to participate in lesson
study activities and will learn how technology can be used to support student
collaboration and authentic inquiry. These improvements are designed to provide
new teachers with the tools and skills needed to lead change within their
schools and impact the lives of thousands of students. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.