* 2050437
* SBIR Phase I:  Analog front end (AFE) platform for lightweight, long-term cortical monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Mark Myers, NEURODYNE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2022
* USD 275,648.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to demonstrate the feasibility of an
intelligent, wearable electroencephalogram (EEG) monitoring and analytics
platform as a remote seizure detection system. Epilepsy is a neurological
disorder affecting 50 million people of all ages globally. Over 3 million people
in the U.S. are affected with 150,000 new cases diagnosed each year. However,
identifying and characterizing the type of seizure can be costly. EEGs record
the electrical activity of the brain and can be used for epilepsy diagnosis.
Today, this test is administered in a hospital setting and the patient is
monitored continuously for several days. This project will enable the end-to-end
system development of a robust, lightweight, wireless EEG cap to transmit
signals remotely to a server, which will generate reports for the physician to
analyze a patient neurological data for treatment. The proposed technology is a
long-term, lightweight ambulatory seizure monitoring system offering advantages,
including 1) Patients no longer have to endure long hospital stays, 2) More
seizure instances can be detected outside clinical settings, and 3) Costs of
ongoing monitoring are lowered. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will: (1) demonstrate that a proposed
Analog Front End (AFE) is the most noise-power efficient in the EEG band (1-100
Hz) compared to benchmarks; (2) develop a system power budget to optimize signal
processing in a low-power environment; and (3) perform signal integrity analysis
of error sources (electronic noise, mains power interference, etc.) to optimize
performance. The AFE is the foundation of a proposed portable
electroencephalograph (EEG) device for neurological data acquisition for the
clinical, academic, and research communities. This system will extend the
current rise of digital health devices into the complex environment of
neurological states, as well as advancing new neuro-analytic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.