* 2050541
* REU Site: Stony Brook University Chemistry REU in Spectroscopy, Biological Chemistry and Synthesis (SBS)
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Elizabeth Boon, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2024
* USD 385,189.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site award to Stony Brook
University, located in Stony Brook, NY, supports the training of 10 students for
10 weeks during the summers of 2021-2023. In this program, supported by the
Chemistry Division, students will pursue faculty-mentored research projects that
provide technical experience applicable to a broad range of chemical
professions. Students work in research clusters, which is designed to enhance
their science communication skills and allow them to engage with a community of
scholars. Training in this program also includes professional development
activities targeting overall career development, ethics, resume-building and
networking. This program aims to increase the diversity of students graduating
and going on to advanced degrees in the chemical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants in this program explore one of three
fundamental research areas: spectroscopy, biological chemistry, or synthesis.
Students are trained in skills relevant to their research projects which may
include organic synthesis, solid state synthesis, cell culture and use of
sterile technique, high resolution NMR, mass spectrometry, fluorescence
microscopy, and Raman spectroscopy. The professional development series focuses
on career development and science communication, including an improvisational
theater workshop focused upon distilling one's scientific message and an end-of-
summer poster session. This program aims to diversify the STEM workforce by
recruiting underrepresented minority students and women from primarily
undergraduate institutions, including five partner Hispanic Serving Institutions
(HSIs) and emerging HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.