* 2050587
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Opportunities in Biomedical Engineering Devices at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Gregory Bashford, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 414,979.00

This three year renewal Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site will
support the training of nine students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2021-2023. REU students will be trained in biomedical engineering, a rapidly
growing area of importance in the U.S. Students will learn how to conduct
research by working in teams which combine the fields of engineering and
medicine. The project addresses current needs in the workforce by providing
exposure to biomedical engineering devices as well as the academic and
industrial pursuits necessary to produce them. Participants will receive hands-
on experience with biomedical engineering devices such as wearable sensors,
miniature robots, and medical imaging equipment. High-performing students who
wish to enter careers in biomedical engineering after graduation will be invited
to participate in the REU. Underrepresented students and students from
institutions that are limited in research opportunities will be especially
encouraged to apply. The overall goals of the project match the NSF mission by
aiming to increase the number of students entering the engineering workforce,
advancing engineering training, and supporting diversity in engineering and
research education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site will provide intensive
research experiences in biomedical engineering (BME) devices for undergraduate
students. The objectives are to: 1) provide interdisciplinary research
experiences to undergraduates in the area of biomedical devices, with at least
50 percent from institutions with limited research programs; 2) give
participants confidence to become independent researchers by providing
systematic instruction in research methodology; 3) provide participants with a
broader view of research and development activities in academia and industry;
and 4) expand participants’ skills and knowledge regarding academic-industry
partnerships, such as technology transfer and entrepreneurship. Structured
research activities will be complemented by professional development activities
designed to prepare participants for STEM research careers. Project evaluation
will ensure the REU site is effective in meeting its objectives. Targeted
student participants include science/engineering majors, especially
underrepresented students, from institutions across the nation that lack strong
research opportunities. REU students will fully participate in carefully
prepared research projects with topics such as medical instrument design,
implanted devices, biomedical imaging, tissue engineering, and related BME
device areas. It is expected that REU participants will publish research results
as lead or co-authors, and project outcomes will be disseminated in engineering
education journals for the benefit of other institutions. The societal impact of
this REU site is expected to be broad, with anticipated outcomes including that
the REU experience will generate participants’ interest in pursuing careers in
research and development in biomedical engineering and related STEM fields;
provide a comprehensive comparison and contrast of research in engineering and
research in the basic sciences; and improve participants’ understanding of the
increasing role of research and development in the commercial sector and its
relation to national interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers (Directorate for
Engineering), and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.