* 2050497
* Preparing Highly Effective STEM Teachers for Rural Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Paul Skrade, Upper Iowa University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 02/28/2026
* USD 638,034.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing highly effective STEM
teachers to serve in rural communities. The project will actively recruit
students from rural communities to enter and stay in college with the goal of
becoming certified secondary STEM teachers who are prepared for teaching in
rural schools. In this way, the project will help to provide rural schools with
a pool of qualified STEM teachers and to improve the schools’ ability to offer
their students a broader range of STEM courses. The program will recruit high
school, community college, and college students to complete a baccalaureate
science degree and earn teaching certification. It will provide these Noyce
Scholars with early teaching experiences and training in mental health,
mindfulness, and understanding poverty. As a result, the project intends to
better prepare the Noyce Scholars to teach in high-poverty, high-need, and rural
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Northeast Iowa Community College
includes partnerships with sixteen high-need school districts (Allamakee,
Central, Clayton Ridge, East Buchanan, Eastern Allamakee, Edgewood-Colesburg,
MFL-MarMac, North Fayette Valley, Oelwein, Postville, South Winneshiek,
Starmont, Sumner-Fredericksburg, Tripoli, Turkey Valley, and West Central), with
the goal of establishing a recruitment pipeline of qualified STEM teachers. It
intends to prepare 15 Noyce Scholars to teach in high-need schools or school
districts, particularly in high-poverty rural areas. The preparation emphasizes
cultural competency through mindfulness and mental health training, technology,
and distance learning. To improve new teacher retention, the project will
provide enhanced induction support. The project aims to generate new knowledge
about effective teacher preparation by investigating the impacts of mindfulness
and mental health training on preparing effective STEM educators to teach in
high-poverty and rural areas. The project will also seek to determine which
specific activities result in better preparation to teach STEM subjects in rural
districts. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.