* 2050789
* REU Site: Youngstown State University Beginning Undergraduates Mathematical Research Preparation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alicia Prieto-Langarica, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 291,406.00

YSU-BUMP (Youngstown State University Beginning Undergraduate Mathematical
Research Preparation) is a summer research experience for students who are in
their first two years of college and are majoring in mathematics. YSU-BUMP’s
design addresses the research literature that identifies the first two years as
a critical time for retention of students in mathematics, particularly of female
students and those from underrepresented minorities. Retention and enhanced
success are expected as a result of three facets of the experience: an early
engagement in a rigorous research project, exposure to a variety of careers in
the mathematical sciences, and an intensive and intentional mentoring component.
Students will explore possible careers by engaging with a wide variety of
speakers who employ higher-level mathematics in their work with industry,
government and academia; and who will offer advice regarding pursuing these
types of careers. Mentoring during and after the program and at least through
students’ graduation will reinforce the gains made in the participants’
mathematical learning through research, and in their motivation regarding
seeking careers in the mathematical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
projects for this REU will cover a wide variety of topics. For example, students
will learn and employ data analysis tools to visualize gun violence data, then
use these visualizations and other work to address questions regarding trends
over time, and relative incidence rates by geographical and temporal locations.
Participants will also engage with theoretical yet still accessible topics, such
as a project in graph theory where they will explore rainbow coloring, a special
type of proper vertex coloring, and seek to discover and prove new mathematical
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.