* 2050731
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Computer Vision
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Mubarak Shah, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2024
* USD 407,181.00

This is a continuation of an Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site
in Computer Vision which has operated at the University of Central Florida for
the past thirty-three years. Each year, 10 students will participate in a
10-week duration, full-time Summer program. Participants will be trained in
Computer Vision; in particular, they will learn fundamentals of computer vision,
which plays an important role in many areas, including, security, healthcare,
defense, and manufacturing. This project will provide opportunities to a diverse
group of undergraduates, most from predominantly undergraduate institutions, to
spend a summer with a highly successful research group. From lessons learned in
recent years, the proposed model includes earlier project planning, round-the-
clock mentoring by the research team, a streamlined 7-day short course that lets
participants start their research projects sooner; and daily meetings with
mentors to plan activities throughout the day. Participants take the short
course, match themselves to a project topic that they most desire, and spend
sufficient time in focused research. They then can opt to continue through the
year by working with the professors to write research papers on their project,
to prepare for the GREs and to apply to graduate programs. Recruits will be a
diverse group of undergraduates, mostly from predominantly undergraduate
institutions Our model for REU will be disseminated among other schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes development of new computer vision
algorithms for solving scientific problems in video object segmentation, object
detection, tracking, activity and event recognition, and visual reasoning. This
involves both theory and practice; we are interested in mathematical modeling
and analysis of difficult vision problems and developing algorithms, while at
the same time building real systems for demonstrating those solutions in real
life situations. This project will strengthen the following skills in
participants ability to: write complex computer programs; communicate orally
about research problem; think about computer vision issues in real life
problems; read and understand key research papers; contribute to discussion of
computer vision problem; and, to apply to graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.