* 2050640
* Planning Virtual Strategies to Prepare Science and Mathematics Teachers in Mississippi
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Abu Khan, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 02/28/2023
* USD 124,992.00

This project aims to serve the national need for skilled secondary science and
mathematics teachers in high-need school districts. To do so, the project seeks
to lay the foundation for secondary-education certification programs adapted to
the novel demands of pre- and post-COVID teaching/learning environments.
Conceived initially as a response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the project aims to
use technology and virtual approaches to deliver remote learning opportunities
for future teachers. As such, the project will enable Jackson State University
to explore the feasibility of a large-scale effort to increase use of evidence-
based, distance-learning strategies in teacher education. Examples of strategies
include virtual simulations, digital credentialing, and online social and
emotional learning. The work will be situated in the urban setting of the
Mississippi State capital. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Jackson State
University includes partnerships with Hinds Community College and Jackson Public
Schools, a high-need school district. The long-term goal of this collaborative
effort is plan how to recruit, support, and graduate teachers who will help meet
the shortage of science and mathematics teachers at high-need schools often
staffed by rotating long- and short-term substitute teachers. The project builds
on the conceptual framework of Jackson State’s College of Education and Human
Development vision of the “responsive educator” who provides and embodies: 1) a
Committed Response; 2) a Knowledgeable Response; 3) a Skillful Response; and 4)
a Professional Response. Additionally, the project builds on the current
infrastructure of the University’s Physics and Mathematics Education curriculum.
The goals of this Capacity Building project are to: 1) develop evidence-based
innovative models and strategies for recruiting, preparing, and supporting
teachers; 2) create plans for collecting data to determine need, interest, and
capacity for increasing STEM teacher development; and 3) establish the
infrastructure for preparing a Track 1: Scholarship &amp; Stipend proposal in
the future. This Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.