* 2050463
* REU Site: Geosciences Program in Energy and Environmental Resource Sustainability (GeoPEERS)
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Maureen Feineman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 01/31/2025
* USD 377,035.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Geosciences
Program in Energy and Environmental Resource Sustainability (GeoPEERS) REU is to
train the next generation geoscience workforce for industry and academia. While
oil and gas jobs will likely continue to decline slowly over the next several
decades, the industry will remain, and we must train geoscientists who can
skillfully, ethically, and strategically locate and extract these resources. At
the same time, demand for resources such as clean water, fertile soil, and
renewable energy is increasing. Diversification of the global energy and
resource portfolio is already underway, and new skill sets will be required of
geoscientists entering academia and the workforce. The GeoPEERS REU program will
train participants holistically to approach the industry of resource extraction
and energy production from a sustainability
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of geosciences is also reckoning
with a profound lack of diversity in its workforce. We will advertise broadly
and draw upon existing partnerships with minority-serving institutions in order
to find highly qualified applicants from a diverse range of backgrounds. Because
simply recruiting a diverse cohort is not enough, we will strive to
intentionally and explicitly create a supportive, inclusive, and equitable
educational environment. By incorporating new skills sets and perspectives into
our training program, and by intentionally building a diverse and inclusive
participant community, GeoPEERS will prepare a new generation for the
geosciences of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.