* 2050894
* REU Site: Investigations in Geometry and Knot Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Rolland Trapp, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 05/31/2024
* USD 259,200.00

This program at California State University San Bernardino is an immersive
research experience for undergraduate students. In each of three summers, eight
participants will learn background material in differential geometry and knot
theory and pursue open-ended research questions. Questions under study in
differential geometry range widely, from determining efficient methods of
expressing curvature, to developing theories regarding the types of curvature
that one might possibly encounter, and even geometrically realizing these
curvatures. Questions under study in knot theory will emphasize the interplay
between topology and geometry. As geometric applications to topology are some of
the most subtle and significant discoveries in the last thirty years, these
questions are part of an active and vibrant area of mathematical research and
are also of interest because of their potential applications. Student
participants will be recruited nationally, with emphasis on recruitment from
those institutions that have limited research opportunities for their students,
and from populations underrepresented in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The differential geometry component of the
project has three main topics. The Riemann curvature tensor is an object that
encodes a manifold’s curvature at every point. It is known that this object can
be expressed as a combination of other types of curvatures, and students will
explore how different curvature tensors could be expressed according to this
decomposition. Second, students will investigate novel invariants for curvature
tensors. Thirdly, students will seek geometric realizations illustrating these
concepts. The knot theory component of this project focuses on hyperbolic
links—links whose complements admit a hyperbolic structure. Projects will focus
on the class of links called fully augmented links, which have particularly
tractable geometric structures but are nevertheless quite useful since they can
be used to construct all links via Dehn filling. Both fields are rich with a
variety of questions to explore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.