* 2050038
* REU Site: Research &amp; Training in Multidisciplinary field of Regenerative Sciences for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Shree Singh, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 373,985.00

This REU Site award to Alabama State University (ASU), located in Montgomery,
AL, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2021- 2023. The focus of this program is to provide “Research &amp; Training in
Multidisciplinary field of Regenerative Sciences for Undergraduates”. It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from underrepresented
minority groups and from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. The training
is aimed at students who desires to pursue a higher degree in STEM fields. The
scientific advances made through the proposed projects will significantly
enhance knowledge in the proposed field. A common web-based assessment SALG
URSSA tool will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program.
Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student projects will be organized around the
fundamental themes of regenerative sciences, biomedical engineering, and
developmental biology along with microbial studies and immune response studies.
Faculty from the Departments of Biological Sciences, Biomedical Engineering,
Chemistry, and Physical Sciences will serve as mentors for the program. Students
will participate in a full-time closely mentored lab research project along with
seminars, field trips, professional development workshops, responsible conduct
of research, career opportunities in academia and industry, and the graduate
school application process. Students will present their findings at a symposium
during the final week of the program. Student will also submit a scientific
report of their project in a manuscript format during the program. Housing, a
stipend, meal and travel allowances will be provided. Students from
underrepresented minority groups and from colleges with limited research
opportunities are especially encouraged to apply. Students will be selected
based on their interest in research, academic record, recommendation letters
from their home institutions and phone interviews with potential faculty
mentors. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.alasu.edu/academics/ research--centers/reu-program and http://bioreu-
alasu.org, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Komal Vig at komalvig@alasu.edu; Tel
334-604-8189) or the co-PI (Dr. Shree R. Singh at ssingh@alasu.edu). This award
is supported by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (DBI) in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO) and the Division of Engineering
Education and Centers (EEC) in the Directorate for Engineering
(ENG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.