* 2050120
* Minimal Surfaces in Geometric Variational Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Christos Mantoulidis, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 09/30/2021
* USD 114,757.00

Differential geometry is a modern version of Euclidean geometry that studies
shapes inside curved surfaces in any number of dimensions. Two key notions in
differential geometry, besides "length" and "angle," are: "minimal surfaces,"
which generalize the concept of a straight line, and "curvature," which measures
how a surface is bent. The early development of differential geometry is partly
attributable to physics. In the early 20th century, Einstein formulated a
geometric theory of gravitation, general relativity, asserting that we live in a
curved four-dimensional world ("spacetime") where energy and mass are
manifestations of the curvature of spacetime, and minimal surfaces are
indicative of black hole boundaries. Nowadays, differential geometry and minimal
surfaces are at the heart of several physical theories and active mathematical
research directions. The principal investigator (PI) will study problems
regarding minimal surfaces that are motivated by general relativity and by the
van der Walls--Cahn--Hilliard theory of phase transitions for multicomponent
alloy systems. This project will also support the proposer's efforts to promote
student learning, inclusion, and training through summer schools, workshops, and
conferences, as well as via expository articles and
notes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project spans three related active research
areas of minimal surface theory in differential geometry. First, the PI will
investigate the construction of minimal surfaces as limiting min-max phase
transitions. This construction has been recently shown to exhibit certain
desirable stability properties that led to the proof of the "multiplicity one
min-max conjecture" in three dimensions by the PI and Chodosh. The PI will
continue this program, to produce surfaces with different curvatures and in
different dimensions, as well as to better understand geometric implications of
stable phase transitions. Second, as a step toward understanding limits of
manifolds with nonnegative scalar curvature, the PI will study smooth and non-
smooth three- and four-dimensional manifolds with nonnegative scalar curvature
via the inherent bending effects of their embedded minimal surfaces. Third, the
PI will apply this study of bending effects of minimal surfaces to investigate
conjectured relationships between different mass notions in general relativity,
where time-symmetric initial data sets are precisely manifolds with nonnegative
scalar curvature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.