* 2050250
* Preparing Secondary STEM Teachers to Improve STEM Learning in High-need Schools by Applying Restorative Justice in Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Daniel Showalter, Eastern Mennonite University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2026
* USD 690,061.00

This project aims to serve the national need to increase the number and
diversity of highly effective STEM teachers in high-need school districts. To
address this need, the project will recruit, prepare, graduate, place, and
support 24 STEM majors to become secondary mathematics and science teachers.
These STEM majors will earn bachelorâ€™s degrees in biology, chemistry, computer
science, or mathematics and be eligible to earn secondary teaching certification
in one of these disciplines. An innovative aspect of the project is its focus on
restorative justice in education, which can transform school climate by building
relationships that support student learning, success, and identity in STEM. The
project will build upon strengths at the institution, including expanded
recruitment activities to increase the number of diverse STEM teaching
candidates, teaching opportunities/field experiences in high-need schools,
mentoring and peer relationships, and new in-service teacher supports.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project at Eastern Mennonite University includes a
partnership with Harrisonburg City Public Schools. Project goals include
implementing restorative justice in education across diverse school settings,
improving learning outcomes and teacher retention in local school communities,
and providing an innovative, replicable model for teacher preparation. Increased
collaboration with the partnering school district will prepare qualified STEM
teachers, add meaningful supports for new teacher retention, and strengthen
restorative justice in education professional development. Project objectives
include to: 1) Recruit, support, and graduate 24 biology, chemistry, computer
science, and mathematics majors with secondary education certification; 2)
Engage the project's pre-service STEM teachers in training about restorative
justice in education, as well as in mentoring relationships and field
experiences; 3) Place and retain the project's graduating pre-service STEM
teachers in high-need school districts; 4) Institutionalize and sustain
successful elements of the project; and 5) Study the impact of integrating
restorative justice in education into the curriculum for pre-service and
professional development of in-service STEM teachers in high-need school
districts. New knowledge will be generated through investigating two research
questions: 1) To what extent and in what ways does a restorative justice-infused
curriculum help pre-service and early-career STEM teachers feel prepared to meet
the challenges associated with teaching in culturally and linguistically diverse
school settings? and 2) Which project elements are associated with the
development of one or more aspects of equitable practice? External evaluation
will provide formative feedback for continuous improvement during
implementation, and project results and lessons learned will be shared with the
community so that effective methods and practices can be replicated at similar
institutions and teacher training programs. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.