* 2050411
* REU site: Research in Cell, Molecular, and Developmental Biology at The University of Chicago
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Lucia Rothman-Denes, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 398,175.00

This REU Site award to The University of Chicago, located in Chicago, Illinois,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2021- 2023. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from
schools with limited research opportunities, from an under-represented group,
and/or from disadvantaged economic backgrounds, will be trained in the program.
Students will learn how research is conducted as well as communicated, and many
will present their results at scientific conferences. The program will help to
foster a more diversified next generation of scientists. Assessment of the
program will be done through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of the REU program is Cellular, Molecular,
and Developmental Biology. The program is housed in the Department of Molecular
Genetics and Cell Biology. Research projects are chosen based on ongoing work in
department laboratories, which exploit model systems including bacteria,
protozoa, fungi, plants, and animals. Recent projects have ranged from
engineering protists for methane capture to biochemical identification of
complexes involved in human genome packaging, and to understanding how the fruit
fly nervous system is wired during embryonic development. The program includes
workshops on laboratory safety, on ethical issues in research, and on applying
to graduate programs. There are weekly faculty seminars on cutting-edge
scientific topics, weekly meetings in which students discuss their progress, and
symposia at which students present their work in both poster format and in oral
talks. The program is evaluated by taking advantage of the online SALG URSSA
tool, which all students complete at the program’s end, and by the program
directors’ interviews with participating students as well as with their mentors.
Students apply via an online portal, and applications are reviewed by a steering
committee comprised of multiple faculty. In reviewing the applications,
particular emphasis is placed on applicants’ essays and on evidence of student
curiosity and drive. More information about the program is available at
https://mgcb.uchicago.edu/education/reu or by contacting the PI (Dr. Aaron
Turkewitz apturkew@uchicago.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Lucia Rothman-Denes
lbrd@uchicago.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.