* 2050813
* REU Site: Research In Astrophysics at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Christine Jones, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 666,068.00

The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory will continue its long-running summer
REU (Research Experiences for Undergraduates) program. In addition to a 10-week
summer research internship working with scientists at the Harvard/Smithsonian
Center for Astrophysics (CfA), students will engage in numerous professional
development activities, including computer tutorials, research-training
seminars, and directed meetings with astrophysicists at all career stages.
Students will also attend group discussions on the ethical conduct of research,
graduate school life, admissions, available fellowships, and career
opportunities after graduation. Since 1994, over half of the interns have been
female, and a small but increasing number from underrepresented groups. More
than 80% of the participants in this REU Site have entered into graduate school
in the STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each summer, eleven students will
spend ten weeks conducting leading-edge research with their mentors at CfA.
Scientists at the CfA are involved in virtually every area of astrophysics and
have access to a large number of modern scientific instruments, so students have
a broad range of projects to choose from. The student research experience will
be completed by a trip to the winter AAS meeting, where each intern will present
a poster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.