* 2050608
* Noyce Scholar Retention in Racially and Culturally Non-dominant Communities: Studying the Relationship between Partnerships and Persistence in the Teaching Profession
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Shari Watkins, American University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 800,000.00

This project aims to serve the national need to increase the diversity of the
STEM teacher workforce by understanding the factors that contribute to STEM
teacher retention. This project investigates how the quality of Research-
Practice Partnerships that support Noyce Scholars influences persistence and
retention of both teachers of Color and White teachers in high-need schools
serving racially and culturally non-dominant communities. The research team aims
to investigate how the three Noyce program components - teacher preparation,
induction/mentoring, professional development - and the collaborative nature of
those teacher development components (i.e., partnerships) affect Noyce Scholars’
persistence in high-need schools serving racially and culturally non-dominant
communities. This project includes the study of six Noyce projects at Bowie
State University, George Washington University, Mercy College, Montgomery
College, the University of Maryland, and American
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator (PI) team seeks to
identify differences, and the extent to which the three components contribute to
such differences, in persistence and retention in teaching between Scholars of
Color and White Scholars. The study is framed through the lens of determining
how the Scholars have experienced race, racism, and power within the three Noyce
program components described above and how these experiences influenced their
retention in the six Noyce projects and in teaching. In particular, the PI team
seeks to develop deeper understanding of how the experiences of serving in
racially and culturally non-dominant communities interact with the Scholars’
individual teacher preparation, induction, and professional development
experiences at each institution. The research design also examines in what ways,
if at all, the partnerships created to support the three Noyce program
components have influenced the persistence and retention of Noyce Scholars of
Color. Such partnerships include those between STEM departments and
schools/colleges of education, and between Noyce teacher preparation programs
and high-need school districts, and other partners. Finally, the research team
also asks: What is the quality of the partnerships, how are the quality of the
partnerships related to the three Noyce program components, and how the
partnership itself influences teacher persistence and retention in schools
serving racially and culturally nondominant communities? The research team will
use a mixed methods approach that includes surveys of Scholars, and Noyce
program and partner program faculty and staff. Structured, semi-structured, and
empathy interviews with selected members of those groups will be conducted. In
addition, a multi-case comparison of at least two teacher preparation programs
with robust partnership components will occur. The results of this study are
intended to provide evidence-based insights into the influence partnerships have
on STEM teacher persistence and retention and how to improve partnerships for
the benefit of all stakeholders. Results will be disseminated to practitioner
and research audiences including STEM education programs. This Track 4: Noyce
Research project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.