* 2050803
* REU Site: Summer Research Experiences in Interdisciplinary Mind &amp; Brain Studies
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Joseph Kable, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 04/30/2024
* USD 366,619.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate and is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program. It has both scientific and
societal benefits, and integrates research and education. This REU site focuses
on Interdisciplinary Mind and Brain Studies at the University of Pennsylvania
(Penn), and is run by MindCORE, Pennâ€™s hub for the integrative study of the
mind. The program provides a ten-week summer research experience for students
that combines the opportunity to work on a research project in an established
research lab with an introductory workshop, and closes with a series of student
project presentations. Student research will focus on various aspects of how the
human mind works, integrating insights from multiple disciplinary approaches,
from neurobiology to psychology and linguistics, to philosophy and computer
science. The primary objective of the program is to provide a diverse set of
students--from underrepresented groups in science and non-research colleges--an
experience of in-depth and hands-on research. This, together with providing
students with broader knowledge of the field, important technical and
professional skills, and connections to cognitive science faculty and labs at
the forefront of research, will prepare them for pursuing future graduate
studies to become full-fledged members of the research community in this
important area, and help progress the understanding of human
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site aims to work towards a more diverse
and equitable future for the field of mind and brain studies, by providing an
integrated research, learning, and mentoring opportunity for students from
underrepresented backgrounds in the sciences. It aims to introduce students to a
broad and interdisciplinary perspective in a way that leads them to see
themselves as active contributors to a larger endeavor to understand the nature
of human intelligence and behavior. During the lab internship, students explore
their own research question, supported by a faculty mentor from a pool of select
Penn MindCORE faculty whose work relates to topics in perception, learning,
decision-making, communication and social behavior. By participating, students
have the opportunity to explore interdisciplinary connections and perspectives
in cognitive science in a collaborative and supportive environment. Programming
will be designed according to principles of Inclusive Teaching, with students
participating in themed seminars, professional development sessions, technical
workshops, lab tours, and journal club meetings with a step-ahead mentor. By
conducting in-depth research on a specific question with a MindCORE mentor in a
key research area, along with extensive scaffolding through ongoing mentorship,
support, and professional development and research skills training, the program
aims to ensure that students have a positive research and learning experience
that increases both their interest and ability in continuing in research careers
and competing for admission to graduate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.