* 2050792
* REU Site: Solar, Terrestrial, and Space Weather Sciences at New Jersey Institute of Technology
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Hyomin Kim, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 02/29/2024
* USD 422,639.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site is based at NJIT's newly
formed Institute for Space Weather Sciences that integrates the strength of
three major research entities: the Center for Solar-Terrestrial Research, the
Center for Computational Heliophysics, and the Center for Big Data. A total of
eight students per year will be selected nationwide to participate in research
projects in solar, terrestrial, and space weather physics for ten weeks during
the summer. Space Weather is a relatively new and highly interdisciplinary
field. Student training in this field is currently offered at a very limited
number of U.S. universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will recruit
students from institutions with limited research infrastructure and from
underrepresented groups. The site leaders have several years of experience in
mentoring undergraduate researchers. Many research mentors are accomplished
solar astronomers, terrestrial physicists, and computer scientists. Each REU
participant will be paired with at least one research mentor to work on a
specific research project. The participants will attend a series of lectures and
workshops and participate in other career development activities throughout the
program. They will present their final results at NJIT’s International
Undergraduate Summer Research Symposium and a professional conference. The
development of the future workforce requires (i) an increased awareness of this
discipline, (ii) an introduction to professional research at the early stage of
undergraduate studies, and (iii) an exposure to closely related disciplines and
frequent cross-discipline communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is
supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.