* 2050703
* SBIR Phase I: Liquid Oxygen (LOX) - Methane Engine for Small Satellite Launch Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Maksud Ismailov, ROCKET PROPULSION SYSTEMS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2022
* USD 255,993.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to significantly lower the capital barriers
for new enterprises to participate as small satellite launchers and service
providers, by offering high-performance rocket engines produced at the $100 K
cost point. On the production side, this change would lead to a restructuring of
space launch and satellite sector supply chains from the current high cost/low
volume to a low-cost/high volume configuration as in the aircraft or automotive
industries. Such a change could also provide a significant increase in high
paying aerospace engineering and manufacturing jobs. On the customer end, once
the small satellites reach the orbit, they could expand capabilities for
military and civilian services in space, from surveillance and weather
monitoring to completely new industries such as agricultural earth observation
and climate change monitoring, or when combined into large constellations,
provide wireless and mobile internet service globally to underserved
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will boost the development of American-made, high-
performance, reliable, high thrust-to-weight and low maintenance liquid rocket
engines of 1.5-metric-ton thrust for small 50-180 kg satellite launch vehicles
to 700 km Low Earth Orbit (LEO), using low-cost liquid oxygen (LOX) / methane
(or liquified natural gas) propellants. A two-stage rocket would be propelled by
a cluster of six such engines on its 1st stage, and a single vacuum-version of
this engine on its upper stage. The small satellite business has been growing
exponentially in the last few years, with the launch demand far outpacing
supply. The annual demand/supply launch gap is expected to be in the 200-700
satellite range by 2026. The primary objectives of Phase I are to design and
build the preburner and thrust chamber assembly and to design the turbopump
assembly. The results from Phase I will provide data on the initial engine
weight, manufacturability, production cost, and define the pace, risk posture,
and resource needs for engine development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.