* 2050534
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Computational Science, Engineering, and Mathematics (RECSEM).
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kwai Wong, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 404,779.00

The Research Experiences in Computational Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
(RECSEM) REU site program at the University of Tennessee (UTK) engages a group
of ten undergraduate students each year to explore emerging interdisciplinary
computational science models and techniques via a variety of compute-intensive
and data-driven applications. The RECSEM program complements the growing
importance of computational sciences in many advanced degree programs and
provides scientific understanding and discovery to undergraduates with an
intellectual focus on research projects using high performance computing (HPC).
This program aims to deliver a real-world research experience to the students by
partnering with teams of scientists engaged in scientific computing research at
the Joint Institutes of Computational Sciences (JICS), the Innovative Computing
Laboratory (ICL), and Oak Ridge National Laboratory. International students
supported by several partnering universities in Hong Kong also participate in
this program. Together the students of RECSEM work collaboratively to achieve
their research goals, and at the same time share a unique opportunity for
trading academic experiences, scientific ideas, and cultural and social
activities in the ten week long programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is
organized around ideas and practices common to many scientific disciplines. The
research projects are categorized into three interrelated areas of research
interests: engineering applications, numerical mathematics, and linear algebra
software and tools. The scope of work for these projects puts emphasis on
developing skill sets in scientific model derivation, software implementation,
and evaluation of numerical experiments, under the guidance of a team of experts
in each scientific domain. Projects include computationally oriented multi-scale
materials science and biomechanics applications, simulation of traffic flow
phenomena, and processing of images using different techniques and algorithms
from machine learning and data analytics. The students have opportunities to
perform large-scale scientific simulations on HPC clusters as well as world-
class state-of-the-art supercomputers equipped with the latest hardware
technologies provided by the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery
Environment (XSEDE) organization, and include computing units with graphical
processing units (GPUs). The RECSEM program is organized into four major
activities: HPC training, research formulation, project action, and scientific
reporting. These stages aim to lead the students toward completing their
research projects on time during the REU period, while providing the appropriate
level of motivation and guidance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.