* 2050253
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Interactive Influence of Environment and Energetics on Human Morphology
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Scott Maddux, University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 24,087.00

As the nose is responsible for heating and humidifying air before it enters the
lungs, geographically-patterned variation in nasal morphology has long been
attributed to climatic adaptation. However, previous research has also shown
that the nose must be large enough to take in a sufficient amount of oxygen
during each breath to meet life-sustaining metabolic requirements. Accordingly,
this doctoral dissertation project examines the combined effects (and possible
functional trade-offs) of demands for respiratory air-conditioning and oxygen
intake on the nasal complex during human evolution. By explicitly investigating
climatic adaptation in nasal morphology within the context of human body size
and shape, this study helps address how different anatomical systems have co-
evolved in response to environmental pressures. Computed tomography (CT) scans
generated for this project will be made freely available to other researchers
through established online archives, substantially expanding the
geographic/temporal diversity of CT scans currently available to anthropologists
and the broader scientific community. This research also provides training
opportunities for undergraduate and medical students (including those from
under-represented groups) and the investigator will incorporate project findings
into ongoing public outreach initiatives including K-12 science education
programs, museum-based community engagement, public lectures, and online
podcasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite substantial evidence that both climatic
and metabolic pressures have likely influenced human nasal anatomy, the
interplay of these two factors on nasal size and shape during human evolution is
not fully understood. This study employs a "whole-body" approach by quantifying
variation in cranial and post-cranial skeletal morphology in a large,
geographically- and temporally-diverse sample of recent and fossil Homo. Using
established equations, body mass and basal metabolic rate will then be
calculated from post-cranial measurements and employed in conjunction with nasal
and climatic variables to statistically assess whether: (1) nasal morphology
exhibits stronger associations with metabolic demands than other aspects of the
craniofacial complex; (2) climate and metabolic demands differentially influence
particular aspects of nasal morphology; and (3) deviations from climatically
predicated nasal morphology in fossil Homo (particularly Neanderthals) are
attributable to greater energetic requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.