* 2050689
* I:Corps:  Interactive web-based gaming system for teaching financial literacy
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Robert DelCampo, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an educational software platform for high school students
designed to teach financial literacy. The proposed technology transforms any
classroom into an interactive gamified environment with elements of chance,
risk, strategy, competition, teamwork, advancement and rewards. In addition, the
technology provides opportunities and incentives for teachers, schools and
districts to partner with businesses for funding, provisions and services. These
partnerships may update the classroom and provide relevance to students’
learning experience. Specifically, teachers aiming to increase student
engagement and enhance their classroom experience will benefit and parents may
use the platform to communicate with teachers and stay up to date with their
child’s class progress. Schools and school districts will gain from the reports
and analytics to evaluate teacher, student and school performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of an
interactive educational software platform to engage high school students and
promote financial literacy. The proposed technology is a web-based game that
simulates real-world decision making as it provides students with opportunities
to earn, spend, and lose virtual dollars based on their engagement, initiative,
and understanding. In addition, the platform is able to track student
performance, understanding, retention, behavior and engagement and is designed
to generate state-of-the-art reports and analytics for teachers and students.
Students may learn valuable soft skills including responsibility, critical
thinking and work ethic while they are introduced to financial literacy skills
including online banking, investing, credit, budgeting and even
cryptocurrency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.