* 2050710
* REU/RET Site: University of Hawai`i Institute for Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Robert Jedicke, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 620,829.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program will offer
individually mentored research experiences at the forefront of astronomical
exploration to foster and enhance the careers of a diverse cohort of aspiring
professionals in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). The site
will also include educators through the Research Experiences for Teachers (RET)
program. The Institute for Astronomy (IfA) at the University of Hawaii REU/RET
program will benefit society by training a diverse demographic in research
skills needed in a STEM career. They will achieve diversity by recruiting
Pacific Islanders and minority students from professional organizations
supporting African American, Hispanic, and Native American scientists.
Participants will learn about the impact that astronomical facilities have on
indigenous people and the importance of communication between scientists and the
public. Progress towards achieving the desired societal outcomes will be
assessed by conducting independent, external, quantifiable, surveys and
interviews with the participants just before the program begins, at its mid-
point, and after the program ends. Many past students reported that this program
was a key factor in their decision to attend graduate school or pursue a career
in STEM, and it is expected that new RET participants will multiply the
program's effectiveness by bringing a modern astronomical research perspective
to their classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The method is based on past experience
but will now be focused on diversifying the student demographics through
targeted recruitment and restricting the program to students from non-research
universities and colleges. With 50 mentors pursuing a broad range of
astrophysical research, the participants will be immersed in the IfA's world-
class research environment. The experience will also include activities that
promote professional development. Participants will visit observatories on Mauna
Kea, complete research projects based on data from these facilities and
participate in observations. In addition to the mentoring process, students will
participate in a STEM-specific professional development course providing
background and skills required for a STEM career. A set of reports in the form
of a research paper serves to develop the participants' writing skills. Finally,
the participants develop their presentation skills by preparing poster and oral
presentations and then giving them to broad audiences. The participants are
supported to present their research in poster or oral form at a professional
meeting after the program ends. In the long term, the program will advance
knowledge by sparking a lifelong pursuit of knowledge in a STEM career in
participants who will then bring their renewed excitement to their
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.