* 2050114
* Development of Metrics to Assess the Impacts of Sexual Harassment Interventions in STEM Academic Environments
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ann Davoren, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,975.00

This project aims to improve equity by developing a comprehensive "matrix of
metrics" to evaluate anti-harassment interventions aimed at STEM faculty and
graduate students. The metrics will consider the range of contextual and
systemic factors that enable or hinder harassment, as well as the intersecting
personal and professional identities of individuals involved. As institutions
develop and implement anti-harassment trainings, policies and prevention
mechanisms, a well-tested evaluative tool will be valuable, especially with a
focus on institutions of higher education. Much of the evaluation research on
anti-harassment trainings have focused on non-academic environments
(corporations, military) and on programs developed for undergraduate students,
and less so on other communities within academia and in STEM. The matrix of
metrics will be the product of a four-phase research project: (1) conduct a
series of in-depth qualitative interviews with key experts and stakeholders to
learn about current anti-harassment efforts in STEM and their evaluation; (2)
using information from those interviews, design and administer a survey to a
broad and diverse array of institutions to gain further data about anti-
harassment efforts and how those efforts are evaluated; (3) develop a matrix of
metrics that institutions can use to evaluate anti-harassment efforts, and (4)
convene a meeting of experts and stakeholders to review the results and further
refine the matrix of metrics to maximize their usefulness. The resulting matrix
of metrics should enable STEM institutions and departments to be wiser stewards
of their resources, by helping to distinguish between effective and ineffective
interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on and advances prior
efforts to evaluate anti-harassment efforts in numerous ways: (1) it has a
strong theoretical foundation based on social ecology theory (Bronfenbrenner,
1979) and intersectionality theory's matrix of power domains (Collins, 2000);
(2) it is grounded in the specific empirical findings and recommendations for
combating harassment in STEM academic settings issued by the National Academies
of Sciences, Mathematics, and Engineering in 2018; (3) it addresses the larger,
systemic factors contributing to harassment by encompassing metrics designed to
assess departmental, institutional, and socio-cultural impacts, rather than just
measuring individual attitudes and knowledge; and (4) it specifically recognizes
that the incidence and impact of harassment vary based on the intersecting
personal and professional characteristics of the individuals involved. The
matrix of metrics will empower institutions to measure their anti-harassment
efforts on a range of criteria that account for the numerous socio-cultural,
institutional, departmental, interpersonal, and individual factors influencing
the efficacy of anti-harassment interventions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The NSF
ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.