* 2050339
* Collaborative Research: Boron in soil carbonates: developing a quantitative soil CO2 proxy
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mark Torres, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 319,659.00

Rising atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) levels pose a global challenge.
Understanding and preparing for the future impacts of rising CO2 requires us to
look into the past at times periods during Earth's history when atmospheric CO2
levels were higher than they are today. This observational approach is crucial
to help test and improve models that are used to project scenarios for the
future. This project is aimed at improving the ability to quantify atmospheric
CO2 levels of the past. The proposed improvement involves measurements of boron
(B) levels and isotopic abundances in calcium carbonate minerals formed in
ancient soils. Established theory predicts that B in soil carbonates is
sensitive to the abundance of CO2 belowground in soil pore spaces, which is the
most uncertain input into an established and longstanding paleo-CO2 ‘proxy’ or
indicator. This project will test that theoretical predication with laboratory
experiments and studies of natural, modern soils. During the course of the
project, undergraduate students from groups underrepresented in the sciences
will be mentored through a series of established programs including the Research
Traineeship Experience and an NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates
project at UT Austin and Rice University. Multiple recruiting efforts will also
be initiated to help improve diversity in undergraduate geoscience programs,
including cooperation with the OnRamps program at UT Austin and with regional
magnet schools that have a high ethnic diversity within the student population
and/or high percentage of underprivileged students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
chemistry of fossilized soils, or paleosols, can record quantitative information
about ancient climates and ecosystems. In particular, the carbonate minerals
that form within some modern and ancient soils have been targeted for analysis
as they are thought to record the composition of soil water and gas in ways that
permit the determination of ancient atmospheric pCO2 among other variables.
However, critical uncertainties in the "traditional" soil carbonate based
proxies (e.g., 13C/12C ratios) fundamentally limit understanding of past
environments and motivates the development of new proxies --- such as the work
on B isotopic ratios (delta 11B) proposed here -- that provide complementary,
but orthogonal constraints on soil chemistry and, potentially, atmospheric CO2.
The aqueous speciation of B is pH-dependent and, all else held constant, the pH
of soils is a function of soil pCO2. So, the delta 11B of soil carbonates may
record information about soil gas that is independent of C isotopic ratios such
that, together, they strongly constrain ancient atmospheric compositions and the
ecosystem response to C cycle perturbations. As a proof-of-concept,
investigators' new measurements of Eocene paleosol carbonates show a decrease in
B/Ca and delta 11B values during the hyperthermal event ETM2. The directionality
of these changes are entirely consistent with an increase in soil (and
atmospheric) CO2. To advance an accurate and quantitative interpretation of
these data, they propose to develop new theory for B cycling in soils as well as
validate it using experiments and field observations. Critically, their approach
will address alternative (to soil pCO2) controls on soil carbonate delta 11B,
such as weathering and biotic cycling, that might confound interpretations of
CO2 change. The proposed work involves microanalytical imaging and analysis of
soil carbonates, development and testing of protocols for B isotopic analysis of
soil carbonates, soil sorption experiments, precipitation experiments, and the
study of B chemistry across soil CO2 gradients in nature: vertical within
individual soils, horizontal across landscapes (climosequence), and temporal
(seasonal variation). They will use surface complexation modeling to help
interpret experimental and empirical results. The proposed work also involves
development of reactive transport models to investigate the effects of biota and
weathering on B chemistry in floodplain soils, including the merging of surface
complexation models with existing floodplain landscape evolution
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.