* 2050546
* Trans-Atlantic Research and Development  Interchange on Sustainability 2021:  Sustainability and Resilience in the Face of Emergent Threats
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Urmila Diwekar, Vishwamitra Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,998.00

In the 21st Century, the dominant challenge to humanity is encapsulated in the
concept of sustainability. This is at its core an effort to find ways that make
it possible for civilization to prosper on Earth now and in the future. By
itself, this is a formidable challenge given the 7.8 billion current human
population. But this challenge must be met in the face of emergent threats such
as the SARS-COV-2 pandemic, wars, climate change, and others. At the local
level, these emergent global threats can manifest as major disruption events
like floods, droughts, forest fires, high rates of hospitalization and death,
and economic distress. Therefore, the theme for TARDIS 21 is "Sustainability and
Resilience in the Face of Emergent Threats." To explore this theme and find
feasible and actionable pathways to manage it, the following focus questions
will be addressed at TARDIS 21: (1) What are the most critical threats facing
the World in the 21st Century? (2) Which of these threats are critical
challenges to achieving sustainability and promoting resilience locally as well
as globally? (3) What may be the most practical and effective ways to mitigate
these threats? (4) What is the most practical and useful path to resilience and
sustainability in the face of these threats? The workshop will be conducted in
October 2021 in Miskolc, Hungary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The composition of the
body of participants will be balanced to include representation with respect to
discipline (engineering, physics, chemistry, economics, policy, etc.),
institutions (academic, government, private sector) and regional and national
representation, and (4) minorities and women. The participants will be from both
the European and American communities, with the European participants being
supported on non-NSF funds. The PI will work with the Technical University of
Graz, the University of Miskolc, and the Austrian Federal Ministry of Science to
prepare a final report resulting from the workshop. This report will be made
available on public websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.