* 2050871
* I-Corps: A Smartphone-Human Hybrid System to Measure Human Behavior and Well-Being
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Yingling Fan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project centers on
accurate and comprehensive collection of human behavioral and well-being data
for improved policymaking and business operations. The proposed system provides
a new way to collect human behavior and well-being data. It has the potential to
help government agencies design more livable neighborhoods, cities, and regions
for greater human well-being. The technology may also help companies demonstrate
that their products and services improve behavioral and well-being outcomes. In
addition, the increasing prevalence of smartphone ownership makes the proposed
system widely accessible for large-scale deployment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project features a smartphone-human hybrid intelligence system that
incorporates advanced data mining and machine learning techniques and
sophisticated user interface design to allow interactions between smartphone-
and human-generated data. Specifically, smartphone sensor data are analyzed
locally on the phone and in real time using data mining and machine learning
algorithms to extract objective, spatiotemporal details of daily activities and
trips. The extracted information reduces respondent burden and serves as an
initial information basis to attach more detailed and accurate information on
daily activities and trips. The information from the human user, in turn,
optimizes the data mining and machine learning algorithms for analyzing
smartphone sensor data and increases accuracy in smartphone-generated data over
time. The result is a novel system in which smartphone sensing collaborates with
human input to generate accurate and comprehensive data related to human
behavior and well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.