* 2050388
* Preparing Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, and Computer Science Secondary School Teachers with Skills in Culturally Responsive Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Mark Beekey, Sacred Heart University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2026
* USD 1,034,023.00

This project aims to serve the national need for a greater number of highly
qualified STEM teachers. To do so, it plans to increase the number of STEM
undergraduates who decide to pursue teaching careers. These emerging teachers
will develop skills in culturally responsive teaching and asset-based
perspectives to increase their effectiveness as teachers in high-need school
districts. The project centers on supporting a pathway for community college
STEM students to transfer to a four-year institution, complete their STEM
baccalaureate degrees, and enter a STEM teacher preparation program. This
pathway is intended to increase the number and diversity of highly qualified
secondary STEM teachers, including individuals from low-income, first-
generation, and/or military service backgrounds. The project will provide
service-learning and STEM-based community activities to encourage STEM majors to
explore teaching as a career. These activities will also form the foundation of
a learning community in which preservice and new in-service STEM teachers can
share and receive support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Sacred Heart
University includes partnerships with Housatonic Community College and Ansonia,
Bridgeport, and Stratford Public Schools. The project goal is to increase the
number of highly qualified STEM teachers and their effectiveness in high need
schools. Over the five-year project, 18 biology, chemistry, mathematics, and
computer science majors will earn bachelor’s degrees followed by a fifth year in
which they will earn teacher certification in Connecticut and the state-required
Master of Arts in Teaching. Individual Noyce Scholars may receive up to three
years of support and will be required to serve as a classroom teacher in a high-
need school district for two years for each of the scholarship years received.
The project aims to develop the Scholars’ professional identities as highly
effective STEM educators, enhance programming in culturally responsive pedagogy,
and emphasize the importance of viewing high-need school populations through a
strength-based lens. A longitudinal study will investigate the impact of
increased familiarity with high-need communities on students’ assumptions about
teaching in low-income urban schools. It will also examine the impacts of an
undergraduate seminar and extensive field experiences on students’ intercultural
competence. The project team expects to disseminate evidence regarding the
developed curriculum, the efficacy of preparing preservice teachers in cultural
competency, the value of service-learning, and the success of mentorship for
novice teachers. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.