* 2050581
* Building Capacity and Collaborations to Prepare Equity-minded STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Chandreyee Mitra, North Central College
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 02/28/2023
* USD 75,000.00

The project aims to serve the national need to recruit, support, and train STEM
teachers in science education and equity practices. This training is locally
critical as Illinois continues to experience teacher shortages in many STEM
areas, while also seeking to increase representation of science teachers from
underrepresented groups. Specifically, the project will seek to increase
teachersâ€™ capacity to work with diverse student populations as well as improve
the achievement of K-12 students in STEM subjects. To lay the foundation for
achieving this goal, the project will partner with local high-need schools,
minority-serving community colleges and local STEM organizations. The project
intends to strengthen partnerships with several districts in and around Chicago,
develop mentoring programs for pre-service and early-career STEM teachers, and
refine curricula to smooth the pathway to the classroom for teacher candidates
in several STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at North Central
College will include partnerships with Chicago Public Schools and J. Sterling
Morton High School District 201. Project goals include: (a) strengthening
science education collaboration within North Central College to develop and
advertise clear pathways for students to double major in education and a science
discipline; (b) expanding achievable pathways in science education for a diverse
population of students transferring from community colleges; (c) collaborating
with high-need local educational agencies to recruit high school students and,
later, as sites for clinical placements of education candidates; (d) training
candidates in use of equitable instructional strategies; and (f) supporting pre-
service and early career STEM teachers through mentorship. In addition, the
project will conduct surveys and semi-structured interviews to better determine
needs and interests among individuals eligible to pursue science teacher
licensure. Data will be analyzed by the team and independent external
evaluators, and knowledge gained will be reported to all partners. The
intellectual merit and broader impacts of this proposal are closely tied to the
project's major aims of (a) establishing pathways designed to increase the
number, quality, and diversity of licensed science educators in the Chicago
area, and (b) initiating systems to improve the supports provided to candidates
and new teachers to help increase their efficacy with all students and retain
them in teaching. This Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers
in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.