* 2050828
* REU Site: Brooklyn Urban Ecology and Environment Program (BUEE)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Brett Branco, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 287,125.00

This REU Site award to Brooklyn College of the City University of New York
(CUNY) in Brooklyn, NY, will support the training of ten students for 10 weeks
during each of summers 2022 thru 2024. The Brooklyn Urban Ecology and
Environment Program (BUEE) offers an integrative research program aimed at
developing undergraduate students into mature and thoughtful environmental
scientists. Authentic research experiences on human-coupled natural systems are
complemented by a rigorous educational program aimed at developing practical
experience in research integrity, scientific communication and quantitative
literacy, together with outreach activities in the broader community. Alumni of
the BUEE program have been accepted into prestigious programs in ecology,
environmental science, sustainable development and urban planning at top
universities in the nation. It is anticipated that thirty students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities or from a underrepresented
group, will be trained over the 3-year period. A common web-based assessment
tool (SALG URSSA) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the REU
program. Longitudinal tracking of students after program completion will provide
data on the effectiveness of the REU in preparing students for careers in urban
ecology and the environmental sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BUEE offers an
intensive research training experience on human-coupled natural systems targeted
at underrepresented students from academic institutions poorly equipped for
research opportunities in STEM. Students will be drawn from a diverse pool of
applicants who have demonstrated an enthusiastic and committed interest to
environmental science and/or policy, and will be evaluated by potential mentors
on the basis of a written application and interview. BUEE leverages the unique
academic and research resources at Brooklyn College/CUNY, including a state-of-
the-art environmental assessment and aquatic research center and the Science and
Resilience Institute at Jamaica Bay (SRIJB), focused on urban sustainability and
resilience. Past research projects have included field research on oyster
restoration, the impact of seascape noise on reproductive behavior,
phytoremediation in urban waterways, and the analysis of soil composition in
urban gardens. Students are encouraged to work with their mentors to develop
independent research projects with scope for publication. More information about
BUEE is available by visiting http://buee.brooklyn.cuny.edu, or by contacting
buee@brooklyn.cuny.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.