* 2050408
* The Utah STEM Master Educator Institute
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Susannah French, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 02/28/2023
* USD 74,850.00

This capacity building project will serve the national need for a well-prepared
population of K-12 STEM teachers who can serve as leaders and role models within
their schools. In particular, the project will develop new partnerships to
support high quality training and professional learning for master STEM teachers
serving high-need school districts in Utah. Working across the state, the
project will bring together local education agencies, multiple colleges and
universities, and local STEM industry partners to create a STEM teacher training
institute. The resulting STEM Master Educators Institute will support educators
as they help to prepare students to work in Utah’s STEM industries.
Specifically, the Institute is intended to increase leadership capacity within
the Utah education community, promote innovative solutions to problems of
practice in STEM education, and create a sustainable model for collaboration
within and across schools. To complete the project, the project leadership team
will work with an experienced advisory board and representatives from multiple
partners to design the Institute. The Institute will incorporate a “think tank”
design to address key challenges in STEM education. The solutions developed by
the Institute will reflect the collective knowledge of experienced K-12 and
college-level educators, subject matter experts, and partners in the educational
technology sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Utah State University
includes partnerships with Utah’s STEM Action Center, and several Utah
institutions of higher education (Southern Utah University, Utah Valley
University and University of Utah). Additionally, the Utah State Board of
Education will support the planning process with the project leadership team to
build durable relationships with local education partners that will complement
and strengthen the Board's STEM efforts. It is anticipated that master teachers
and other Institute stakeholders will address challenges in distance learning,
culturally aligned STEM content, integration of STEM across the disciplines,
project-based learning, and K-12 science and math instruction. Project goals
include the development of a novel, industry-based STEM teacher professional
learning institute model. The project’s research plan uses the lens of Cultural-
Historical Activity Theory to explore interactions between statewide educational
systems to better understand the relationships between stakeholders and teacher
education programs. This Capacity Building project is supported through the
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.