* 2050427
* Collaborative Research: The Role Of Climate In Agricultural Intensification And Settlement Trends
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2025
* Amber VanDerwarker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2025
* USD 59,735.00

The investigators will examine the cooperative relationships among farmers and
government institutions that enabled the development of about 150 sq km of
prehistoric agricultural raised fields. This occurred during a period of peak
population density and complexity with settlements established around monumental
earthen constructions, including temples and ballcourts that drew people
together for religious ceremony. To feed this population, local groups pooled
their labor to convert natural wetlands into highly productive raised fields by
digging a network of drainage canals and piling the fertile soils onto raised
planting platforms. The whole system eventually failed. Monumental constructions
ceased, raised fields were no longer maintained, and people either migrated
elsewhere or disbanded to live in smaller, self-sustained farmsteads. These
types of collective arrangements remain imperative today as government
agricultural subsidies and support programs, as well as farmer co-ops, have had
varied successes and failures. The social and environmental conditions of
agriculture continuously change due to climatic variability, erosion, soil
fertility losses, and the willingness of individual farmers to cooperate both
with each other and government institutions. These uncertainties, which have
plagued all agricultural societies since the earliest domesticates, cannot be
easily projected into the future, so we turn to the long-term approach of
archaeology. The region of study presents the complete cycle from
intensification of agricultural infrastructure to its ultimate
failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on a case study where detailed
satellite and aerial remote sensing has identified remains of ancient
agricultural field systems. Coring and trenching in the raised fields will
reveal construction techniques and duration of use with geochemical analysis to
assess soil fertility. Samples from fields will be used to date their
construction and abandonment, and to determine what crops were grown in these
fields through macro- and micro-botanical analysis. These data will be compared
with that collected from survey and excavations as a means to reconstruct
settlement history relative to raised field construction. Excavations will
target households of different statuses to understand how wealth and power
relationships changed over time. Paleoenvironmental reconstructions based on
lagoon cores will model how the climate changed from the beginning to the end of
this period of agricultural intensification. Together, these data will present a
picture of the social, political, religious, and environmental factors that
fostered an era of cooperation that led to the development of an intensive
agricultural system and levels of monumentality not seen before in this region.
Perhaps more importantly, the project will uncover the reasons why such
collective action ceased. Regardless of the differences in scale and technology,
this case shares many of the same social, political, and environmental concerns
with our modern farming systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.