* 2050978
* REU Site: Big Data Analytics at Oklahoma State University
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Christopher Crick, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/29/2024
* USD 402,772.00

The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site on big data analytics at
Oklahoma State University (OSU) is a ten-week summer program that seeks to
recruit ten undergraduate students from colleges with limited research
capabilities and high concentrations of underrepresented minority populations
such as African Americans and Native Americans in Oklahoma and neighboring
states. The participants will engage in research projects in big data analytics
under faculty mentors' mentorship and guidance and allow students to participate
in interdisciplinary research that crosses a variety of fields. The goals of the
project include (1) providing a quality research experience for undergraduates,
(2) increasing participation of female and under-represented minorities in
computing fields (especially big data analytics), which will contribute to the
broadening of diversity in computer science, (3) preparing students to pursue
graduate studies in computing and data science fields, and building a community
of big data analytic researchers. The participants will also be exposed to
research activities in the industry through field trips and external speakers.
This exposure will inform students' future choices about potential career paths
within academia as well as within industrial settings. By the end of the
program, the students should acquire skills that will lead to rewarding
professional careers in science and technology, specifically in data science,
expected to continue to be one of the most important fields of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site aims to engage
undergraduates in learning experiences that increase students` interest and
ability to conduct primary research in computer science, especially big data
analytics research. Students will learn how to develop and use different machine
learning (e.g., neural networks), data mining (e.g., clustering), and
statistical methods (e.g., regression), with applications to graph theory, text
mining, image processing, and bioinformatics. They will be introduced to
different aspects of big data analytics while working on real-world projects
with different types of data, including network, health, and image data. They
will develop efficient novel algorithms to analyze massive real-world social and
information networks, to analyze the health data collected from electronic
health records and to extract meaningful visual representations of unlabeled
data for better visual understanding. Research topics range from using big data
to characterize hate speech in social media to understand the COVID-19 spread.
Students will contribute to cutting-edge research and often publish and present
in top venues. The REU experience will expand the students' understanding of
research by placing students in teams that include other undergraduate students
and graduate students under the mentorship of the PIs and other faculty mentors.
They will also learn about the ethical challenges inherent in big data
analytics, from issues of privacy to problems emerging from machine learning
applied to biased datasets. With weekly meetings and seminars, they will also
learn about other projects, share their experience in their project with other
students to form a cohort. The primary focus is to recruit female and
underrepresented minorities, make UG students ready to pursue professional
careers in research-oriented positions and contribute to the broadening of
diversity in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by Computer and Information Science and Engineering’s Information and
Intelligent Systems division and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.