* 2050483
* A Robert Noyce Spatial Thinking Academy for Preparing Effective K-12 STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Richard Rosso, Saint John's University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 05/31/2026
* USD 623,615.00

This project aims to serve the national need for a greater number of highly
qualified STEM teachers. To do so, it will create the Robert Noyce Spatial
Thinking Academy, which will be designed to motivate talented STEM students and
professionals to become successful STEM teachers in high-need public schools. In
the process of moving to certification, the future teachers will improve their
spatial thinking knowledge and skills. In addition, they will learn to use
spatial thinking as an approach to improve their students' STEM learning. The
project will provide two pathways to New York State Teacher Certification:
Pathway 1 for recent STEM graduates and Pathway 2 for STEM workforce
professionals. Three combined cohorts of Pathway 1 and Pathway 2 students will
receive scholarships or stipends. Through the Spatial Thinking Academy, the
project will: (1) train and retain talented individuals from culturally diverse
backgrounds in STEM education; (2) increase future teachers' understanding of
the context in which STEM learning occurs in both informal and formal settings;
and (3) increase the capacity of highly qualified STEM educators to advance
learning of STEM concepts by reinforcing them with spatial thinking
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Saint John's University includes
partnerships with New York City metropolitan area high-three need school
districts (Yonkers, New York School District and School District 31 in Staten
Island). The goal of the project will be to recruit, support, and retain
talented STEM graduates who will pursue a career as a biology, chemistry,
physics, environmental science, or mathematics teacher in high-need public
schools. In doing so, the Spatial Thinking Academy will support 36 talented STEM
graduates to serve in these schools and will provide two pathways leading to New
York State Teacher Initial Certification. Pathway 1 is designed for 24 recent
Saint John's graduates with STEM majors. Pathway 2 is designed for 12 STEM
professionals seeking initial teaching certification as career changers. Both
Pathway 1 and 2 future teachers will enroll in a one-year master's degree in
education and will receive scholarships or stipends for that year. Through a
longitudinal mixed methods research approach, the project investigators will:
(a) design, test, and verify a STEM teaching residency model intended to be
sustainable and adaptable at other universities; (b) test and verify
institutional policies and best practices to increase the number of STEM majors
from culturally diverse communities who pursue careers in teaching; (c) review,
modify, and implement institutional strategies that provide a career pathway for
STEM majors to pursue careers as STEM educators; (d) design, test, verify, and
validate curricula that recognize the importance of spatial thinking as a 21st-
century STEM educational, professional, and career-readiness skill; and (e)
design, test, and validate a model for ongoing professional development and
instructional coaching for STEM teachers. Testing and validation will be
conducted by tracking scholars prior to participation, during the program
period, and for one year following employment in the partner school districts.
The study will explore not only future teachers' abilities to connect spatial
skills and STEM subjects, but also their ability to teach STEM topics from the
perspective of spatial thinking. The results of this work may have far-reaching
implications for connecting spatial cognition research with STEM teaching
practice throughout the country. This Track 1—Scholarships and Stipends—project
is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.