* 2050548
* REU SITE: Enhancing Undergraduate Research Experiences in Cybersecurity and Privacy-Enhanced Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Bharath Kumar Samanthula, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 02/29/2024
* USD 395,470.00

As secure software and trustworthy cyberspace are vital to combat diversified
threats, this Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Montclair
State University focuses on training students to solve real-world cybersecurity
problems and aspires them to be the next generation of cybersecurity
professionals. The REU site provides a diversified group of undergraduate
students with immersive research experiences on advanced topics in cybersecurity
and engaging professional development activities. Faculty mentors use a hands-
on, inclusive teaching approach to effectively train students using state-of-
the-art cybersecurity tools and techniques. The Site will pursue the following
primary objectives: (i) recruit and engage undergraduate students, especially
those from underrepresented groups, on transformative interdisciplinary research
activities in cybersecurity, (ii) train the students on fundamental research
methodologies and instill a computational thinking approach to understand and
solve problems effectively, (iii) stimulate teamwork spirit as well as self-
directed learning that lead them to research-independent status and successfully
work on research projects in a collaborative manner, (iv) motivate students to
apply for graduate programs and aspire for a variety of careers in
cybersecurity, and (v) promote the rich experiences of the Site students and
their home institutions to attract more new students into the related fields.
The Site students and the partnering institutions will act as ambassadors to
disseminate their unique research experiences among their peers which can
attract more undergraduate students into cybersecurity education and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this REU Site is to promote
Montclair State University (MSU) as the next-generation Cybersecurity research
hub by nurturing a diversified group of undergraduate students with immersive
research experiences on advanced topics in Cybersecurity. The Site will provide
unique opportunities for students to invigorate their Cybersecurity knowledge
and skills with research-intensive summer projects and engaging professional
development activities. The REU project trains women and underrepresented
minorities predominantly from institutions where research opportunities in STEM
fields are limited. Given the scarcity of cybersecurity workforce, the Site will
contribute to the growing efforts of developing a more diversified cybersecurity
workforce. The Site will: (i) engage a diversified pool of students in cutting-
edge research projects in three major subareas of cybersecurity, namely
cryptographic protocols, machine learning for cybersecurity and human aspects of
secure software development, (ii) expose students to scientific research skills
and rich cybersecurity knowledge that increase their creative capacity and
confidence in cybersecurity R&amp;D, and (iii) establish sustainable mentor
relationship with the Site students and cultivate a strong desire to apply for
advanced degrees in the related fields. The Site will create a vibrant
cybersecurity learning environment that encompasses interesting group
discussions, weekly seminars, poster presentations and industry visits that
foster studentsâ€™ passion for cybersecurity research. It will also open up new
opportunities for participating students in academia, industry and government
that would not otherwise be possible at their home
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.