* 2050284
* SBIR Phase I:  Building the sunscreen of the future
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Camille Martin, SEASPIRE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2022
* USD 247,617.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to develop and analytically validate a new, bio-inspired material as
an alternative ultraviolet (UV)-filter that would fill an immediate societal and
environmental need, which is to minimize the impacts of solar radiation without
posing a risk to human health or the marine ecosystem. This is important, as
existing commercial sunscreens suffer from five significant problems: (1) A
large proportion of marketed sunscreens are ineffective at protecting skin from
UV radiation. (2) Over 65% of non-mineral sunscreens contain chemicals that are
toxic to marine ecosystems (i.e., oceanâ€™s coral reefs). (3) Many common,
conventional sunscreen chemicals may not even be human-safe and are currently
being re-evaluated by regulatory bodies. (4) There is poor adoption of the
safer, mineral-based sunscreens due to their negative aesthetic properties
including a thick, white coating on the skin. (5) Early evidence indicates
growing concerns that newer micro- and nano-based formulations of mineral
sunscreens, which are visually more appealing, also have toxic impacts on both
skin and the environment. The proposed technology innovation is aimed at
replacing those currently in use as a safer, ecofriendly, and more effective
alternative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will overcome three
technical hurdles involved in bringing a new ingredient into the suncare market.
The first is aimed at simplifying the chemistry of the core class of molecules
proposed in this work to ultimately reduce the production costs of the raw
material to a market viable rate. The second will be to assess their utility and
effectiveness in formulations at a range of sun protection factors. In addition
to their UV-filtering performance, the photo- and thermal- stabilities of the
formulations will be evaluated. The third is to investigate the safety of the
proposed materials in formulations including cytocompatibility and anti-
microbial assays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.