* 2050755
* REU Site: Intensive Mentored Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) in Psychology and Neuroscience at an Urban Public College
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Laura Rabin, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2024
* USD 335,586.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits in addition to integrating research and education. The CUNY Boston
College (BC) REU program aims to advance discovery for the scientific and
broader communities while promoting mentoring, learning, and professional
development by: (1) immersing students from underrepresented groups (primarily
women, racial minorities, first-generation college students) in innovative
research in psychology and neuroscience; (2) guiding students through the
scientific process, from generation of research questions to communication of
results; (3) engaging students in didactics that highlight the relevance and
applied value of their laboratory work; (4) enhancing students' competitiveness
for graduate school and professional positions; (5) training mentors to meet
studentsâ€™ training needs; and (6) boosting the research competence of local
middle and high school teachers with downstream positive learning effects for
their students. This REU program also enables faculty members to supervise
talented individuals who might otherwise miss out on mentored laboratory and
professional development opportunities, and contributes to the training and
advancement of the next generation of scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central (scientific) component of the BC REU program is a semester-long
laboratory immersion, under the supervision of Psychology and Biology Department
faculty mentors, which results in a completed research project. We emphasize the
generation of high quality research and integration of psychological and
neuroscientific theory with the design, execution, and interpretation of data.
We select ten students annually for mentored research projects, especially
undergraduates from ethnic-minority serving, public two-year and four-year
institutions in the New York metropolitan area. Students also attend weekly
didactics: a seminar that focuses on research methods, data analysis,
statistical reasoning, and professional issues/career development and a journal
club that familiarizes students with scientific literature. To enable students
to address ethical issues that arise in research environments, we train students
in key ethical guidelines and regulations based on the work of ethics experts.
As a capstone experience, students present a first-authored poster at the BC
Science Research Day, where they compete for awards based on the quality of
their work and ability to communicate their findings. Many of our students work
with their mentors to publish their results in peer-reviewed journals. We also
host a data-driven mentor training presentation and student-mentor discussion
panel in order to facilitate strong mentor-mentee relationships, increase
mentor-mentee dialogue, and further motivate REU students to pursue STEM
careers. Finally, our program has a RET (Research Experiences for Teachers)
component, which provides middle and high school teachers with coursework and
mentored laboratory experiences to enhance their research proficiency and raise
the level of science education in local middle schools and high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.