* 2050311
* REU Site: Animal Behavior in Context
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Cara Wellman, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 344,871.00

This REU Site award to Indiana University, located in Bloomington, IN, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2021 -
2023. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. Students will conduct research on how context, a concept
that includes external events, internal state, and past experience, influences
behavioral decision-making. This theme unites perspectives and methods from
biology, psychology, ecology, anthropology, and cognitive science. Projects will
be conducted in home labs that may use a range of methodological approaches
including genomics, neuroscience, microbiomics, endocrinology, and modern field
work to study the mechanistic bases of context. Students will learn how research
is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. Assessment of the program will be done through the online SALG
URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine
their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site is housed at the Center
for the Integrative Study of Animal Behavior. Faculty members in the departments
of Biology, Psychological and Brain Sciences, and Anthropology will serve as
mentors. The scientific theme of context as behaviorally informative will lead
to new insight into the capabilities of animals for behavioral plasticity and
lends itself to groundbreaking research in the mechanisms of behavior. For
example, several projects will focus on the microbiomic, genomic, hormonal, or
neural mechanisms that regulate aggressive behaviors in mice, hamsters, electric
fish, or tree swallows. In addition to research, students will be trained in the
ethical conduct of research, scientific writing, and research presentation.
Students will be prepared for applying to graduate school. Matches with specific
projects will be based on mutual interests between students and home labs.
Student achievements will be assessed via the SALG URSSA tool, by formative and
summative assessments in conjunction with the School of Education, and via long-
term individual tracking. More information about the program is available by
visiting https://animalbehavior.indiana.edu/research/reu/index.html , or
contacting the PI (Dr. Laura Hurley: lhurley@indiana.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Cara
Wellman: wellmanc@indiana.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.