* 2050047
* Collaborative Research: Parameterizing The Drivers and Timing of Post-Earthquake Landslides
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Christopher Massey, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 512,967.00

This research project explores the drivers of landslides that occur after
earthquakes, which currently are not well understood. Following destabilization
of the terrain from earthquakes, landslides tend to occur more frequently,
presenting a persistent hazard that impacts socioeconomic well-being and
community recovery. While this increased landslide occurrence after earthquakes
has been documented, the reasons why this phenomenon arises are poorly
constrained. In the absence of physics-based insight towards this problem, we
are ill-equipped to prepare and mitigate landslide hazards following seismic
events, leaving our communities vulnerable at a critical time for recovery. In
collaboration with partners in New Zealand, which experienced significant post-
seismic landsliding in recent years, this project will create a physics-based
framework to evaluate drivers and the timing of post-seismic landslides at local
and regional scales. This work will be accomplished through constraining the
physical mechanisms and evolving material changes that drive landslides to occur
more frequently following earthquakes. Through these activities, engineers,
planners, and scientists will be better equipped to design and prevent the
impacts of post-earthquake landslides, enabling the more resilient design of
infrastructure systems and better planning for recovery after seismic events.
This project will also allow sharing lessons of direct relevance learned from
recovery in New Zealand with the transportation and community planners in the US
Pacific Northwest, which is overdue for a strong, subduction zone earthquake.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this research project is to
parametrize the spatiotemporal drivers of post-earthquake landslides. Evaluation
of the magnitude and timing of elevated post-earthquake landslide activity is
primarily limited to empirical observation from remotely-sensed data. This
evolving landslide activity has been ascribed to various phenomena; however,
there are no physics-based approaches to test hypotheses regarding the drivers
of post-seismic landsliding, evaluate their respective influences, or provide
predictive power towards assessing post-earthquake landslide hazard. This
research project will establish a comprehensive physics-based platform for
understanding why strong earthquakes increase subsequent landslide activity.
Through these activities, we seek to (1) establish a framework for evaluating
earthquake-induced hillslope damage, (2) isolate how climate, geology,
seismicity, vegetation, and topography influence observed post-earthquake
landslide activity, and (3) test hypothesized influences on the timescales of
post-earthquake landslide activity. These activities will be performed in
continued, close collaboration with GNS Science in New Zealand, who currently
are leading an extensive research effort to understand and predict post-
earthquake landsliding after the 2016 Kaikoura event. We will expand and
complement GNS Science data collection and statistical modeling efforts by
adding a geomechanics perspective and enable a formal, international exchange of
knowledge. We will test a research-to-practice engagement program developed by
the GNS Science social science team throughout the scientific process with the
Oregon Department of Transportation, who is interested in planning for post-
earthquake recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.