* 2050718
* REU Site: Program in Climate and Space Science Observation (PICASSO) at the University of Michigan
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Frank Marsik, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 03/31/2024
* USD 408,402.00

Improvements in the understanding of the climate and space sciences rely on the
use of both ground- and space-based observations. In addition to providing
insights into many complex processes and trends, these observations can also aid
in the development and evaluation of weather and climate forecast models, Earth
environmental models, space weather models, as well as models which describe the
evolution and state of planetary atmospheres. Combined, these observations and
models can be used to protect human health and welfare in a number of ways,
including: (a) providing advanced warning for hazardous weather events, (b)
providing guidance on short- and long-term weather conditions which can impact
agricultural and industrial economic sectors, (c) aiding in the development of
climate adaptation strategies to protect sensitive natural environments,
community infrastructure, and indigenous practices, and (d) allowing for the
prediction of solar storm interactions with our atmosphere, which have the
potential to impact global communications, electrical power grids, and aviation
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Program in Climate and Space Science
Observation (PICASSO) at the University of Michigan seeks to engage a diverse
cohort of students with hands-on exposure to a broad range of climate and space
science topics, including meteorology and climate variability, atmospheric-
biosphere exchange, aerosols and atmospheric chemistry, remote sensing,
computational modeling, space weather and planetary atmospheres. Through these
projects, students will have the opportunity to learn technical skills, such as:
(a) research project development and management, (b) data collection, quality
assurance, analysis, and visualization, (c) computational model development,
application and evaluation, and (d) assessment and consideration of
uncertainties in the interpretation of research results. In addition to the
technical skill-building elements of the program, students will participate in a
series of professional development activities which will focus on: (a)
understanding practices associated with the responsible and ethical conduct of
research, (b) developing skills for the communication of scientific research
results to their peers and the general public, (c) learning the nuances of
selecting, applying to, and succeeding in graduate school, and (d) developing a
greater sense of self-understanding and self-authorship in support of
professional and personal decision-making. In doing so, we will seek to improve
the confidence of these students regarding their continued participation in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields. Overall, our
program will seek to produce scientifically-trained, culturally and ethically
responsible scientists, engineers and leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is
supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.