* 2050340
* RUI: Multi-wavelength Spectroscopic and Spectropolarimetric Diagnostics of the Solar Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Qiang Hu, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 03/31/2024
* USD 388,769.00

This 3-year project aims to develop data analysis techniques to infer the
thermodynamic and magnetic structure of the solar atmosphere from the
photosphere to a height of about 2-5 Mm using simultaneous multi-wavelength
observations of spectral lines formed at different heights. Many current
analysis approaches yield only simplified results instead of stratifications of
physical properties. The project will develop an automatic, semi-empirical
method to convert such results of lower complexity to atmospheric
stratifications wherever they cannot be directly derived from an inversion of
spectra. The method will be tested on observations of sunspots, where additional
constraints on the magnetic field topology, connectivity and the gas density are
available from the well-organized spatial structuring and magnetic field
extrapolations. The results will enable one to address nearly all currently open
questions in relation to the lower solar atmosphere, e.g., understanding the
fine-structure and the properties of mass flows and oscillations inside sunspots
from deep in the photosphere to the chromosphere. This will add to our
understanding of the basic properties of sunspots, which are some of the most
enigmatic objects in astrophysics. Sunspots are an integral part of late-type
stars, play a vital role in stellar evolution and can influence life-supporting
exoplanets including the Earth through space weather events that are rooted in
sunspots and the active regions that host them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The method
to infer the thermodynamic and magnetic structure of the solar atmosphere will
be based on a piece-wise analysis of different photospheric and chromospheric
spectral lines with already available inversion codes and the additional tools
developed during the project. For any spectral line where current analysis
methods do not provide stratifications of physical parameters of the solar
atmosphere, e.g., the prominent chromospheric spectral line of neutral Hydrogen
Alpha at 656 nm, a semi-empirical method using external constraints from
magnetic field extrapolations will be employed to convert the results retrieved
from a simplified modeling of the radiative transfer to stratifications. A major
effort will be to consistently convert and combine the stratifications from
different height regimes into a single atmospheric stratification of all
relevant thermodynamic and magnetic parameters from 0 to about 5 Mm in the solar
atmosphere. The resulting atmospheric model is expected to be in hydrostatic
equilibrium, to provide all physical parameters on a geometrical height scale
and to reproduce all observed spectral lines when a spectral synthesis of the
model atmosphere is executed. A successful demonstration of the reliability of
the approach on sunspot observations, where additional constraints are available
because of the spatial continuity of the magnetic field topology, will allow one
to decide on its suitability for observations of arbitrary solar targets. Any
scientific question that requires accurate physical properties of the lower
solar atmosphere can potentially be addressed with the results of the analysis
approach. The tool developed through this project will be freely available to
the community of solar researchers and will help in fully exploiting the
observations with the NSFâ€™s 4-meter class Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope. The
participation of underrepresented students at California State University
Northridge to both analyze and visualize the high-resolution spectropolarimetric
data will prepare a future generation of the scientific workforce in solar
physics. The research and EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic
Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.