* 2050471
* REU Site: Michigan Summer Program in Cognition and Early Development (MSPICED)
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Felix Warneken, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 04/30/2024
* USD 325,001.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate and is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program. It has both scientific and
societal benefits, and integrates research and education. This summer internship
program aims to educate undergraduate students by giving them first-hand
experience in how psychological research is conducted and help them develop
professional skills in science. Developmental science is a field of psychology
concerned with the development of children who are facing a dynamically changing
reality while teachers, parents, and policy makers are experiencing heightened
demand for making rapid decisions affecting children world-wide. To support
them, developmental science advances evidence-based theory and practice of
promoting child development and well-being. Therefore, it is critical for
individuals of many professions to gain the skill-sets for using and
interpreting scientific findings through active participation in state-of-the-
art developmental science research. To help with these educational goals, each
year 7 undergraduate interns will participate in a 10-week summer internship
program that includes (1) hands-on research-participation in active empirical
research projects, directly supervised by faculty with a strong track-record of
involving undergraduates in their research, (2) teaching modules to offer
training in advanced behavioral and neuroscience methods and develop programming
skills for using state-of-the-art statistics software, and (3) professional
development training to tutor academic writing, science communication to the
public, and how to write strong graduate school applications for a career in
science. Recruitment is focused on a diverse group of undergraduates, including
those from smaller universities and colleges that do not have the opportunity to
be involved in active psychological research at their home institutions.
Therefore, priority is given to under-represented minority students and first-
generation college students through several recruitment mechanisms with
organizations and databases that reach these target populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By working collaboratively with faculty members and
graduate students at the University of Michigan, summer interns become actively
involved in pursuing specific projects in developmental science focused on the
cognitive development of young children. The interns collect and analyze
scientific data as part of behavioral and neuroscience studies. They learn how
to write and present scientific research, including academic writing and
statistical data analysis, as well as poster presentations at the Department of
Psychology and scientific conferences. Moreover, through collaborations with
local museums in Ann Arbor, Michigan, interns will learn about science
communication with the greater public. The broader impact of this is to break
down boundaries and strengthen their resolve in becoming scientists themselves.
In addition to their primary research project, interns participate in weekly
meetings and formal training sessions introducing them to core tenets of
developmental science and career paths in the discipline. Professional training
modules, a mentoring agreement, assessment tools for the interns’ short-term and
long-term professional goals, and an alumni network to help with further career
steps all aim to promote diversity and inclusion not only in recruitment, but in
fostering long-term success of the interns of this REU
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.