* 2050873
* REU Site at Kent State University: Liquid Crystals and Advanced Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Torsten Hegmann, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 05/31/2024
* USD 395,810.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates Sites (REU) award to Kent State
University (KSU), located in Kent, OH, supports 10 students for 10 weeks of
research training and professional development during the summers of 2021-2023.
The site, supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
Program and the Division of Chemistry, is co-located in the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry as well as the Advanced Materials and Liquid Crystal
Institute. Planned research projects are expected to bring together a diverse
group of students who will work closely with faculty mentors to pursue
scientific discovery in the area of advanced materials, from nano-chemistry and
soft condensed matter physics to biological and polymeric materials. Students in
this REU program will participate in all aspects of the scientific process, from
design and execution of their project to interpretation and dissemination of
research results, all in a cooperative and collegial atmosphere. Students also
take part in robust professional development programming, helping them to
navigate their future careers in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students at this REU site will undertake
research projects encompassing many areas of advanced materials. Available
projects include explorations of controlled motion of bacteria in liquid
crystals and other active matter, studies of DNA nano-assemblies and
carbonaceous nanomaterials, efforts to achieve chirality amplification in soft
matter and studies of liquid crystalline elastomers and of organic transistors.
Student professional development programming includes sessions on research
ethics, analytical and materials characterization training, as well as clean
room training, and a multi-REU-site research symposium. Students are recruited
from two- and four-year institutions and minority serving institutions from
various parts of the country, including Alaska. Aside from exposure to a
multidisciplinary research culture, this experience creates new friendships,
networks, and aspirations that are expected to endure long after the summer
research experiences are completed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.