* 2050829
* REU Site: Astronomy and Physics at Georgia State University: From the Largest to Smallest Scales in the Universe
* MPS,AST
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Daniel Crenshaw, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 10/31/2024
* USD 304,783.00

This project will establish a new REU site in astronomy and physics at Georgia
State University (GSU) with a theme of exploring the various size scales in
nature and their commonalities and differences in terms of fundamental physics,
scientific approach, connection to other fields of study, data acquisition and
measurement, statistical analysis, computational modeling, characterization of
systematic and random uncertainties, presentation of results via talks and
posters, and scientific writing. Each student will be given a distinct research
project and work closely with their faculty advisor and group to produce
presentations for a department summer symposium and a national conference.
Groups of 2 â€“ 4 students will travel with a faculty member to a GSU-affiliated
observatory or laboratory (Apache Point Observatory, CHARA, or Brookhaven) for a
week to carry out a mini-project related to their research field. Weekly
seminars led by the graduate coordinator will focus on professional practices
and ethics, reading scientific papers, scientific talks, science writing, and
practice for the summer symposium. Weekly lunch meetings will feature brief
faculty talks and discussion questions led by graduate students to foster
student discussions of their research projects and their connectivity throughout
the Universe. Social activities will take advantage of the many cultural and
recreational opportunities in Atlanta. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GSU is a large
urban research university in the Southeast and an official minority-serving
institution for both Blacks and Hispanics. The Department of Physics and
Astronomy is looking to build on its success in growing the number of
underrepresented B.S. in Physics graduates, its informal program of paid
undergraduate researchers over 20 years, and its more formal program in the past
2 years. The recruitment objective is to expand the program nationally to
attract a diverse group of students with limited STEM opportunities to provide
them with a research experience that is essential for their scientific
development, eligibility for graduate school, and
employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.