* 2050248
* Building STEM Teacher Capacity in Southeastern Tennessee
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2022
* Cynthia Gardner, Maryville College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 02/28/2022
* USD 75,000.00

This project aims to serve the national need for highly effective STEM teachers
by developing a one-year Master of Arts in STEM Teaching degree program at
Maryville College. This additional pathway to teaching licensure will address
the needs of STEM majors who decide upon a teaching profession later in their
college careers or even after graduation. Because of state licensure
requirements, college students seeking teaching degrees are required to complete
high credit-count coursework in both their primary STEM majors and in education.
To do so in four years, most students begin on the traditional STEM education
pathway, and their college coursework plans are prescriptive to ensure
graduation within four years. The restrictions of this model can discourage
transfer students as well as late deciders from pursuing teaching careers, as
these students must often commit to at least two more years of study. The
development and implementation of a Master of Arts in STEM teaching program aims
to lower barriers for STEM majors to choose teaching as a profession.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this project, Maryville College will partner with
Blount County Public Schools, a neighboring high-need local education agency and
four regional partners. Regional partners include the Great Smoky Mountains
Institute at Tremont, an environmental education center in the Great Smoky
Mountains National Park, the STEM Innovation Network of Tennessee, and the
Little River Watershed Association. As the overarching goal of this project is
to develop a one-year Master of Arts in STEM Teaching degree program, the
project has three major objectives. One is to create a viable, attractive
pathway for STEM majors from Maryville College and for transfer students from
community colleges to pursue teacher licensure midway through their college
careers. A second objective is to create educational materials to raise
awareness of the new master’s program among Maryville College STEM students,
regional STEM graduates, community college students, and potential professional
partners with employees who may be interested in teaching. The third objective
is to forge partnerships with several regional organizations to develop a
recruitment pipeline of STEM professionals who want to change careers. The
project also aims to provide professional development opportunities for
undergraduate students and Master of Arts in STEM Teaching students through
internships and teaching-related field experiences. Project evaluation will
provide an opportunity to analyze the successes and challenges in developing and
launching the proposed program, yielding valuable data for future program
innovations at Maryville and for other institutions planning fifth-year STEM MAT
program implementation. This Capacity Building project is supported through the
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.