* 2050195
* REU Site: The future of discovery: training students to build and apply open source machine learning models and tools
* CSE,OAC
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Daniel Katz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 03/31/2024
* USD 405,000.00

Machine learning is a powerful tool that has been successfully applied to a
variety of problems that until recently were deemed too difficult or impossible
for computers to solve. This REU Site project gives participating students
experience in many aspects of machine learning, ranging from developing open
source machine learning models and tools to applying them in the real world. The
work carried out by the students will lead to research advances in the fields of
these projects and the models and tools they develop will be open-source,
leading to them being available to other fields where these models can be used
to make additional advances. Machine learning is an emerging field with
limitless opportunities to design innovative services and products that will
enhance the lives of billions of people, help to address emerging challenges in
climate, food, water, energy, transportation, and healthcare, and advance
science and engineering discoveries in ways unimaginable today. The project
contributes to the development of a highly specialized workforce trained to
utilize advanced machine learning methods, and to contribute to open source
software. Students from diverse backgrounds and computational/data-oriented
disciplines are being trained to apply machine learning and to participate in
research where these tools are at the center of scientific discovery, preparing
them to apply machine learning methods in other fields and providing them with
the foundation and motivation to pursue advanced graduate studies. This project
serves NSF's mission by promoting the progress of science and advancing national
health, prosperity and welfare. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project
are to train undergraduate students, focusing on those from minority serving
institutions, in machine learning and open source software, where they will then
apply these skills to mentor-guided research projects. This is an on-site summer
program at the University of Illinois that brings to campus 10 students per year
and is based on matching their preferences and interests to those of a group of
mentors, so that each student works with a pair of mentors, one from the
project's research area and the other with expertise in machine learning. This
program increases the students' knowledge of research and graduate school, and
in many cases, stimulates their interest in continuing to graduate school, while
in other cases, trains students with skills that enable them to seek data
science and data analysis jobs in industry, increasing diversity in these
graduate programs and in industry. By their presence in the program as
continuing undergraduates, when the students return to their university, they
will build a relationship between Illinois and that university, their faculty,
and their peers that encourages future students to participate in the program
and provides the basis for future joint research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.