* 2050265
* An Asset Model Approach for Building Capacity in a Rural Region for the Recruitment, Mentoring, and Licensing of Math and Science Preservice Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2021,10/31/2022
* Timothy Deis, University of Wisconsin-Platteville
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 10/31/2022
* USD 120,792.00

The project aims to serve the national need of producing high quality STEM math
and science teachers. This project intends to build capacity to create a pathway
from high school to science or mathematics teacher certification with a focus on
students in rural locales. This project will serve national interest and the
Noyce program’s intent through implementing an asset-based approach that builds
upon the strengths of a rural community in the recruitment and mentoring of
students to fill much needed positions in STEM teaching. Significant to this
project is the identification of how the unique strengths of a rural region can
be leveraged to create a pathway for students from high school to STEM teacher
licensure. This is important because rural regions across the nation are
struggling with recruiting and retaining high quality STEM teachers. This
project proposes to both capitalize on the strengths of the local community and
to implement a series of steps towards the creation of a pathway to recruit,
mentor, and prepare STEM students for teacher certification. This includes
working with the local community, the newly aligned two-year college branch
campuses that tend to serve primarily low-income students, and high school
students’ own enthusiasm for mathematics and science. This project has the
potential to provide useful information on a different, more direct approach for
recruiting students along with how to create a pathway from high school to STEM
teacher certification to address the need for more high-quality science and
mathematics teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Capacity Building project at
the University of Wisconsin-Platteville, a comprehensive public institution, is
in partnership with its two 2-year branch campuses, UW-Platteville Baraboo Sauk
County and UW-Platteville Richmond. The project’s overarching goal is to create
a “grow-your-own” program, designed to recruit promising high school seniors,
and to then provide innovative, continual support as they travel on the path to
becoming highly-qualified high school STEM educators. The project will achieve
this by building partnerships, creating a cohort-centered mentoring program, and
systematically gathering and analyzing data. The project’s intellectual merit
includes the use of an asset model approach to leverage the strengths of a rural
community in the recruiting and supporting of STEM students seeking education
licensing. The project’s broader impacts will provide other institutions,
particularly those in a dynamic post-secondary state system, the steps necessary
for creating a pathway that eases rural students’ transition from high school,
to a two-year institution, to a four-year institution, then to the classroom as
high-quality, licensed science or mathematics teachers. The work will be
evaluated by examining the effectiveness of the proposed Capacity Building
approach that leads to the creation and submission of a future Noyce proposal.
The findings will be disseminated through established regional and national
networks focused on improving science and mathematics K-12 teachers. This
Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.