* 2050630
* Building Capacity for Assuring High Quality, Licensed Computer Science Teachers across Hawai’i
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Michael-Brian Ogawa, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 12/31/2022
* USD 74,940.00

This project aims to serve the national need of increasing the number of
qualified and licensed computer science teachers. The state of Hawai‘i, a hub
for technologically innovation in the Pacific, offers computer science in all
public high schools throughout the state. As more elementary, middle, and high
school computer science courses are established, an increase is needed in the
number of qualified, licensed computer science teachers. The project seeks to
provide a framework for licensure in computer science education for college
students majoring in computer science or mathematics. The project team will
determine critical components needed in a culturally responsive computer science
curriculum in a state that has a majority of minority students. With its
established online learning infrastructure, the university intends to initially
develop a curriculum that can be accessed online or face-to-face, which may
increase access to the certificate program by removing the barrier of commuting
to the Honolulu-based campus. The project also focuses on building capacity for
future recruitment and retention that will allow successful statewide alliances
to be scaled up for broader impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the
University of Hawai’i at Manoa, a public teaching and research university, will
partner with the Hawai’i Department of Education, the sole school district in
the state of Hawai’i. The project goal is to build capacity to provide a pathway
for computer science and mathematics majors to obtain licensure to teach
computer science in K-12 through developing the infrastructure for a five-course
computer science education certificate program. It is the intent of this project
to increase content knowledge, pedagogical content knowledge, culturally
sustaining knowledge, and pedagogical practices to align with the K-12 computer
science teaching standards. The knowledge gained through this project may guide
future research and interventions designed to enhance individual aspirations and
capacity of underrepresented groups to pursue computer science teaching. The
project includes an advisory board of content experts, education partners,
industry partners, teacher education faculty experts, and computer science
faculty experts. This Board will evaluate the development of the new teacher
preparation program to determine if it is sound in both content and context for
Hawai‘i. The resulting curriculum and development process will be shared at
local and national education conferences. This Capacity Building project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.