* 2050883
* REU Site: Software and Data Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Mark Hills, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 02/29/2024
* USD 381,268.00

This project will establish a three-year REU site in software and data analytics
at East Carolina University (ECU). It will offer a ten-week research program for
ten undergraduate students during summer semesters. The faculty-student
interaction, as well as interaction among students, will take different forms,
including daily Scrum meetings, tutorials, weekly meetings, lectures, seminars,
group meetings, and field trips. The REU project will allow a diverse pool of
undergraduate students to experience cutting-edge research. Students will gain
valuable research skills that will prepare them for their future fields of
study, while helping them to develop into self-reliant STEM researchers.
Furthermore, their exposure to research will motivate them to continue to
graduate studies. Finally, the REU project will provide students with an
opportunity to collaborate with their faculty mentors and student peers across
the nation after the summer program ends. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sample
research projects cover open research topics in software and data analytics.
Code Recommendation for Programming Language Learners investigates machine
learning techniques for building code recommendation systems aimed at beginning
programmers, taking their level of programming knowledge into account.
Intelligent Program Update Detection and Automation uses version histories of
software systems to understand how code related to uses of a software library
(via an Application Programming Interface, or API) evolves, to identify when
this evolution needs to occur, and to build transformation scripts to partially
or fully automate the changes needed to support a newer API version. Human-
Computer Collaborative Dialogue Systems explores techniques for automated
regression test case prioritization that utilizes techniques from information
retrieval such as term similarity. Link Recovery Systems investigates the use of
information retrieval techniques for recovering traceability links between
program requirements, bug reports, and project source code. Using Machine
Learning to Estimate Software Development Effort explores the use of machine
learning techniques to estimate software development effort. Understanding
Implicit Extension APIs investigates uses of machine learning for API
recommendation, specifically in the context of APIs in dynamic languages that
are created implicitly in the code. Machine Learning Algorithms for Biometric
Data Analysis uses a combination of machine learning techniques and mobile
application usage data (e.g., about swipe gestures) to infer demographic
characteristics of app users. Performance Evaluation of Machine Learning
Algorithms explores the use of machine learning for prediction, using the
example of the next day closing price for crypt-currencies. Students
participating in these projects will learn about topics including code
recommendation systems, static program analysis, program transformation,
classical techniques for classification in machine learning (e.g., k-nearest
neighbors), deep learning, information retrieval, software testing, software
maintenance, software repository mining, software quality metrics, crypto-
currencies, and both theoretical and empirical measurements of algorithm
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.