* 2050979
* REU Site: Green Infrastructure for Sustainable Urban Environments (GI4SUrE)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jon Hathaway, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 09/30/2024
* USD 404,784.00

In this Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site Program, Green
Infrastructure for Sustainable Urban Environments (GI4SUrE), a diverse cohort
will participate in research supporting the advancement of Green Infrastructure
to improve public and ecological health in urban environments. Green
Infrastructure can be described as the interconnected natural spaces in urban
environments such as parks, riparian areas, and nature-based storm water control
measures that serve to clean storm water runoff, reduce urbanization impacts to
local surface waters, and offer protection from flooding. Research will include
state of the art field, laboratory, and modeling studies to better understand
and optimize these systems. Students that participate in this REU will have the
chance to improve their research and critical thinking skills while bolstering
their ability to communicate with technical and non-technical audiences through
oral and written mediums. Additional experiences include access to new mentors,
exposure to the various career pathways made possible by a graduate degree in
engineering, and training on how to collaborate with, learn from, communicate
with, and consider the perspectives of colleagues outside their discipline. This
program will serve to improve the diversity of the engineering profession and
student participation in graduate school by extending opportunities to
traditionally underrepresented groups in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a 10-week, summer undergraduate research
experience, the GI4SUrE REU Site aims to: (1) propel scientific knowledge
regarding Green Infrastructure (GI) contributions to sustainable urban water,
and (2) provide a high quality professional and social atmosphere where
attendees are educated on fundamental research methodologies and critical
thinking. Under the guidance of faculty mentors, students will perform field,
laboratory, and/or modeling studies to explore how GI functions to mitigate the
effects of urban runoff on surface water quality and hydrology. Green
Infrastructure has been deemed as a way to build better infrastructure as part
of the National Academy of Engineeringâ€™s Grand Challenge to restore and improve
urban infrastructure, making it a vital topic for investigation. REU students
will be exposed to state of the art techniques and convergent research by the
inclusion of non-engineering co-mentors in a subset of the projects to address
complex questions that consider social, hydrologic, ecologic, and/or economic
outcomes. Through a targeted recruiting strategy, this REU site will bolster the
participation of traditionally underrepresented groups in undergraduate
engineering research. Students will gain skills in research methodology,
communication, convergent approaches, and working in team environments which
will be invaluable in their professional endeavors. Further, exposure to the
various career pathways that are open to individuals with advanced degrees will
aid them in determining their desired career path, whether it be academia,
industry, government, or non-government organizations. REU contributions to GI
knowledge will be invaluable. As billions of dollars are being spent nationwide
to reduce the effects of urbanization through the use of GI, there is a critical
need to better understand and optimize its performance to make these efforts
more scientifically informed. Overall, the REU intends to establish direct,
lasting mentoring relationships between participants and faculty, and long-term
relationships among those in the cohort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.