* 2050397
* Talented Teachers in Training for Texas, Expanded
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Chrissy Cross, Stephen F. Austin State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,010,840.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing highly effective STEM
teachers to serve in high-need school districts. To do so, it intends to recruit
a diverse group of STEM undergraduate students and support them to become
skilled STEM teachers. The project will use two strategies to recruit future
teachers. The project will offer two one-credit courses on the campuses of
Stephen F. Austin State University and Lone Star College Houston North. These
courses are intended to help STEM majors explore a career in STEM teaching. The
project will also recruit future STEM teachers through a one-week, paid STEM
Master Teacher Job Shadow, which will help STEM students experience a STEM
teaching career up close. The undergraduate STEM majors who are recruited to
become certified teachers will be supported financially through scholarships.
These Noyce Scholars will also receive biweekly training and robust mentoring
and coaching that will continue in in their early years of teaching. The project
expects that these supports will reduce both undergraduate attrition and STEM
teacher attrition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon the
infrastructure of two previous teacher preparation projects supported by the
Noyce Program. It is led by Stephen F. Austin State University in partnership
with Lone Star College Houston North, in collaboration with Angelina College,
Kilgore College, and Tyler Junior College, with Lufkin and Nacogdoches
Independent School Districts (both high-need), and with the Region 7 Education
Service Center. The project works from a recruiting base of JacksTeach, which is
a replication of the nationally recognized UTeach program at Stephen F. Austin
State University. In addition, Scholars will be recruited from the STEM Master
Teacher Job Shadow for STEM majors prior to the junior year. The project aims to
recruit and support 26 undergraduate STEM majors to become certified teachers
and teach STEM in a high-need school district for at least four-years. Project
aims include the following: engaging over 100 STEM students through
participation in either the JacksTeach or STEM Master Teach Job Shadows;
recruiting committed STEM undergraduates who will graduate in STEM and become
teachers; supporting Noyce graduates with professional development and sustained
research; and equipping Scholars with expertise in culturally relevant pedagogy.
This Track 1: Scholarship and Stipends project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers
in high-need districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.