* 2050518
* REU Site: Tracking Land Change (TLC)
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Paul Laris, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 05/31/2024
* USD 343,916.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits, and integrates research and education. This project brings together
eight undergraduate students with faculty for an eight-week intensive research
and learning experience to study the science and technology of environmental
conservation. America’s biodiversity hotspots exist within a matrix of urban
sprawl, reserves, and working lands. In populated areas, such as California,
biodiversity cannot be supported solely through the designation of wildland and
conservation areas. There is a need for a broader approach that incorporates
humans, their activities, and working lands. This understanding has given rise
to reconciliation ecology movements and new science that seek to integrate
humanized spaces—working lands such as ranches and farms—with existing systems
of wildlands and conservation areas. These approaches expand the habitat for
rare plant and animal species as well as sustainably manage and provide
ecosystem services to society. The objective of this REU is to train the next
generation of land managers and restoration scientists in conservation science
and technology to facilitate the transition of working lands to de facto working
reserves. We will train a highly diverse group of students in the field on River
Ridge Ranch (RRR), a working ranchland near Sequoia National Park, and in the
laboratory, in the use of innovative geospatial technologies and systems and the
application of the associated STEM biogeographic concepts that inform them.
Students will develop their own research questions and carry out original
research in teams. They will also receive training in career skills, including
professional report writing and oral communication for in-person and virtual
visual presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current intersection of
population growth, climate change, and resource demand have created a pressing
need for re-evaluating land use, especially working landscapes that have high
ecological service value. This project will develop a framework for tracking
metrics for a triple bottom line of ecosystem services—agricultural production,
biodiversity and habitat conservation, and soil health. We will introduce and
train students in the conceptual questions framed by this intersection, the
choices faced by society and land managers, and the analytical and technological
approaches needed to evaluate alternative solutions. We will train teams of
students to track changes over time in carbon sequestration, vegetation cover,
animal diversity, and other factors. We will use this team-based approach to
study how plant communities respond to different disturbance regimes, such as
the release of lands from intensive cattle grazing, reimplementation of fire
regimes once used by Native Americans, and other forces that cause transitions
between different vegetation states (e.g., grasslands to savannas to woodlands)
with subsequent changes in ecosystem services. We will introduce a diverse group
of students to the use of conservation drones (UAVs) to gather high species
specificity data on vegetation. Data will be analyzed using state-of-the-art
software systems to provide research teams and land managers with accurate data
to inform management decisions that support economic and environmental
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.