* 2050400
* REU SITE: WETLAND SCIENCE IN THE MODERN WORLD
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Jason Knouft, Lewis and Clark Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 300,757.00

This REU Site award to Lewis and Clark Community College in Godfrey, IL is based
at the National Great Rivers Research and Education Center (NGRREC), located in
Alton, IL. The REU will support the training of eight undergraduate students for
ten weeks during the summers of 2021-2023. Research is conducted at NGRRECâ€™s
state-of-the-art field station and at local field sites situated at the
confluence of the Mississippi, Illinois and Missouri rivers. It is anticipated
that a total of 24 students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be trained in the
program. Students will gain experience in research project design, field- and
lab-based research methods, data collection and analysis, and presentation of
results at an in-house symposium at the end of the program. Training will
include ethics and the responsible of research. Assessment of this REU Site
program will be done through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wetlands are among the most functionally important
ecosystems on Earth. However, wetlands are impacted by anthropogenic activites
at a variety of spatiotemporal scales, including changes in land use, pollution,
invasive species, and global climate change. This REU Site will focus on
employing a modern integrative approach to studying wetlands that makes use of
recent technological and theoretical developments with a goal of unifying
wetland science across scales. In collaboration with mentors from NGRREC and
other local institutions, students will develop hypothesis-driven research
projects that may include research on the following questions: What are the
impacts of native versus invasive species on wetland communities? What are the
effects of riparian restoration on wetland communities? What are the effects of
changes in temperature on wetland species? The program will include
opportunities for field- and lab-based research as well as participation in a
research symposium at the end of the REU experience. Applications can be
submitted at http:/www.ngrrec.org. Students from schools with limited research
opportunities or from an underrepresented group are encouraged to apply. More
information about the program and the application process is available at
http://www.ngrrec.org/reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Anthony Dell at
adell@lc.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Jason Knouft at
jason.knouft@slu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.