* 2050326
* GOALI: In situ generation of two phase flows to eliminate membrane concentration polarization and fouling
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Manish Kumar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2022
* USD 40,636.00

PI Name: Darrell Velegol&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1705278&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane technologies, especially reverse osmosis
(RO), are now at the forefront of water purification from lower-quality water
sources such as seawater, brackish water, and wastewater. The objective of this
project is to minimize membrane fouling by producing oxygen at the membrane
surface to impede the growth of biofilms on the membrane. Biofouling has the
largest negative impact on desalination membrane performance. This fundamental
research has the potential to transform membrane performance by significantly
decreasing the energy use of membranes and increasing their usable lifetime. The
fundamental principles learned are anticipated to lead to solutions that are
scalable and commercially viable and can improve municipal and industrial water
treatment to help meet the growing national demand for potable
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous efforts have focused on improving RO
efficiency by pretreatment, minimizing concentration polarization (CP), and
mitigating fouling. Current methods have not overcome the problem in a feasible
manner, especially for concentration polarization; however, no study has been
reported on the application of microbubbles generated in situ to disturb the CP
boundary layer. The hypothesis is that catalytically generating microbubbles at
a membrane surface will produce localized micromixing, which will significantly
reduce both concentration polarization and particle-bacteria-organic fouling. To
test the overall hypothesis and meet the objective, three important fundamental
questions must be answered, and form the intellectual merit of this research: 1)
What is the rate of microbubble formation, and the microbubble size
distribution, given a particular catalyst type, catalyst loading fraction,
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) dosing profile, and local pressure (i.e., must exceed
Henry's law solubility)? 2) For a given microbubble production rate and size
distribution, what is the increase in water effluent due to the different
mechanisms of micromixing for concentration polarization, and liftoff for
membrane fouling species? and 3) For a given microbubble production rate, what
is the disinfection capacity for biofilm-forming microorganisms using the
produced oxidant (reactive oxygen species), at production levels that avoid
membrane damage? The approach is to incorporate catalysts in the membrane module
(either membrane surface or spacers), and then during the operation of the
membrane, to inject pulses of H2O2 or other reactants that will produce
microbubbles at the membrane surface. A primary figure of merit for this work is
an increased water flux through the membrane over time. The broader impacts of
this proposal focus on educating Ph.D. students (including internships with Dow
Chemical, our NSF GOALI partner) and undergrads, as well as technological
commercialization (with partner Dow Chemical). Producing microbubbles and
generating localized micromixing could be achieved at commercial scale. Ph.D.
and undergrad education as well as internships and entrepreneurship training
will form part of the student experience.