* 2050540
* REU Site: Human-Centered Computing for Social Good
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Evan Rosenberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/29/2024
* USD 404,983.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site aims to support a
diverse group of undergraduate students in human-centered research experiences
that apply computer science to address social good problems. The objectives of
this project are to: (1) provide support for undergraduate research, especially
for students that are underrepresented or have limited access at their home
institutions; (2) facilitate mentorship from leading researchers in virtual
reality, social computing, and human-robot interaction at the University of
Minnesota; (3) explicitly train students in research methods and immerse them in
the culture of science, and (4) provide professional development opportunities
to prepare students for graduate school. The REU projects supported under this
award will produce novel technologies, algorithms, and interaction techniques
that can enrich and empower human experiences with computing systems. To frame
the social relevance of their research, all student projects supported through
this award will be aligned with a Sustainable Development Goal established by
the United Nations Foundation. Students will apply these advances to address
important societal problems and sustainability goals, which can further increase
engagement by helping them to make the connection between computer science and
real-world impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, the site will
recruit at least 50% of the cohort from institutions with limited research
opportunities, with a particular emphasis on supporting women, underrepresented
minorities, and first-generation college students. Participants will be immersed
in highly collaborative research labs supervised by faculty with longstanding
commitments to mentoring undergraduate researchers. Research topics will include
computational support for addiction recovery, studying alternative treatments to
opioid use disorder in online communities, immersive data storytelling for
climate action, intelligent search strategies for locating underwater trash
using autonomous robots, and investigating the use of virtual reality to
mitigate implicit bias. REU students will also carry out research on addressing
equity in algorithms used for decision-making and help in designing intelligent
systems that can serve the community needs both effectively and fairly. The
student projects will also leverage research and development of technology for
connecting older adults as mentors to school children to improve their academic
performance and improve their resilience. At the cohort level, students will
participate in research training seminars, invited talks, and professional
development workshops that will support their scholarly development, prepare
them for graduate school, and provide a meaningful social
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.