* 2050669
* Developing a Program to Meet the Need for Prepared and Diverse STEM Teachers in Houston
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Hannah Wingate, Houston Baptist University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 05/31/2022
* USD 122,389.00

This project aims to serve the national need for increased numbers and diversity
of highly qualified STEM teachers and educational leaders. Public schools face a
shortage of STEM teachers, especially those with a STEM degree and who represent
the diversity of the community they are serving. This shortage likely limits
K-12 student STEM learning and may decrease their interest in pursuing further
education in STEM. As a result, the lack of highly qualified STEM teachers can
affect representation of underrepresented minorities in the STEM workforce.
Houston Baptist University is a four-year undergraduate Hispanic-Serving
Institution in Houston, Texas, one of the most diverse cities in the nation. The
demographics of students at the University mirror those of the K-12 students in
the Houston area. The project includes collaboration with the Lone Star College
System, a public community college system and the largest institution of higher
learning in the Houston area. Through this collaboration, the project aims to
develop a program to prepare students to become K-12 teachers and leaders by
obtaining both a Bachelor of Science degree in a STEM major and a Master of
Education degree. This capacity building project also aims to identify ways to
retain these prepared and diverse educators in the Houston area. The development
of this program will provide an alternate career route for STEM majors that is
designed to address a shortage of prepared and diverse educators in the
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Houston Baptist University
includes partnerships with the Lone Star College System and Houston Independent
School District. The primary goal of this project is to develop and implement
plans for a five-year BS/MEd pathway for STEM majors to earn their teaching
licensure in a fifth-year program and eventually enter the Houston workforce as
STEM teachers and education leaders. Project aims include: 1) increasing
capacity for student success in STEM; 2) expanding capacity of the Houston
Baptist University curriculum for STEM teaching licensure; and 3) strengthening
capacity for professional development for STEM educators. This project seeks to
identify challenges that lead to the persistent shortage of qualified and
diverse STEM educators in Houston Independent School District. The needs of
college students pursuing a STEM degree, STEM teachers, and local K-12 school
administrators will be assessed to determine capacity for continuous growth of
the program. If successful, development of the program has the potential to
serve as a model for understanding STEM teacher shortages in urban school
districts serving predominantly underrepresented students. Findings also have
potential to be applied to other institutions with student groups experiencing
similar challenges preventing them from remaining in the community and serving
through teaching. This Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers
in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.