* 2050777
* NSF REU Site: Research training in the biomedical sciences and engineering
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Corey OHern, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 425,987.00

This REU Site award to Yale University, located in New Haven, CT, will support
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2021-2023. It is
anticipated that a total of 10 students per year, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities or from under-represented groups, will be trained
in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted and about various
types of science careers. Many of the students will present the results of their
work at scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will be performed via
the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program to
determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 10-week NSF REU Site
provides undergraduates with convergent, hands-on research experiences and
professional development skills at a large research institution that will enable
them to pursue STEM careers. The REU Site has three focus research areas: A)
Biological imaging and data science, B) Biomechanics, and C) Systems biology.
Each REU participant conducts research in one of these research areas.
Enrichment activities develop students’ written and oral communication skills
aimed at science and lay audiences, networking skills, and understanding of the
graduate application process, STEM careers, and scientific ethics. REU
participants will gain a deeper understanding of interdisciplinary and
quantitative research and how wet-lab experiments inform computational and
theoretical approaches, and vice versa. This REU Site helps students determine
if they want to pursue graduate studies, the field they want to pursue during
graduate studies, and the STEM careers that are available to them. Many
participants will have the opportunity to present their research at scientific
conferences, and, when possible, contribute to the preparation of scientific
publications. The success of the REU Site will be assessed by participants
yearly, and used to improve the program elements. More information about the
program, including the application process, is available by visiting
https://physics-engineering-biology.yale.edu/nsf-reu-site or by contacting the
PI (Prof. Corey O’Hern at corey.ohern@yale.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Dorottya Noble
at dorottya.noble@yale.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.