* 2050246
* Community Facility Support for Geochronology and Thermochronology at the Arizona LaserChron Center
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* George Gehrels, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2024
* USD 885,087.00

Recent developments in geochronologic methods and instrumentation are
revolutionizing many different aspects of Earth Science research. Some of the
most exciting advances are being driven by Laser-Ablation ICP Mass Spectrometry
(LA-ICPMS), which generates U-Th-Pb ages and complementary geochemical
information rapidly, with micron-scale spatial resolution, and with the
precision necessary to address a wide range of problems in Earth Science. The
Arizona LaserChron Center (ALC) is a community facility that utilizes LA-ICPMS
to determine U-Th-Pb ages, Hf isotope ratios, and trace element abundances from
a variety of minerals that occur in sedimentary, igneous, and metamorphic rocks.
We also utilize a dedicated Scanning Electron Microscope that generates the
high-resolution and high-magnification images necessary for state-of-the-art
micro-analysis. Primary goals of the ALC are to (1) generate U-Th-Pb ages, Hf
isotope ratios, and trace element concentrations of the best precision,
accuracy, and spatial resolution possible from LA-ICPMS, (2) provide
opportunities for researchers from around the world (and especially NSF-
supported scientists) to use our instruments and expertise to address geologic
problems, (3) drive the development of new techniques and applications of
geochronology, thermochronology, and petrochronology, (4) build new
cyberinfrastructure for data acquisition, analysis, and archiving, and (5) use
every aspect of facility operation as an opportunity to enhance expertise and
diversity among geochronologists and users of geochronology. Research at the ALC
is conducted in a highly collaborative mode, with ALC scientists providing
assistance with all aspects of a project (from initial design of the study to
final publication of results) and faculty members and students from other
institutions visiting the lab to generate their own data and learn the theory
and methodology of U-Th-Pb geochronology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding from this
award will enable the ALC to facilitate the acquisition of geochronologic
information in support of a large number of NSF-funded projects. These projects
focus on generating new knowledge about the growth of continents, emergence of
life, processes of mountain building, mechanisms and timing of volcanic
eruptions, distribution of sediment through space and time, formation of
mineral, energy, and water resources, and linkages between climate and
tectonics. The ALC will also continue to help drive the development of numerous
new analytical techniques, applications, and instruments, as well as the
cyberinfrastructure needed to utilize and integrate the information generated.
Educational activities will include hosting visits from several hundred faculty
and student researchers per year, teaching short courses at annual meetings,
developing materials that can be used in Earth Science courses, providing
opportunities for non-scientists to learn about geochronology, creating new
tools for displaying and interpreting geochronologic data, and driving the
development of global databases that host U-Th-Pb geochronologic
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.