* 2050754
* REU Site: Research Projects in Data-Enabled Industrial Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Mihhail Berezovski, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 03/31/2024
* USD 362,621.00

This REU site at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University provides ten undergraduate
students each year with opportunities to participate in authentic research
projects in data-enabled industrial mathematics during the summers 2021-2023.
The objectives of this unique research experience are to prepare students for
challenges in data-driven mathematics and to provide them with skills to
navigate capably in todayâ€™s data-rich world. Students will learn to transform
technical, organizational, and data-enabled problems posed by business,
industry, or government into solvable mathematical questions. The program will
recruit talented students from diverse groups, including females,
underrepresented minorities, financially disadvantaged students, and first-
generation college students. Participation will equip students interested in
industrial mathematics research with a strong understanding of data analytics,
mathematical modeling and problem-solving abilities, and effective communication
skills. Video documentaries of the progress and results of each research project
will be used to promote undergraduate research and data literacy for a broader
audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate idea of this site is to model real-
world industrial research experiences, focusing on student growth and
encouraging students to interact with the educational material at a level that
goes beyond a classroom setting. The students will work collaboratively on
problems provided directly by business, government, and industry. The two
perspectives of the faculty mentor and of the industrial partners are keys to
this unique experience: the faculty mentor maintains a clear focus on the
mathematics and data science aspects at the core of the project, while
industrial partners provide an incentive of relevant industrial needs and
contexts. Students will learn through examples how data science skills can be
critical for practical applications, and the experience will foster informed
career decisions and promote professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.