* 2050842
* REU Site: Imaging in Medicine and Biology for Underrepresented Minorities
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jiebo Luo, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 07/31/2024
* USD 405,000.00

Diverse teams are needed to solve complex engineering problems. However, the
lack of research opportunities in engineering and other STEM-related fields
prevents undergraduates from underrepresented groups from considering STEM as a
viable and rewarding career path. To improve this situation, this Imaging in
Medicine and Biology for Underrepresented Minorities REU site will provide an
environment for underrepresented minorities (URM) undergraduates to complete
individual research projects under the mentorship of leaders in their respective
fields, in a world-class interdisciplinary research environment. The Imaging in
Medicine and Biology for Underrepresented Minorities REU site will also provide
structured enrichment programs to participants that will allow students to
develop critical skills needed to be successful in STEM graduate education (GRE
preparation, time management, oral/written presentation). The University of
Rochester (UR) is an ideal setting for this REU site; it is the home of the
Rochester Center for Biomedical Ultrasound (RCBU), the Institute of Optics, the
Goergen Institute for Data Science (GIDS), and the Del Monte Institute of
Neuroscienceâ€”members of which will serve as mentors in this REU site. Imaging is
crucial to medicine (disease diagnosis, treatment planning, and monitoring), but
it is also the driving force behind many transformative technologies, including
robotics, self-driving cars, and facial recognition. At its foundation, imaging
is a highly multidisciplinary field that combines various engineering
disciplines (e.g., electrical engineering, computer science, physics, chemistry,
materials science, and medicine) to create a cohesive whole. Like other
disciplines, artificial intelligence is changing imaging. It requires diverse
teams to solve new challenges, which requires us to train and expand the
diversity of researchers capable of making meaningful contributions to imaging
science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program will provide ten
students annually with exciting interdisciplinary research opportunities in
computational imaging, optical imaging, and ultrasonic imaging science with
mentors in disciplines ranging from engineering to computer science to
neuroscience to microbiology. The REU site program will organize workshops on
career development, community colloquiums, scientific research in chosen
laboratories, and a bootcamp on scientific programming focusing on fundamental
medical imaging techniques. Students will regularly meet with professional and
research mentors to formulate the next steps regarding appropriate graduate
programs that align with research interests discovered during the REU
experience. Participants in the REU site will complete individual projects under
the mentorship of leaders in their respective fields. In these projects,
participants will use computational, optical, or ultrasound imaging techniques
to solve significant medicine and biology problems. Participants will interact
with their professional advisors to demystify the graduate school program and
improve their professional skills. Other planned activities will include
community colloquiums, a MATLAB programming bootcamp that teaches students image
processing techniques such as image segmentation, principal component analysis,
and multidimensional filter design, which are fundamental to medical imaging.
Students will work with their professional and research mentors to formulate the
next steps to pursue their research interests. Research mentors in the proposed
REU will teach participants how to develop their research project; collect data
from several imaging modalities (functional ultrasound, shear wave elastography,
bioluminescence, micro-CT, magnetic resonance imaging); design algorithms for
image analysis, 2D and 3D image reconstructions, computer vision; perform
experiments on rodents, cell culture, and phantoms; and iteratively refine the
solutions. Students will present their research findings to other students,
mentors, and the research community at UR at a research symposium at the end of
the 10-week research experience. Students will also be encouraged to submit
their research findings to national conferences or co-author peer-reviewed
publications. Three thematic research areas will serve as the foundation for
this REU site: 1) ultrasonic Imaging, 2) computational Imaging, and 3) optical
Imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.