* 2050958
* REU Site: End-User Programming of Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Kostadin Damevski, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 02/29/2024
* USD 396,942.00

Virginia Commonwealth University will establish a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site conducting research projects on end-user programming
for cyber-physical systems. Due to the growth in the number and diversity of
programmable devices, end-users (i.e., those not trained as programmers) are
increasingly becoming de facto programmers, configuring and commanding their own
systems. At the same time, computing is increasingly interacting with the
physical world, as consumer robotics and home automation systems are becoming
commonplace. In this new context, where end-users program cyber-physical
systems, both the programming languages they use to specify programs and the
programming tools that help them avoid common mistakes will become vital to
their productivity, security, and safety. This REU site will train 9
undergraduate students per year, including a significant cohort of those
traditionally under-represented in computing, as contributors who will
ultimately research, design, and evaluate novel techniques for end-user
programming of cyber-physical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance the state-of-the-art in end-user programming for cyber-physical systems,
an activity which will impact hundreds of millions of users in the coming
decade. The projectâ€™s research strategy is to apply the hard-won lessons from
traditional software engineering and CS education research to end-user
programming, making improvements upon the relevant tools and languages,
ultimately making end-user programs more robust, secure and easier to write. The
project will leverage programming environments targeting novice programmers,
such as block-based programming. After embodying new research ideas as
prototypes, the research team will evaluate them via quantitative user studies,
analyze generated user study data, create and conduct large-scale surveys, and
qualitative methods such as interviewing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.