* 2050161
* REU Site: The Scope and Consequences of Hate Crime Victimization in the South
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Tusty ten Bensel, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2024
* USD 324,987.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits, and integrates research and education. The REU site in the School of
Criminal Justice and Criminology (SCJC-REU) at the University of Arkansas at
Little Rock provides undergraduate students with the opportunity to engage in an
immersive research experience examining hate crimes in the South. Funded by the
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Sites program in the SBE
Directorate, this SCJC-REU site engages students in a collaborative research
environment to gain an understanding of the research process through
experiential learning, field experience, and working with experienced faculty
mentors and graduate students on an emerging issue within criminal justice. This
project, REU Site: The Scope and Consequences of Hate Crime Victimization in the
South, focuses on the extent and scope of hate crimes, discrimination, and
stigmatization. Over three years, each cohort of students work on a different
aspect of this project. In Year 1 (2022), the focus is on experiences,
perceptions, and concerns with regards to stigmatization and victimization
based. In Year 2 (2023), the SCJC-REU team examines the extent and scope of hate
crimes in Arkansas through the distribution and analysis of a statewide survey.
In Year 3 (2024), the policies, procedures, and decision-making processes of the
law enforcement who handle hate crime incidents in Arkansas are explored, in
addition to the perceptions of lawmakers and the obstacles in passing hate crime
legislation in Arkansas. Through these projects, students learn how to conduct
meaningful research that can contribute positively to the NSF’s mission to
promote public welfare by heightening public awareness of hate crimes along with
obstacles to social integration, reporting, and seeking support after
experiencing hate crimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SCJC-REU provides students
the opportunity for in-depth mentorship in theory, skills, and application to
cultivate research curiosity, to build experiences conducting independent
research, and apply research to real-world issues. Specifically, the goals are
to: 1) recruit participants with an interest in social research, especially, but
not limited to, underrepresented undergraduate students, 2) provide and
cultivate experiences that involve theory, research skills, and application, 3)
increase knowledge about substantive areas, methodological techniques, and
increase participants’ ability to conduct independent research through hands-on
research experiences, 4) strengthen professional skills through a series of
interactive workshops, invited expert speakers, and interactions with criminal
justice professionals, 5) inspire and motivate students to continue conducting
research, and 6) prepare students to apply to and attend graduate school in
criminology, criminal justice, or related disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.