* 2050410
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Robust,  Privacy- and Utility-Preserving Fingerprinting Schemes for Correlated Data
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Erman Ayday, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

In today's data-driven world, to receive personalized services or contribute to
scientific studies, data owners share sensitive information with a wide-range of
service providers (SPs). While doing so, they want to make sure that SPs will
comply with the data usage agreements and not engage in unauthorized sharing of
their data. Thus, in case of an unauthorized distribution of their data, data
owners want to detect (and identify) the source of such data leakages to keep
the corresponding SP(s) liable. Digital fingerprinting is a technique to
identify the recipient of a digital object by embedding a unique mark (called
fingerprint) into the shared object, with the aim to identify the guilty SP who
is responsible for data leakage. However, existing fingerprinting techniques are
not directly applicable for sharing sensitive, correlated, and high value (in
terms of utility) data because (i) they (especially for multimedia data) utilize
the high redundancy in the data, (ii) the embedded marks need to be large to
provide robustness against attacks, which reduces the utility of shared data,
and (iii) they do not consider the correlations between data points, which
reduces the robustness of the fingerprint. Such unique challenges for
fingerprinting correlated data require fundamentally new ways to design
fingerprinting algorithms that also provide high data utility and data privacy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the investigators propose novel
techniques for robust, privacy- and utility-preserving fingerprinting of
correlated data. First, the vulnerability of existing fingerprinting schemes to
the attacks will be shown by exploiting the correlations in the data. To
mitigate the identified vulnerabilities, new probabilistic fingerprinting
algorithms that provide robustness against a wide-variety of attacks will be
developed. Furthermore, realizing the similarities between the proposed
fingerprinting algorithms and privacy-preserving data sharing, for the first
time, the proposed techniques will provide both privacy and robust
fingerprinting while sharing data. Specifically, the proposed research thrusts
include: (i) in-depth study of the proposed probabilistic fingerprinting
algorithms, including formal robustness analysis, studying different correlation
models, and improving utility considering different utility definitions; (ii)
application of the proposed fingerprinting schemes for different data types,
such as personal correlated data, databases, and graphs; (iii) developing data
sharing metrics and algorithms that provide privacy along with robust
fingerprinting by exploring differential privacy and its variants; and (iv)
developing algorithms to find the optimal order of data processing that
simultaneously optimize fingerprint robustness, privacy, and utility. In a
broader view, the investigators expect the impact of the proposed research to be
significant in several areas: (i) on society, by providing tools that identify
the sources of unauthorized data leakages with high probability. This will deter
malicious SPs from unauthorized sharing of their usersâ€™ data. Furthermore, data
owners, knowing they have stronger control on how their data will be used and
shared, will be more willing to share their data with the SPs; (ii) on education
and learning, by training graduate, undergraduate, and high school students; and
(iii) on broadening participation of underrepresented groups in computing, by
recruitment of women and underrepresented groups in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.