* 2050673
* Capacity Building for Increasing STEM Teacher Education at an Urban Lasallian University
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Alexander Happ, Christian Brothers University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 05/31/2022
* USD 74,801.00

This project aims to serve the national need for increasing the capacity of
higher education to prepare qualified STEM educators for high-need schools that
serve diverse, urban student populations. These high-need schools often struggle
with recruiting and retaining qualified STEM teachers. As a result, student
performance in STEM subjects often suffers. Working with a local, high-need
school district, Christian Brothers University plans to assess school district
needs to refine its own pathways for students pursuing STEM majors to seek
teaching licensure. The University aims to enhance its recruiting strategies to
generate greater interest among STEM majors to pursue teaching licensure. It
also intends to investigate the feasibility and need for a computer science
major paired with teaching licensure. These activities are intended to position
the University to produce diverse and highly qualified STEM educators who are
prepared to meet the needs of urban school districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project at Christian Brothers University includes a partnership with Shelby
County Schools, the largest school district in Tennessee, which faces the
challenges of STEM teacher vacancies and poor student performance in STEM
subjects. More than half of the students enrolled at Christian Brothers
University’s major in STEM fields. However, these STEM majors have remarkably
low interest in and completion of the two currently available undergraduate STEM
teaching licensure options. To address this problem and to meet the needs of
Shelby County Schools, the goals of the project are to: 1) assess Shelby County
Schools’ needs, to strengthen University programs and meet the needs of an
urban, diverse school setting; 2) research and develop targeted strategies to
increase interest and enrollment in teaching licensure programs among STEM
students the University; and 3) determine the feasibility of and interest in
expanding existing pathways to include a new computer science/teaching licensure
endorsement. In addition to shedding light on the STEM needs of a large,
diverse, and high-need school district, the project aims to produce valuable
feedback on the efficacy of various recruiting strategies designed to spur
interest in STEM teaching careers among new and current STEM students. More
broadly, the project aims to design programs to generate a larger and more
diverse supply of STEM educators for the area, which may in turn help to
encourage Shelby County students to pursue STEM training and careers, thereby
further diversifying the STEM workforce. This Capacity Building project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.