* 2050685
* EAGER: Tracking marine diazotrophy with isotope-labeling proteomics
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Jacob Waldbauer, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2023
* USD 368,403.00

Throughout much of the global ocean, nitrogen fixation – the conversion of
abundant atmospheric nitrogen gas into chemical forms usable by life – is a
crucial source of nutrients for biological activity. In particular, life needs
nitrogen to make proteins, the essential biochemical machines that power all
cells. Nitrogen fixation in the oceans is carried out by a variety of
microorganisms, whose surprising diversity and ecology oceanographers are
working to uncover. This project uses a novel mass spectrometry technique to
directly track the flow of nitrogen from nitrogen gas, via nitrogen fixation,
into proteins. These measurements reveal which nitrogen-fixing organisms are
active in a given part of the ocean, what proteins they make with the nitrogen
they fix, and how that nitrogen ultimately flows to feed the entire marine
biological community. This information will better inform models and predictions
of how marine microbial ecosystems, and the essential biogeochemistry they
perform, responds to changing conditions in the ocean. This project engages an
undergraduate student researcher, recruited from groups underrepresented in
science, in both the field and laboratory work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diazotrophy
(biological N2 fixation) is the largest input of fixed nitrogen to the ocean and
is carried out by a wide diversity of marine microbes, but we have limited
ability to quantify the N2-fixation activity of the full diversity of marine
diazotrophs, or to resolve how the N they fix ultimately flows to supply the
broader microbial community. Since the primary biosynthetic fate of fixed N2 is
protein production, proteomics is poised to make substantial contributions to
our understanding of the marine nitrogen cycle, and to the molecular physiology
and ecological roles of diazotrophs in particular. This project brings a novel
15N-tracking proteomics methodology to bear on three outstanding questions in
marine diazotroph ecology:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) How is whole-community N2
fixation activity apportioned among different diazotroph taxa?&lt;br/&gt;2) How
do diazotrophs and their symbiotic partners make biosynthetic use of the N they
fix?&lt;br/&gt;3) How much diazotroph-derived N is redistributed to particular
non-diazotroph taxa?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are conducting
15N2-tracking proteomics experiments at the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT)
Station ALOHA, assaying N incorporation from 15N-labeled dinitrogen into
proteins of both diazotrophs and the broader microbial community. This is the
first use of proteomics to track diazotrophic 15N2 incorporation, representing a
novel, molecular-level approach for investigating marine nitrogen fixation that
encompasses the entire microbial community with high taxonomic resolution.
15N-tracking proteomics data provides unique insight into the flow of nitrogen
currency through its key biological accounts in cellular proteomes, and into the
ecophysiology and biogeochemical roles of marine
diazotrophs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.