* 2050923
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates: Interdisciplinary Cutting-Edge Research though the Analysis of Global Data
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Dallas Abbott, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2024
* USD 565,595.00

Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory (LDEO), located in
Palisades, NY will host a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program.
The title of the program is “Interdisciplinary Cutting-Edge Research through the
Analysis of Global Data", and it will provide ten-week research internship
opportunities for fourteen undergraduates each summer from 2021-2023.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program takes students from posing a cutting-edge
scientific question, to gathering and analyzing data, developing conceptual
hypotheses, and culminates in activities that communicate their results to
scientific and broader audiences. Students work with LDEO’s interdisciplinary
research community and are individually mentored by at least one of LDEO’s 180
PhD-level scientists. The global data theme focuses the experience on data-
driven, solutions-oriented approaches to scientific questions. A lecture series
on forefront research and workshops in professional ethics, data display and
manipulation, scientific writing, and career opportunities add depth to the
experience. The program includes a formal outcome-based evaluation by an
educational professional, together with a midterm review of students and
mentors. Students will be housed in dormitories at the nearby Dominican College
and/or participate virtually. The program is co-funded by the Division of Ocean
Sciences and the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.