* 2050960
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Information Centric Engineering for  Emerging Process Domains
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* J. Cecil, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 425,279.00

Through this REU Site’s proposed research activities, the participants will be
exposed to cutting-edge research activities in exciting Virtual Reality and
related areas and contribute to the nation’s global leadership in these key
areas of economic and scientific importance. Through these valuable research
experiences, a new generation of engineers and scientists will be encouraged to
refine and hone their research skills while fostering their interest in research
oriented careers and graduate programs in various areas of science, engineering
and medicine. Depending on the interests of the undergraduate participants, a
specific process domain will be identified for their research activities. These
include manufacturing, medicine/health care and deep space exploration
(including the Moon Mission). Some of them will be exposed to becoming skilled
at creating Virtual/Mixed Reality environments to help train surgeons and other
health care professionals in surgery and other medical procedures. Others will
gain experience building simulators to help new nurses and first responders be
trained effectively while responding to the current covid-19 pandemic. Students
interested in NASA’s Moon Mission and the Nation’s leadership in the
colonization of space can interact with NASA engineers and mentors in designing
simulators to help train astronauts as well as design habitats on the Moon for
the astronauts to live and work. This project will provide opportunities for
Women, under-represented minorities (including physically disabled students) and
others to information technology and cyber oriented research areas and help
prepare them to become leaders in these emerging areas of
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this REU Site is to provide
meaningful research experiences to a new generation of engineers and scientists
in emerging process domains with an emphasis on Information Centric Engineering
(ICE) techniques including design of 3D Virtual Reality/Augmented Reality based
simulation approaches and cyber-physical environments. Such research experiences
provided to undergraduate students seek to encourage them towards graduate
programs and research careers in these leading-edge research areas. The REU
participants will explore Next Generation Information Centric approaches and
frameworks in manufacturing, medical and space systems. The research activities
in manufacturing domains hold significant potential for industrial applications
including fabrication of miniature surveillance devices, and micro robotic
devices for health monitoring. In the context of medicine and healthcare, the
adoption of VR based training approaches will contribute to better trained
medical professionals. Exposing students to the design of VR based simulators to
help covid-19 first responders be trained effectively provides a practical
insightful experience on applying engineering approaches to healthcare domains.
The Artemis Moon Mission will be a milestone for NASA heralding another new era
in the colonization of space. Working on related simulation research will excite
and expose the next generation of students to ICE research involving NASA space
mission contexts. The planned K-12 Soaring Eagle outreach activities will
provide opportunities for REU students to serve as STEM ambassadors and mentors
to K-12 students; the long-term impact is to foster a research culture among
minority and other students in these cyber oriented research areas and help
prepare them to become leaders in these emerging areas of
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.