* 2050532
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Immersive 3D Visualization
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Oyewole Oyekoya, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/29/2024
* USD 404,964.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award funds a new site
to enable ten undergraduate students each year to undertake Immersive 3D
Visualization research projects at Hunter College, City University of New York
(CUNY). The intended impact is to use the creative potential of Immersive 3D
technology to attract and broaden participation of women and underrepresented
minorities in STEM and computing fields. To achieve this, this REU site will:
(i) involve 10 students per summer directly in Immersive 3D visualization with
mentored research projects conducted in collaboration with other subfields, (ii)
provide training in tools and technologies that are common in these research
areas, (iii) inspire participating students to consider STEM as a career path
and pursue STEM careers at the graduate level, and (iv) specifically target
participation of women and underrepresented groups. The investigator will
identify research collaborators with immersive visualization needs and assign
each student to a REU team. Each REU team will consist of a research mentor and
a REU student. The mentoring team includes members not just from CS but also
from diverse backgrounds including film and media, journalism and biological
sciences. This funding supports Hunter College and CUNY in its mission to
continue to provide higher education to a largely disadvantaged
population.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In labs and businesses around the world,
immersive visualization and virtual/augmented/mixed reality (VR/AR/MR) is
playing a key role in the storytelling, data discovery and analysis process.
Representing data in immersive environments allows shared understanding of the
data and enables collaboration among multi-disciplinary researchers. Therefore,
the intellectual merit of this REU site is to advance knowledge by supporting a
research agenda that aims to investigate human interaction during the
visualization and research storytelling process. This REU site will implement a
research program designed to increase the number and diversity of students in
STEM careers. Students will gain hands-on experience doing creative VR/AR/MR
projects. Students will participate in mentored research projects in data driven
research areas, including scientific visualization and visual analytics. Some of
the planned research projects include: VR for aiding students with learning
disabilities, MicroRNA (Ribonucleic Acid) as a regulator for cell lineage
plasticity, immersive remote telepresence, indoor robot navigation along with 3D
object identification, sonifying the microbiome, and VR for improving inter-
personal skills in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics)
students. These inter-disciplinary and collaborative research projects will
contribute to the national talent pool of students with highly sought
transferable skills in immersive visualization
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.