* 2050672
* Expanding Pathways for STEM Teacher Education to Better Serve Minnesota’s Diverse Student Populations
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Gaston Small, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 05/31/2023
* USD 79,256.00

This project aims to serve the national need for building the capacity of
secondary STEM education programs to recruit and train more secondary STEM
teachers, especially those from diverse backgrounds. Significant barriers exist
that discourage STEM majors from pursuing careers in secondary STEM teaching.
For example, it often takes longer than four years to meet both STEM degree and
licensure requirements, thus raising time to degree and college costs.
Additionally, limited strategies and structures are available to encourage and
support diverse students’ pursuit of a STEM teaching career. In this project,
the University of St. Thomas will work to encourage STEM teaching careers by
streamlining its curricular requirements, identifying and addressing barriers to
teaching careers, and partnering with a community college to connect with a
greater diversity of future STEM teachers. The University expects this effort to
increase the number of secondary STEM teachers in Minnesota that match the
state’s diverse urban student population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University
of St. Thomas, in partnership with Normandale Community College, aims to create
a mechanism for recruiting diverse STEM majors to consider becoming secondary
STEM teachers while completing their STEM degrees. The partnership intends to
collaborate to streamline STEM and secondary education curricula, and to
identify barriers to a teaching career. Few students at the University choose to
become secondary teachers, and completing a dual degree program in STEM and
education can be even more challenging for community college transfer students.
The absence of strategies and supports for these double majors contributes to
the low graduation rates of secondary teachers. The goals of this Capacity
Building project are to: 1) restructure STEM degree programs to allow for a B.A.
double major in a STEM discipline and secondary teacher education that enables
graduation in 4 years; 2) complete needs assessments to identify barriers
encountered by University of St. Thomas students and transfer students to
completing a baccalaureate degree in a STEM discipline and in secondary
education; and 3) partner with Normandale Community College to align their STEM
courses and develop strategies for a seamless transfer pathway for community
college students to St. Thomas University. The project anticipates achieving
these goals can lead to development of a Noyce Track 1 proposal in the future to
provide scholarship support to both community college and four-year college
students to complete dual degrees and become secondary teachers of a STEM
discipline. Findings from the curriculum analyses and needs assessments could
serve as a model for other colleges and universities in addressing curricular
and non-curricular challenges of preparing more secondary STEM teachers for the
future. This Noyce Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers
in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.