* 2050693
* REU Site: Research in Behavior Science at West Virginia
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Kathryn Kestner, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2024
* USD 323,027.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR). It has both scientific and societal benefits, and
integrates research and education. The REU Site for Research in Behavior Science
at West Virginia University provides high-quality research experience and
mentorship to students who aspire to be a part of the next generation of
behavior scientists. This project aims to foster interest and participation in
experimental psychology and expand the diversity of skilled researchers in
behavior science. Recruitment is open to NSF eligible undergraduate students as
rising sophomores, juniors, and seniors, and this REU site especially encourages
applications from undergraduate psychology majors from primarily undergraduate
institutions in the Appalachian region and students from underrepresented groups
within psychology, including individuals from underrepresented racial and ethnic
groups (e.g., Black, indigenous, and persons of color), veterans, individuals
with disabilities, first-generation college students, and students from socio-
economically depressed areas. REU participants conduct laboratory research in
behavior science with a focus on “bench science” in behavioral psychology and
the translation of basic research to issues of social significance.
Participation fosters scientific, communication, and collaboration skills. The
research projects address questions relevant to several areas in behavior
science, including behavioral pharmacology, prevention of relapse and
maladaptive behavior, social behavior, and improving the efficacy of behavioral
interventions. The findings of these studies contribute to a more advanced
understanding of fundamental behavioral processes and technologies of behavior
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is to foster
student interest and participation in experimental psychology and expand the
diversity of skilled researchers in behavior science. The objectives toward
meeting this goal include: 1) Provide research opportunities to students from
primarily undergraduate-serving institutions and students from underrepresented
groups, 2) Involve students in laboratory research in psychology with an
emphasis on experiences that students may not have the opportunity to gain at
their home institutions, including bench and translational research in
behavioral psychology, 3) Improve students’ technical research skills, including
idea development, research design, technical laboratory skills, and the
dissemination of research, and 4) Retain participants in the field of psychology
by providing relevant experience, support, and encouragement to pursue graduate
studies or other post-baccalaureate opportunities within psychology and related
fields. Each year, a cohort of 8 REU participants work with faculty research
mentors from WVU’s Behavior Analysis Program in the Department of Psychology.
During the 10-week experience, REU participants attend a 3-day training, conduct
a research project with their mentor, attend research meetings, participate in a
weekly seminar and a physical computing workshop, attend multidisciplinary
workshops, and present at a research symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.