* 2050117
* I-Corps:  Analog artificial neural network (ANN) structure with tunable parameters for identification of acoustic events
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2022
* David Anderson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of extremely low-power systems for applying machine learning to
audio signals. This enables the continuous monitoring complex environments
without the need for large power supplies. The initial thrust is in agriculture
where monitoring livestock may result in healthier animals and lower antibiotic
usage. This may result in improved animal welfare and lower production costs for
animal protein. In addition, it may help address the challenge of humans
developing antibiotic resistance acquired through meat products consumer. The
size-weight-and-power (SWAP) advantages may make the technology attractive to a
broad range of other fields including environmental monitoring, manufacturing,
security, and new portable medical devices. These innovations could result in
enhancing human health and safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of methods of adapting traditional artificial neural
networks (ANNs) to work reliably even when implemented using approximate
computing analog technology. Using these methods in the design of on-chip analog
ANNs makes it possible to perform audio event classification in ultra-low-power
hardware. In addition, practical machine learning and audio signal processing
algorithms are used to efficiently characterize environmental audio using
developed proprietary sparse-matrix-encoded dictionary algorithms. These
algorithms run on low power edge computation hardware that capture and analyze
an audio environment locally. These algorithms also allow robust implementations
of ANN for further acoustic classification. When combined with other solutions
involving programmable analog circuits, the result replaces power-hungry digital
circuitry with more efficient analog processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.