* 2050515
* Recruiting and Retaining STEM Teachers through Community, Mentoring, and Industry Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2026
* Randall Griffus, Dalton State College
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 04/30/2026
* USD 654,785.00

The project aims to serve the national need of recruiting, preparing, and
retaining highly effective STEM teachers who understand the lives of the
children they teach. The project will provide STEM undergraduate students with
opportunities to work with K-12 students on STEM projects. This experience is
expected to help many of the undergraduates decide to pursue STEM teaching as a
career. Once these STEM undergraduate students are on a path to become high
school STEM teachers, they will be immersed in additional community and industry
experiences, such as summer science camps. By combining these experiences with
field experiences in schools, the project aims to build a network of STEM,
industry, and education mentors. The mentors will be positioned to guide the
prospective STEM teachers through their preparation for teaching and their
introductory years as STEM teachers. With a strong network of support and a deep
understanding of the community in which they teach, it is expected that these
new teachers will be retained in high-need schools, thus potentially reducing
teacher shortages in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project at Dalton
State College, a Hispanic-Serving Institution, includes partnerships with two
local high-need school districts (Whitfield County and Dalton Public Schools)
and Shaw and Mohawk Industries, two of the world’s largest floorcovering
manufacturers with a combined total of more than 63,000 employees and $14
billion in annual sales. The project goal is to recruit and prepare 22 new
biology, math, and chemistry secondary teachers by recruiting undergraduate STEM
majors into teaching careers. The project's prospective teachers will be matched
with a selected cadre of STEM teachers who will serve as mentors. While working
at STEM community events, the prospective teachers will have an opportunity to
develop an understanding of the contexts of K-12 students’ lives. Through STEM
industry externships, the prospective teachers will learn how to connect local
STEM jobs to the STEM content they are teaching and will broaden their network
of STEM mentors. Through focus group interviews with stakeholders, surveys, and
analysis of observational data, the scientific and education communities will
develop an understanding of the impact of mentoring, community engagement, and
industry immersion on the preparation and retention of STEM teachers. Increasing
teacher's knowledge about the community in which they serve will be the most
important broader impact of this work. The network that has been created between
teachers and industry has potential to help change the perceptions of advanced
manufacturing careers, a focus of the community. Prospective teachers will share
their industry experiences at community organizations, which may increase the
sustainability of the program beyond the life of the project. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.