* 2050856
* REU Site: Exploring the Limits of Life - Understanding Biofilms in Extreme Environments
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Brent Peyton, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 397,090.00

Montana State University’s (MSU) centers of excellence, the Thermal Biology
Institute (TBI) and the Center for Biofilm Engineering (CBE), in Bozeman,
Montana, will implement an REU site to support the training of 10 students each
year during the summers of 2021-2023. This REU program will explore the limits
of life in extreme environments (e.g., under glaciers and in Yellowstone
National Park hot springs) and combine team-orientated learning and guided
research, helping students discover new ways to grow, understand, and use
extreme biofilms for society’s benefit. The goals of the REU program are to 1)
increase participation of underrepresented minority students in innovative
science and engineering research; 2) empower more undergraduates to pursue
advanced degrees in bioengineering, microbiology, and related disciplines; and
3) strengthen and encourage the persistence of students’ science and engineering
identities through novel research and professional development. It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from non-research-intensive
universities, tribal colleges, community colleges, or from an underrepresented
minority will be trained in the program. To achieve the recruitment goals, the
core participant team will actively network with faculty at regional
universities and colleges, as well as embark on an annual in-person recruitment
‘blitz’ at state tribal colleges and community colleges. Program assessment will
leverage the online SALG URSSA evaluation tool and student interviews, with
longitudinal tracking surveys used after the program to determine student career
paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program is an experience where
participants are paired into teams of two and work collaboratively on an extreme
biofilm research project under the guidance of faculty experts. As part of their
research, program participants help a) characterize and grow extreme biofilms,
b) investigate extreme biofilm functions, or c) explore biofilm growth at
extreme pressures/temperatures/pH, assessing their utility in different
biotechnologies. As a group, students participate in a field trip and workshop
in Yellowstone National Park, a scientific literacy and communication short
course, and weekly professional development activities. Several workshops help
students learn the fundamentals of how to formulate a research question, design
an experiment, and critically evaluate data. Students attend weekly informal
lunch gatherings with faculty mentors to discuss project progress, upcoming
goals, and share ways of solving problems. Participants communicate findings
from their research by presenting a poster at a local summer science and
technology meeting, giving a presentation at a research symposium, and
completing a writing-to-learn assignment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.