* 2050442
* Science Education and Leadership to Promote Equity in K-6 Classrooms
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Deborah Hanuscin, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 01/31/2023
* USD 74,966.00

This project aims to serve the national need of developing highly qualified
teacher-leaders in elementary grade level science instruction. The quality of
science instruction at the elementary level varies between school districts and
schools. Yet, a critical national priority is to ensure that all students see
science as relevant to their lives and see themselves as participants in
science. To achieve these goals, all students must have equitable access from an
early age to high quality science instruction centered in students’ experiences
and communities. This project looks to improve elementary school science
instruction by building capacity to develop elementary science master teachers’
knowledge and skills. These teacher-leaders will provide leadership to make the
changes needed to provide equitable, high-quality science instruction in their
schools. This project will center on the needs and opportunities within the
region that includes the university and district partners. The results of this
regional effort will inform an additional effort to examine similar issues
statewide. Working with local schools and internal university partners, the
project will explore and develop mechanisms to allow future teacher-leaders to
more deeply integrate the Next Generation Science Standards into their teaching
and professional communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Western
Washington University includes partnerships with the Northwest Educational
Service District and high-need schools in four districts in Northwest
Washington: Bellingham, Mount Vernon, Nooksack, and Sedro-Wooley. Project goals
include to: (1) Determine the needs and capacity for change toward equitable,
Next Generation Science Standards-aligned science teaching in elementary schools
in Northwest Washington; (2) Co-construct with school partners a sustainable
model for teacher leadership development and support that enables the sharing of
expertise across districts while being responsive to school contexts; and (3)
Create a plan for science education faculty and elementary teacher leaders to
engage in reciprocal learning that will result in aligned teacher preparation
and science teaching in schools. Through this work, teacher-leaders will develop
a community of practice and strengthen school-university partnerships. The model
of teacher leadership developed by the project will contribute new knowledge to
the community and may be adopted by other institutions. The project will be
assessed by an evaluator with significant experience in elementary science
education. This Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.