* 2050528
* Social Adaptation During Periods Of State Collapse
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Sarah Kennedy, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2025
* USD 193,013.00

Researchers will investigate how communities respond to state collapse and
climate change, two processes that have set global human populations into motion
for generations. Archaeology is well suited to address this question because it
investigates how humans interact innovatively with their environments through
food production and other cultural practices over many generations. Communities
that have migrated or been displaced face many challenges, among them food
insecurity, limited economic opportunities, and a loss of identity. This project
focuses on herding communities to understand how particular economic and social
strategies can differentially influence the outcome and experience of migrants.
Agropastoralists benefit from a mobile food base that enables them to move
between different environments and maintain broad social networks. Often
considered marginal to urbanized state societies, herders find themselves at an
advantage when the pressures of political conflict and persistent drought force
communities to migrate in search of resources. How did displaced
agropastoralists leverage their expansive knowledge and resources in their daily
routine while also maintaining stewardship of their cultural traditions and
memories away from home? How did local and foreign resources and practices shape
agropastoral cuisine, production, and ritual in diaspora? The team researchers
will provide educational and training opportunities for students with emphasis
on scientific field and laboratory methods in archaeology. The project also
includes educational outreach and professionalization of local community members
to contribute to local awareness of heritage and to aid conservation of
archaeological sites in the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will
examine how highland-descendant herders modified their subsistence strategies,
mobility patterns, and ritual activities to adapt economically and socially to
new environments, climate change, and sociopolitical reorganization. The
research will be conducted amidst diverse ecological zones that offered
pastoralists access to seasonally complementary resources in an otherwise
marginal environment. A team of archaeologists, paleoethnobotanists, and
zooarchaeologists will assess what resources were produced or acquired at the
site. The team will excavate a residential compound and adjacent cemetery area
to illustrate how resources contributed to daily and ritual practices. The
application of a suite of isotopic scientific analyses will allow the
researchers to source different materials from the site and reconstruct the
spatial and temporal scope of mobility and exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.