* 2050567
* REU Site: Biological Interactions from Molecules to Ecosystems- Phenotype, Genotype, and Environment
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* David Wassarman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 323,945.00

This REU Site award to the University of Wisconsin-Madison, located in Madison,
WI, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2021- 2023. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from
schools with limited research opportunities or from an underrepresented group,
will be trained in the program. Students will investigate how diversity in
genotype and the environment as well as interactions between genotype and the
environment lead to diverse characteristics, or phenotypes. The REU program will
prepare students to meet this challenge by supporting development of their
observation skills and their ability to approach complex problems from multiple
experimental directions. These skills are required to address challenges such as
how organisms respond to stresses and how to target plant and animal breeding to
sustainably feed and fuel the growing human population. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will be done thru the online
SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU will train students
to understand how observable traits and phenotypes are influenced by genotype
and environmental conditions. The program includes diverse projects with
research groups from nine bioscience departments (Bacteriology, Biochemistry,
Biomolecular Chemistry, Botany, Comparative Biosciences, Entomology, Integrative
Biology, Medical Genetics, and Neurology). Students will participate in seminars
and workshops to sharpen their research skills of observation, critical
thinking, communication, research ethics, and creativity. Students will learn
strategies to navigate the research process and will learn ways to develop an
effective relationship with their mentors. They will acquire skills and
knowledge that will help enhance student success in graduate school. Students
should apply online. Applications are reviewed holistically by the PI, Co-PI,
and faculty mentor. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://wiscience.wisc.edu/IBS-SRP, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Amber Smith at
amber.smith@wisc.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. David Wassarman at
dawassarman@wisc.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.