* 2050374
* Neutrino Geoscience: Geoneutrinos and heat production in the Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* William McDonough, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2024
* USD 340,499.00

The PI seeks to understand the power driving the Earth’s engine and how long the
fuel, which powers its engine, will last and keep the planet active and
habitable. There are two sources of energy within the Earth: the primordial
energy and radiogenic energy. Primordial energy is the kinetic energy that comes
from heating during a collision: particle to particle, small planet to small
planet, and big planet to big planet collisions. A simple estimate of this
energy, derived from the velocity of meteorites and the mass of the earth, gives
1032 joules, or more than a trillion, trillion times the power of all nuclear
power plants in existence. Unfortunately, we lack a fuel gauge for either energy
source and consequently we do not know how much power is left to drive the
earth's engine, nor how much energy (and time) is left to keep it habitable.
Geoneutrinos are naturally occurring electron antineutrinos produced during
beta-decays of these heat producing elements. These neutrinos are tiny
fundamental particles that are almost impossible to detect, because they are
about a billion times smaller than a proton, near-massless and chargeless. In
2005, particle physicists first detected the earth's emission of geoneutrinos
with large underground detectors and are now telling us about the amount of
radiogenic heat inside the earth. Reading the earth's fuel gauge by counting
geoneutrinos, however, requires that geologists understand the abundance and
distribution of these heat producing elements in the continents and the
mantle.By quantifying the planet’s geoneutrino flux we can establish precisely
its composition and define the meteoritic building blocks used to construct the
Earth. Competing theoretical models of the Earth’s composition will be
unbiasedly interrogated by neutrino technology and tell us which of the
competing chemical models of the Earth is the right one. New results from
geoneutrino detectors in Japan and Italy present contrasting stories as to how
much fuel is left in the earth's engine. Geologists are addressing these
complexities by building 3-D physical and chemical models of the earth’s
continents. We seek to resolve these complexities. This award will fund the
research of a graduate student and the outreach efforts of the PI.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Debate continues regarding the convective power of earth's mantle and
the abundances of radiogenic elements in the earth. The earth has a nonuniform
3D physical and compositional structure. Consequently, there is minimal
consistency between heat production models. Data from current and planned
geoneutrino detectors (major 100’s of million dollars particle physics
experiments) can bring resolution to several major issues in earth sciences
which we seek to answer:&lt;br/&gt;1. what are the building blocks used to make
the planet;&lt;br/&gt;2. what is the proportion of radiogenic heat relative to
the residual heat of accretion and core formation;&lt;br/&gt;3. what is the
fraction of radiogenic heat in the continental crust relative to that in the
mantle; and&lt;br/&gt;4. what is the composition of the bulk silicate earth, and
its present upper and lower mantle?&lt;br/&gt;Answers to these questions will,
in turn, define the power that drives plate tectonics, mantle convection and the
geodynamo. From this we will also get insights into the structure of mantle
convection. Neutrino geoscience offers a potential to address broad
interdisciplinary issues over conventional methods. Geoneutrino measurements
sample the globe and are not confounded by mantle melting processes. The current
debate about the mantle's Urey ratio (values ranging from 0.1 to 0.8; where UR =
(radiogenic mantle power)/(total - crustal radiogenic power)) confound
predictions for the Earth's abundances of chondritic refractory elements (36
elements, including Ca, Al, Th, &amp; U), its cooling rate, and the onset of
plate tectonics. Having geoscientists working with physicists to determine the
crustal model for the geoneutrino signal and the mantle's contribution to heat
production will promote mutually beneficial interdisciplinary
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.