* 2050927
* REU Site: Catalysis and Motion
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Squire Booker, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 05/31/2024
* USD 376,275.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to The
Pennsylvania State University, located in University Park, PA, supports the
training of 10 undergraduate students for 10 weeks during the summer months of
2021-2023. The motivation for this program, funded by the Division of Chemistry,
is the recognition that hands-on research experience at an early stage has an
enduring impact on students' careers and the development of their science
identities. Students will be recruited nationwide, with a strong emphasis on
students from underrepresented and underserved groups. Each student is
supervised by a faculty mentor, and the program structure provides opportunities
for cross-collaboration with students and faculty in other research groups in
the department and across the university. Students will work daily on their
research projects, attend weekly research seminars, participate in professional
development workshops and outreach events, and deliver research presentations at
a cross-campus symposium. Interactions with professional industrial chemists are
planned, including site visits to companies and seminars from industrial
scientist to give students career information and inspiration. Formative and
summative assessment is conducted, and students' careers are tracked during and
after their participation. The goal is to help, inspire, and retain
undergraduate students in scientific careers by providing them with a strong
educational, mentoring, and research training
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the leading global scientific
challenges require a deeper understanding both in biological and in chemical
catalysis, and the subsequent or parallel ability to evolve new and better
catalysts. Moreover, the ability to manipulate or regulate biological catalysts
within human cells is the foundation of current therapeutics for a multitude of
diseases. Students are recruited to work in the following areas: (1)
Understanding Macromolecular Catalysis, which focuses on understanding how
protein enzymes, protein metalloenzymes, and RNA enzymes catalyze reactions; (2)
Dynamics of Biological Processes, which focuses on (a) understanding how protein
movement or "dynamics" relates to enzyme catalysis, (b) molecular motors, and
(c) the movement or "trafficking" of various types of macromolecules and small
molecules within the cell and (3) New Insights into Chemical Catalysis, which
involves the synthesis and characterization of chemical catalysts for a variety
of processes. Coupling frontline research with professional development
activities, this site aims to prepare a diverse pipeline of students ready to
tackle pressing and relevant scientific problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.