* 2050266
* REU Site: Engineering and Nanoscience of Materials and Device Applications in Biotechnology and Medicine
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Sudipta Seal, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 373,887.00

The University of Central Floridaâ€™s Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site is aimed at fostering multidisciplinary engineering research towards
developing new materials and devices for application in biotechnology and
medicine. Medical technology keeps advancing, often at a disruptive pace to keep
up with the existing and new needs of the population. Monitoring human health,
improved diagnostics, improvement of quality of life during and after illness,
and treatment and prevention of current and newly developing diseases are
driving demand for better tools and therapies. This is an emerging market with
large demand for trained personnel as research findings continue to move from
laboratory to the field. This REU site brings together engineering, computer
science, photonics research, chemistry and biochemistry, and nanoscience and
technology fields in multidisciplinary teams focused around these areas.
Experiences for the REU participants include research projects in topics such as
remote monitoring of physiological parameters using implantable sensors, as
early as possible disease detection using biomarkers, and smart therapeutic
tools. This program also includes enrichment activities including professional
development opportunities to build skill sets relevant to research and to
professional life. Social activities will facilitate developing bonds and
networking at the REU site, industry site visits, and a research showcase.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Central Florida is a Hispanic Serving
Institution. This REU site has a strong emphasis on diversity and inclusion to
broaden participation by students from underrepresented groups and by students
from colleges with limited research opportunities and primarily undergraduate
institutions (PUI) in STEM research activities. 3D microelectrode in vitro
chips, electronic biosensors, wound healing patches, on-chip plasmonic
biosensors, and software engineering for study of biomolecule-substrate
interactions and for reduction of vertebrate animal testing are cutting edge
examples of research at the REU site. The research is hypothesis based and REU
participants are mentored to independence and hypothesis formulating skills,
while developing hands-on expertise with research methods, tools, analysis and
dissemination of their work. This REU site engages participants 10 weeks per
year, and we emphasize broader impacts on students from traditionally
underrepresented groups in engineering, and on students from colleges with
limited research opportunities and primarily undergraduate institutions (PUI).
In addition to research, students are also made aware of the role of engineering
in biomedical technology and medicine, receive training in responsible conduct
of research, and develop communication skills of students in interdisciplinary
environment, through research, our writing program and community outreach. REU
participants represent a new generation of future engineers and scientists that
will lead the way in the development of advanced materials and technologies for
application in biotechnology and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.