* 2050878
* REU SITE: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Molecular Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2025
* Juan De Pablo, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2025
* USD 434,002.00

The University of Chicago Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering REU site
"Research Experience for Undergraduates in Molecular Engineering" will increase
the awareness, interest, and retention of undergraduate students in molecular
engineering by immersing them as active members of a research group in the
innovative and interdisciplinary STEM community of practice at the University of
Chicago Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering (PME). The PME is an
interdisciplinary engineering school organized around grand engineering
challenges facing society. Researchers translate advances in physics, chemistry,
biology, and computation to manipulate, transform, and organize molecules into
functioning engineering systems to solve problems in three thematic areas: (I)
Materials Systems for Sustainability and Health, (II) Immunoengineering, and
(III) Quantum Engineering. REU participants will be immersed within this STEM
community of practice and undertake authentic research in research themes that
lie at the heart of the PME mission to engage and solve pressing challenges
facing modern society. Students will participate in and contribute to problem-
driven research to advance understanding and develop technical skills and
scientific knowledge. These mentored scientific experiences will promote
engagement and interest among participants without access to STEM resources and
from traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM. By actively and
authentically engaging in research and participating in professionalization and
career development activities, students will enrich their skills, knowledge, and
understanding of STEM, cultivate an identity as scientists and engineers, and be
provided with excellent preparation for future success in STEM education and
career tracks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering
(PME) is a transformational academic and research unit organized around the
emerging field of molecular engineering: the manipulation and design of
molecules and molecular assemblies to engineer materials with novel properties
and functions. The school has adopted a pioneering interdisciplinary and
problem-driven approach to engineering research and education organized around
three prominent research themes (I) Materials Systems for Sustainability and
Health, (II) Immunoengineering, and (III) Quantum Engineering. The intellectual
focus of the program will embody this interdisciplinary and challenge-driven
focus. Students will be immersed and mentored within research groups, and a STEM
community of practice, as active and self-directed researchers exposed to the
intellectual rigor and excitement of scientific research. Students will
experience the problem-driven and interdisciplinary nature of the field, gain
authentic understanding of how basic science can be translated into tools to
address some of societyâ€™s greatest challenges, and learn how to effectively
communicate their work to audiences within and outside of academia. Faculty,
graduate students, and postdoctoral mentors will model best practices and foster
participation, integrating research activities with science teaching and
learning and cultivating a resilient STEM identity among student participants.
The impact of the program is to increase the learning, awareness, interest,
participation, and retention of undergraduate students in molecular science and
engineering, including among early-stage undergraduates uncommitted to STEM and
those without access to research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.