* 2050613
* REU Site:  Human Neuroscience Research and Techniques at Georgia Tech and Georgia State
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Eric Schumacher, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2024
* USD 374,699.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The brain is critical for basic functions in life, such
as movement, emotion, awareness, and regulation. Understanding how the brain
functions is vital to questions scientists have about behavior and health.
Research of the human brain is possible with sophisticated tools that are used
to understand the function and health of our brains. Over the last several
decades, great steps have been made to develop the tools to improve our ability
to more accurately understand human brain function. It is critical to develop
the next generation of brain scientists to use these tools to unlock new
discoveries. However, some college-age aspiring brain scientists are unable to
use these tools because they are not available to them. This Research Experience
for Undergraduates seeks to provide hands-on exposure to the tools to understand
human brain function. We will train women and/or under-represented minority
college students in research laboratories at two universities that are leaders
in brain research, Georgia Tech and Georgia State University in the city of
Atlanta, GA. This experience will support engagement with techniques to study
human brain function, enhance their knowledge of brain science, and support the
next generation of scientists that can unlock the mysteries of the
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neuroscience is a growing field. Knowledge about the
brain and brain function is critical for our understanding of human behavior and
many human diseases and disorders. The collaborative neuroscience community at
Georgia Tech and Georgia State is uniquely suited to provide an undergraduate
research experience in human neuroscience research and techniques that will
achieve several goals. This REU program will train women and/or under-
represented minority students, including 6 in a unique second summer research-
mentorship experience that will: 1) provide exposure for students to human
neuroscience research that do not have tools available at their institutions; 2)
afford hands-on training on data acquisition and analysis in fMRI and EEG; 3)
provide training on the importance of reliability and reproducibility in
research; 4) engage in active research in PI labs; 5) increase the students'
competitiveness when applying for post-graduate education or work in
neuroscience-related fields, and 6)increase scientific knowledge and make
neuroscientific discoveries by advancing the transformative research in faculty
mentor laboratories. To achieve our goals of increasing neuroscience knowledge
among trainees, we will engage them in transformative neuroscience research
tailored to their interests through collaborative research with faculty mentors.
The participants will advance neuroscientific knowledge by carrying out this
transformative research with Georgia State or Georgia Tech faculty. Through
group activities, the REU participants will gain a hands-on knowledge of
neuroscience techniques that they would not otherwise have access to. The shared
activities of the REU participants and faculty mentors will foster interaction
across psychology, physics, neuroscience, biology, and biomedical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.