* 2050781
* REU Site: REU in Theoretical and Experimental Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Jason Slinker, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/29/2024
* USD 322,867.00

The REU site in experimental and theoretical physics at The University of Texas
(UT) at Dallas will develop the research, problem-solving, and communication
skills of eight REU Fellows. The program seeks to broaden participation and
retention in physics and other scientific careers of under-represented groups:
under-represented minorities, women, those with limited access to research
opportunities, and those from less advantaged socioeconomic backgrounds. The
Fellows, selected from an inclusive pool of applicants, will be matched to a
project from a broad range of physics topics and participate in cutting-edge
research. Projects will include ones that benefit health, e.g., cancer imaging
research, aim at securing the national defense, e.g., quantum computing
research, and increase our understanding of the Universe, e.g., research on
gravitational physics. Fellows will gain valuable teamwork skills by
collaborating with graduate students and other researchers in their mentor's
research group and developing their ability for independent work. Workshops and
seminars will help to prepare the Fellows for graduate school and scientific
careers. REU Fellows will share their scientific results with the academic
community, and when possible, will also be invited to participate in community
outreach activities during the summer. Social interactions between the Fellows
will be fostered through cohort building activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
participation and retention of underrepresented groups in physics and other STEM
fields will be achieved by providing meaningful research experiences and
training relevant to graduate school and STEM careers. Based on interests and
any prior research experience, eight REU Fellows will be matched to an
experimental, computational, or theoretical project from areas including
biophysics, computational physics, condensed matter physics, cosmology, and
gravitational physics. Each Fellow will be fully integrated into their mentor's
research group. Early in the program, REU Fellows will attend workshops on
topics foundational to research, e.g., computer programming. They will present
at weekly joint meetings, summarizing their research progress and goals for the
following week. Special workshops such as physics GRE preparation will help
equip Fellows for application to graduate school. The Fellows will present their
results at a research symposium at the end of the program, and they will also be
encouraged to present at conferences after the program concludes. When possible,
they will also participate in writing scientific papers based on their research.
Assessment will be made with questionnaires completed at the beginning and end
of the program and via informal conversations with Fellows and mentors during
the program. The program will be modified appropriately based on these findings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing the retention of under-represented groups will
provide much-needed role models for future students. The program will also open
up the pool of potential high-tech employees essential for the nation's economic
growth and prosperity. The REU Site will enhance the general infrastructure of
research and education at UT Dallas and facilitate the future recruitment of
graduate students who are more representative of the nation. A more inclusive
student body will enrich the campus experience and have a positive long-term
impact on outreach to the broader local and national
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.