* 2050194
* REU SITE: UC Irvine Summer Institute in Neuroscience
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* LUIS COLON-PEREZ, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 501,986.00

This REU Site award to the University of California, Irvine (UCI) is supported
by the Department of Defense ASSURE program thru a partnership with the NSF REU
program. This REU will support the training of ten students for eight weeks
during the summers of 2021- 2023. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities and who are from
under-represented groups will be trained in the program. Students will learn to
conduct high-level neuroscience research from neuroscientists in the field of
learning, memory and cognition. Several students will present the results of
their work at scientific conferences such as the Annual Spring Meeting on
Learning and Memory or the Society for Neuroscience. Student projects will span
various scales: from neurotransmitters to systems-level neuroscience. Assessment
of the program will be done thru the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be
tracked after the program to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Summer Institute in Neuroscience REU Site is
housed at UCIâ€™s Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory (CNLM) where
projects cover areas of neuroscience research ranging from neurotransmitters to
cellular, behavior, and systems level studies. For example, students might: (1)
collect and analyze neuropsychological and multimodal neuroimaging data in human
subjects to understand how the human brain store and retrieve information, (2)
perform state-of-the-art embryologic manipulations, pharmacologic treatments,
and in vivo microscopy imaging in aquatic animals to understand how the brain
develops, (3) evaluate gene expression and chromatin modifications in transgenic
mouse models to understand how early-life exercise impacts memory function.
Others projects are described in the REU website (see link below). Student
activities include an introductory boot camp, weekly journal clubs and
professional development workshops, networking activities, and biweekly
neuroscience methods workshops. Students present their research at a symposium
at the end of the program. Students interested in neuroscience research,
especially those from schools with limited research opportunities or members of
underrepresented groups, are encouraged to apply. Students apply online and will
be selected by a committee composed of CNLM scientists, the PI and co-PI. More
information about the program is available by visiting https://cnlm.uci.edu/REU,
or by contacting the PI (Dr. Colon-Perez at lcolonpe@uci.edu) or the co-PI (Mrs.
Yassa at manuella.yassa@uci.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.