* 2050805
* REU Site: Tropical ecology and evolution at El Verde Field Station, Puerto Rico
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Luis Ramirez-Ulate, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 332,973.00

This REU Site award to North Carolina State University, located in Raleigh,
North Carolina, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2021- 2023. Research is conducted at El Verde Field Station, located
at El Yunque National Forest in Puerto Rico. It is anticipated that a total of
30 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities or from
an under-represented group, will be trained in the program. Students will learn
how research is conducted, with emphasis in tropical ecology and evolution.
Students develop independent projects under the advice of faculty mentors,
spending most of their time conducting research and attending seminars and
workshops on scientific data analysis and techniques to study tropical systems.
Most students are expected to present the results of their work at scientific
conferences and that some will publish their summer research in scientific
journals. Assessment of the program will be done thru the online SALG URSSA
tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths.&lt;br/&gt;The program focuses on Tropical Ecology and Evolution.
Students develop projects in areas such as the study of plant population
biology, stream ecology, aquatic insect dynamics, forest ecology, arthropod
biology, and coevolution in tropical rainforest. El Verde Field Station is the
base of operations of the program and of many tropical researchers, including
the Luquillo LTER program. Students work with their faculty mentors in designing
a research project. Students spend the summer collecting field data in
rainforest ecosystems, conducting data analysis and interpretation. At the end
of the summer, students present their results in a summer research symposium.
Support activities are provided to help students become researchers (e.g.,
workshops, seminars, round tables). A responsible conduct in science component
is provided to discuss issues commonly encountered by students during their
careers. Student selection is based on their research interest, academic record,
and potential for outstanding research in biological sciences. More information
about the program is available by visiting https://www.ramirezlab.net/reu, by
writing to reu@ramirezlab.net, or contacting the PI (Dr. A. Ramirez at
alonso.ramirez@ncsu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.