* 2050699
* Advancing SEA-PHAGES at Northwest Indian College to Promote Indigenous Voices
* EDU,EES
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* John Rombold, Northwest Indian College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,984.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will increase the body of knowledge on the genomics
of bacteriophages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northwest Indian College (NWIC) students
will collect and isolate their own mycobacteriophage (phage) from samples
collected on or near campus, with one project focusing on the cyanobacteria of
the Salish Sea. Students will purify the elected phage and isolate its genomic
DNA, and then conduct a restricted digest analysis of a portion of phage genomic
DNA to confirm genomic DNA integrity and to examine if the restriction pattern
is similar to previously characterized phages. Students will also prepare
electron microscopy grids fixed with their purified phage and work with NWIC's
Salish Sea Research Center to determine their phage morphology. The genome of
one phage will then be sent to the University of Pittsburg for genomic
sequencing, and during the second half of the course the students will use gene-
searching tools to identify and annotate the probable genes. Students will also
compare the results of their gene coding to known, characterized
mycobacteriophage genomes before uploading their completed product to GenBank,
an online database of genetic sequences maintained by the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Presentations at the national SEA-PHAGES
conference in Ashland, VA further develop student research
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.