* 2050623
* Collaborative Research: From subduction to suture: testing collisional stage and lithospheric strength as controls on orogenic structure in the Caucasus
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Eric Cowgill, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 457,637.00

Mountain belts form where two plates that make up the outer-most shell of the
Earth (the crust) collide. These collisions are driven by the plate tectonic
cycle. Where one colliding plate is composed of dense oceanic crust and the
other is more buoyant continental crust, which makes up most of the landmasses
on Earth, the oceanic crust sinks back in the Earth’s deep interior via
subduction to recycle material from the surface back into Earth’s mantle.
However, when the two colliding plates are composed of continental crust, they
both resist subduction, resulting in the formation of the largest mountain belts
on Earth. The collisions that form these mountain belts produce devastating
earthquakes, concentrate natural resources, and drive biological evolution via
the rapid growth/decay of topography. Continental collisions often terminate
periods of oceanic plate subduction, but much is still not understood about the
transition between these two processes, including how a subduction zone converts
to a continental collision to produce a mountain chain, what controls the size
and locations of large earthquakes, or what modulates the distribution of
economically critical ores. This 3-year, international collaboration between
researchers at the University of California, Davis, the University of Michigan,
and Ilia State University in the Republic of Georgia will investigate the
transition from subduction to continental collision in the Greater Caucasus
Mountains, a major tectonic element of the Arabia-Eurasia continental collision,
and one of the only places Earth where this transition can be observed today.
This project will advance scientific knowledge and contribute to society by
training PhD students, which contributes to the preparation of a globally
competitive STEM workforce and expands the pool of STEM educators. The project
will engage and mentor undergraduate students who are from underrepresented
minorities, providing professional development and increased participation in
STEM, and will increase domestic and international partnerships by engaging US
students in collaborative, international work, providing training to graduate
students from Ilia State University, deepening collaborations between US and
Georgian researchers, and supporting new research collaborations within the US.
Finally, this project will enhance research and educational infrastructure by
supporting analytical capacities at US research
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transition from oceanic subduction to
continental collision defines a profound change in force balance and dynamics
along the plate boundary. Thus, determining the spatial and temporal
distribution of strain during the transition from subduction to collision is
critical for relating the deformational response of the orogen to the far-field
plate motions driving that deformation. During the transition, buoyant crust of
the subducting continental margin enters the trench, reduces the dip of the
subduction megathrust, increases plate-boundary coupling, and deforms the
overriding plate. The transition from subduction to collision triggers
fundamental changes in the spatial distribution and rates of deformation,
exhumation, and deposition along the convergent margin as the accretionary wedge
evolves into the suture between colliding continental blocks. Geologic
observations of the spatial and temporal patterns of deformation during the
transition from subduction to collision within an active continental collision
zone remain highly elusive, primarily because of a paucity of localities to
study this transition. This project will test the idea that the Greater Caucasus
serve as a natural laboratory to study the subduction to collision transition by
determining if a fundamental along-strike dichotomy in the geology, structure,
seismicity, and geodetic shortening results from a transition from active
subduction in the eastern part of the range to continental collision and
terminal suturing in the west. Specifically, this project will test the
hypothesis that there is a terminal suture in the Greater Caucasus, west of
~45°E longitude, that represents a now-subducted oceanic back-arc basin that
formerly separated Eurasia to the north from a continental ribbon to the south.
East of 45°E, collision has not yet occurred, and the range is dominated by
active oceanic subduction. The project has two goals: (1) To illuminate the
geologic observations necessary to recognize suturing in ancient continental
collisions by describing and quantifying the geologic expression, duration,
kinematics, and mechanics of this fundamental change in dynamic state and (2) to
capture the deformational response of an orogen to the evolving shift in plate
boundary forces associated with the transition from subduction to collision, and
thus quantify the relative roles of plate strength and plate boundary coupling
in controlling orogenic structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.