* 2050006
* EAR-PF: Towards a robust understanding of the spatio-temporal evolution of foreshock sequences from the laboratory to the field
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,06/30/2022
* David Bolton, Bolton, David Chas
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 06/30/2022
* USD 76,399.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. David C. Bolton has been
awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to investigate the evolution of
earthquake foreshock sequences in time and space, explored through natural and
laboratory fault zones. Estimating the timing and location of future earthquakes
has been a long-standing goal in the study of seismology. However, progress in
this area has been slow due to a poor understanding of the connections between
the origins of earthquakes and seismic activity. Foreshocks are small
earthquakes that precede the main earthquake and are thought to be indirect
evidence that a fault is close to failure. However, foreshocks are not an easily
observed feature of all earthquakes, and their connection to the impending
earthquake is not well understood. This work will integrate laboratory and
field-based observations of foreshocks with an aim to provide a coherent
understanding of the evolution of foreshock sequences. A significant focus will
be devoted to investigating whether foreshock properties encode information
about the mainshock size. This work will provide key insights into the
preparatory phase of earthquakes and will help advance earthquake early warning
systems and improve earthquake hazard assessment. The project will also join
forces with the GeoFORCE outreach program led by the Jackson School of
Geosciences at UT-Austin to provide research opportunities to underrepresented
communities in southwest Texas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
implement novel machine learning and earthquake seismology techniques for
developing high-fidelity earthquake catalogs that are rich in small magnitude
events. These high-resolution catalogs will illuminate how foreshocks interact
with each other, their evolution in space and time, and their connection to the
mainshock. The project will utilize laboratory experiments instrumented with
acoustic emission monitoring to shed light on the causative processes that drive
foreshock sequences. Fault zone properties such as stress, slip displacement,
strain, will be integrated with the spatio-temporal patterns of acoustic
emissions, allowing for a detailed understanding of the connection between the
physics of earthquake nucleation processes and seismic activity. A second key
element of the project will involve scaling up the laboratory observations to
geologically relevant conditions by detecting and locating foreshocks on the
well-characterized and seismically active Apennine fault system in Italy. This
multi-scale, integrated research plan represents a unique opportunity to study
seismic processes from the laboratory to tectonic scale and will determine if
characteristics of laboratory foreshocks can be scaled up to tectonic fault
zones. The proposed work has important implications for seismic hazard analysis
and could help improve our ability to make accurate hazard forecasts and
scientific predictions about earthquake processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.