* 2050443
* Developing Strong and Diverse STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Teri Murphy, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2026
* USD 920,810.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing science and
mathematics teachers to address the nationâ€™s STEM teacher shortage. Because the
percentage of teachers of color in secondary schools is decreasing, the project
team is focused on recruiting and preparing highly qualified teachers of color.
Furthermore, urban and other high poverty schools are most likely to have STEM
teachers without baccalaureate degrees in mathematics or physics, although
teachers of other subjects such as chemistry or biology may also not have
baccalaureate degrees in those areas. Therefore, this project focuses primarily
on recruitment of undergraduate students pursuing degrees in physics or
mathematics, as well as post-baccalaureate physics or mathematics degree holders
to meet this need, but will welcome other STEM majors as well. Funds are
anticipated to support 10 undergraduate STEM majors and 20 graduate STEM degreed
pre-service teacher candidates. Through this project, these individuals,
supported as Noyce Scholars, are prepared to establish culturally responsive
learning environments for their students. As they obtain teacher certification,
the Noyce Scholars develop skills in designing and teaching lessons focused on
engaging all students in Problem-Based Learning (PBL) and Engineering Design
Processes (EDP). The project works with community cultural institutions and
programs to increase the Scholars knowledge and connections with the local
community. These connections enhance the Scholars ability to incorporate
culturally relevant instruction focused on the needs and interests of the
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of Cincinnati
includes partnerships with Breakthrough Cincinnati and the Winton Woods School
District and is guided by three goals. First is to prepare 30 new STEM teachers
over 5 years, including at least 15 teachers of color and 10 with degrees in
physics or mathematics. Second is to prepare all the teachers to use PBL and
culturally responsive teaching practices and third is to create an inclusive
teacher preparation environment. A qualitative research design is used to
investigate the following research questions. What PBL and/or Engineering
instructional strategies do the Scholars use in their instruction? What
rationales do the Scholars give for their use or non-use of elements of PBL and
design instruction? How do Scholars connect their PBL and design units to issues
of justice and equity? In addition to the research findings from investigation
of these question, broader impact of the project is regarding the increased
number of teachers of color with physics or mathematics degrees who are well-
prepared to provide experiences in which all students succeed and who serve in
high needs schools. This: Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends, project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.