* 2050634
* Preparing 21st Century Science and Mathematics Teachers for the Urban Classroom
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Celia Cruz, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 03/31/2026
* USD 1,024,426.00

The project aims to serve the national need of preparing highly qualified
mathematics and science teachers to serve in high-need elementary and secondary
schools. Future U.S. competitiveness depends on how well prepared the nation’s
students are for 21st century careers in STEM. The CUNY-Lehman College teacher
preparation program intends ensure that more students are prepared for these
future STEM careers. To do so, it will recruit three cohorts of individuals who
have obtained baccalaureate degrees in a STEM discipline and support them in
earning a master’s degree in education with teacher certification. The support
will include a two-semester, mentored experience in public schools. The project
is expected to strengthen the pipeline into mathematics and science teaching in
areas with high needs and to improve the quality of STEM teaching in public
elementary, middle, and high schools in New York. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project at the City University of New York-Lehman includes partnerships with
high-need, New York school districts in the Bronx and in Mount Vernon. During
each of the first three years of the project, it intends to recruit annual
cohorts of nine individuals who have a STEM degree and provide them with
scholarships and other support to complete a master’s degree. As a result, 27
new certified STEM teachers should be teaching in high need schools by the end
of the award. The project will provide the Noyce Scholars with coursework that
builds their content knowledge and pedagogical skills in working with elementary
and secondary school students in science and mathematics classrooms. Additional
project goals include development of the Noyce Scholars’ ability to connect
teaching and learning to the experiences of their linguistically and culturally
diverse students. These skills are expected to be honed during a two-semester
sequence of immersive experiences at New World High School in the Bronx and at a
K-8 school in Mount Vernon, where the Noyce Scholars will be mentored by
experienced in-service STEM classroom teachers. The project also aims to build
the capacity of the host schools to provide high-quality, clinical experiences
for pre-service teachers, both online and onsite, by becoming “best practice”
demonstration sites. The project also intends to reform and implement a joint
elementary-secondary teacher preparation program to meet local school needs.
Finally, the project aims to generate and disseminate new knowledge about the
relationships between teacher effectiveness and their preparation in mathematics
and science education. This Track 1 Scholarships and Stipends project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.