* 2050451
* REU Site: Growing Entrepreneurially-Minded Undergraduate Researchers with New Product Development in Applied Energy
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Lisa Bosman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 523,750.00

The goal of this project is to provide underrepresented engineering and
engineering technology students with a research experience that combines the
best aspects of academic applied research, such as strong theory basis and
rigorous scholarship, with essential business practices such as real-world
customer discovery and the generation of sound business plans. This REU Site
project is unique in that it offers an entrepreneurship-integrated, applied
energy research experience in the Midwest United States. The concentration on
entrepreneurship-integration will lead to new product development skillsets
including customer discovery and business model validation. By the end of the
summer program, students are expected to “get out of the building” and conduct a
minimum quantity of customer discovery interviews, as the first step in the
commercialization process. The customer discovery process will assist students
in establishing the motivation for applied energy research first-hand. The
intentions behind the concentration on applied energy research supports NSF’s
mission to promote the progress of science. First, energy generation and
distribution methods have been evolving rapidly over the last few years. Bulk
energy production done by large-scale energy generators is being complemented by
small-scale energy production, where local homeowners are the greatest
beneficiaries of smart grid technology and smart energy generation and
distribution techniques. However, the increased number of players, variability
in electricity production, and potential for bad actors poses challenges and
risks to the energy infrastructure resulting in increased costs to the grid. All
five REU projects are aimed to combat these challenges and
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU experience will empower students to develop
an entrepreneurial mindset, enhancing their research toolbox and skillset. The
project will recruit junior and senior level engineering and engineering
technology students with a particular focus on recruiting students from Tribal
Colleges and Universities (TCUs), Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs), and Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs). The intended impact is
twofold. First, is the professional development of 30 underrepresented minority
(URM) undergraduate students (across three years) in an experience that
encapsulates both applied energy research and entrepreneurially-minded new
product development. Second, is the quality of professional development in
better preparing students to enter industry or academia, upon completion of the
degree. The intellectual contributions involve building knowledge within applied
energy new product development. The proposed energy research projects will
support the broad initiatives of the UN Sustainable Development Goals and
National Academy of Engineering. Via the broader impacts, this project will
contribute to society through a direct impact on 30 undergraduates traditionally
underrepresented in STEM. In addition, the new product development component of
the student research experience will inform the faculty-driven research agenda
(and subsequent entrepreneurial activities), thus improving the quality and
customer focus of the applied research initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.