* 2050798
* Collaborative Research: Hybrid Flow-Sediment-Structure Interaction Analysis of Extreme Scour due to Coastal Flooding
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Ali Farhadzadeh, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 322,052.00

Foundation scour is one of the primary causes of structural damage in coastal
communities during flooding events. This project will leverage state-of-the-art
in wave flume physical modeling, geotechnical centrifuge modeling, and numerical
simulation to answer a number of critical and open questions related to the
interactions among extreme flood flow, soil, and structure which lead to scour
and foundation failureâ€”shifting the paradigm in the current understanding of key
physical processes in flood-induced scouring process in complex urban setting.
Enhancement of open-source multi-physics computational tool for coastal hazard
mitigation will provide a strong multi-disciplinary modeling platform to the
broader civil and coastal engineering research community. The new
parameterization set for extreme scour-liquefaction resulted from the
fundamental knowledge-gain will benefit region-scale nearshore morphodynamic
modeling and the state of foundation design in flood-prone areas. The education
and outreach efforts will broaden the participation at all levels including: (1)
recruitment, retention, and education of underrepresented students in three
collaborating institutions; (2) engaging science teachers in three coastal
states with different urban settings and population, in coastal infrastructure
and community resiliency training; and (3) enhancing the well-being of the
coastal residents through changing the design and hazard mitigation
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bridge the state-of-the-art in
sediment transport and scour, unsaturated and saturated soil mechanics, and
hydrodynamics of flood flow. This goal will be achieved by correlating the
spatiotemporal variations of scouring and loading with the dynamics of shallow
flood flows within complex urban setting and water hysteresis in unsaturated
soils around and underneath surface structures. The research objectives of this
project are to understand: (1) scouring patterns of single and array of
structures, under various flow and soil states; (2) initiation and progression
of foundation scouring in low fines content soils of varying properties (i.e.,
composition, relative density, initial water content); (3) soil-foundation
interaction response under simultaneous wave action and hydraulically-induced
excess pore pressure; (4) rocking response of shallow foundations in unsaturated
ground; (5) enhancement of an open-source Eulerian two-phase modeling framework
for a complete description of seabed stability and scour; and (6) incorporating
an extended effective stress-based sub-model and a revised solver for slight
water compressibility to simulate soil behavior in partially drained and
unsaturated condition with high overburden. The long-term goal of this project
is to create public-domain tools for reliable scour predictions of complex urban
and non-urban settings, under extreme coastal flooding
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.