* 2050879
* REU Site: Sustainable Resilient Transportation Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mark Nejad, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2024
* USD 420,383.00

Climate change is one of the major challenges that the U.S. faces in the 21st
century. Carbon emissions, as a major catalyst, are in great part a result of
construction, maintenance, and operation of transportation systems. With support
from the NSF Division of Engineering Education and Centers, this award
establishes the REU Site in Sustainable Resilient Transportation Systems at the
University of Delaware which will contribute to the state-of-the-art
technologies and design methodologies with a potential to reduce carbon
emissions and, consequently, help address climate change. The site will host a
diverse cohort of undergraduate researchers who will engage in interdisciplinary
research programs in electric and autonomous vehicles; green construction
materials and structures; and resilient infrastructure. By enabling low-carbon
footprint transportation systems, the REU site contributes towards improved
global economic prosperity, the safety of our planet’s residents, and future
development. Training provided at the REU site will help develop a diverse STEM
workforce capable of tackling the complex engineering challenges of the 21st
century, improving the U.S. competitiveness at the global level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This unique program provides students with research
experiences in sustainable resilient transportation systems; develops students’
experimental, quantitative analysis, and communication skills; fosters student
appreciation of interdisciplinary collaborations, the pursuit of graduate
degrees and careers in transportation-related fields; and increases the
diversity of the transportation workforce. This is accomplished by the students
participating in individual and cohort experiences. Individual experiences will
promote students’ transition from dependent to independent researcher status in
their laboratory by engaging students in personalized mentoring with REU Site
faculty advisors. Cohort experiences are designed to strengthen students’
intellectual focus in Sustainable Resilient Transportation Systems, support the
development of students’ research skills, and encourage student-student
communication and collaboration. It is anticipated that this work will
contribute to the development of more diverse engineering programs for students
underrepresented in STEM as well as provide opportunities for students that have
limited access to research experiences. This underserved population presents a
significant potential benefit to society in areas in which innovation and
creativity are most needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.