* 2050848
* REU Site: Aquatic Sciences, Engineering, and Technology (ASET) REU at Clarkson University
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Alan Christian, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/29/2024
* USD 215,155.00

Clarkson University in Potsdam, New York will host a new Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) program called Aquatic Science, Engineering, and
Technology (ASET). The program will bring eight undergraduates to Clarkson each
summer for a ten-week research experience during the summers of 2021-2022.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASET will focus on the Great Lakes and Hudson River basin
environmental research. REU interns will have opportunities to conduct research
in a range of disciplines with a focus on 1) Aquatic Natural Sciences, 2)
Aquatic Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences and 3) Aquatic Resource
Engineering. Projects available to students will develop skills in ecosystem
ecology, population genetics, molecular taxonomy, molecular toxicology,
computational biology, wildlife monitoring and GIS analysis, aquatic
biogeochemistry and limnology, sustainable forestry, aquatic engineering,
mitigating nitrates in wastewater, environmental chemistry, etc. The program
includes an integrative learning community through research, seminars,
professional development, and social activities. Student recruitment will
develop cohorts that are diverse in perspective, discipline, and demographics.
Objectives are to 1) develop a student’s research experience; 2) develop a
diverse and supportive learning community; 3) strengthen Scholars’ skills to
create and evaluate communication products; 4) foster Scholars’ evaluation of
the ethical and legal aspects in research; 5) validate the Scholars' academic
path and facilitate degree completion in a STEM-related field; and 6) encourage
Scholars to choose a career in STEM, especially in aquatics. This award is
supported by the Directorate of Biological Sciences and the Division of Ocean
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.