* 2050846
* REU Site: Multidisciplinary Chemistry Research: Empowering Scientists to Improve Society
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Tammy Dwyer, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 02/29/2024
* USD 342,105.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the University
of San Diego, located in San Diego, CA, provides support for 10 students for 10
weeks of research and professional development each summer from 2021-2023. In
this program, supported by the Division of Chemistry, students take part in
projects representing diverse approaches and techniques, giving them a unique
opportunity to explore the power of multi-disciplinary science. Beyond
scientific gains, students will work side-by-side with faculty mentors to engage
with issues of social awareness, justice, and responsibility in Chemistry. At
least half of the students are recruited from local community colleges with
otherwise limited opportunities for laboratory research. To increase the
retention of these students in science, the site includes programming for
academic, personal, and professional development on topics such as academic
preparation, financial literacy, and career paths. Working closely with mentors,
students will receive professional guidance, grow their scientific identities,
and develop ownership of their research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
from first-generation, underserved, and diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds
will be engaged in authentic mentored research that thoughtfully integrates
social justice themes. In collaboration with faculty, student researchers will
synthesize and study novel organic molecules, investigate nanoscale materials,
colloids and active matter; and explore atmospheric, surface, water, and plant
chemistry. Participants also have the opportunity to examine protein chemistry
and biomacromolecular interactions and engage in research projects related to
climate change, renewable energy, clean water, and health. In conjunction with
their research activities, participating students will also consider societal
implications and impact of scientific research including issues of equity,
environmental justice, and access to emerging technologies. The REU student
cohort will also participate in discussions with mentors, peers, and invited
speakers to explore issues of diversity, equity, inclusion and access in the
scientific community and in society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.