* 2050077
* Collaborative Research: CEDAR--Upper Atmospheric Hydrogen Variability on Timescales from Dusk-Dawn to Multidecadal
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Lawrence Haffner, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 258,341.00

This award will use results obtained from the combination of hydrogen
interferometric nightglow observations and general circulation modeling to study
the variability in upper atmospheric hydrogen density over various time scales
ranging from night-to-night to multi-decades. Observing the morphology and
climatology of atomic hydrogen density, a key constituent in the thermosphere
and exosphere composition, will achieve an improved understanding of space-
weather processes, neutral atmosphere plasmasphere coupling processes, and non-
Maxwellian physics present in the upper thermosphere and exosphere regions.
Hydrogen is also a by-product of molecular reactions taking place at lower
altitudes involving species such as water vapor and methane, two of the
greenhouse gases most important for the energy balance of the Earth’s
atmosphere. Thus, tracking the H density over several decades will provide
insight into any significant climate change taking place within the mesosphere
region. These results will improve the understanding of the mechanisms driving
the observed hydrogen variability and will determine the response of exospheric
hydrogen density to increases in greenhouse gases over the time span of
observations. Broader impacts of this award will include involvement of one
graduate student as well as several undergraduate students, participation by a
faculty member from a two-year Wisconsin campus, as well as education and
outreach in climate science and aeronomy. Students will have the opportunity to
take and analyze new observations with these two remote observatories. The
students will also learn the use of the WACCM-X model to achieve the simulations
necessary for these comparisons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Application of forward
modeling methodology will compare existing and new high signal-to-noise Fabry-
Perot observations of geocoronal hydrogen emissions with model simulations
extracted from the outputs of the National Center for Atmospheric Research Whole
Atmosphere Community Climate Model eXtended (WACCM-X). These data sets would be
combined with the model results to study the variability in existing Southern
Hemisphere (SH) hydrogen emission observations by comparing its variations to
that observed for the Northern Hemisphere (NH) Fabry-Perot Balmer-alpha
observations once the SH and NH data for the first coincident Balmer-alpha
observations using the INSpIRe and WHAM Fabry-Perot interferometer instruments
have been collected. The new observations from Wisconsin and Chile will provide
near-simultaneous, carefully-calibrated measurements of hydrogen nightglow
emissions from NH and SH mid-latitudes. The award will also use for this study
the observations drawn from existing NH and SH upper atmospheric hydrogen Balmer
alpha emission data sets. Comparing these results will detect any hemispheric
asymmetries in hydrogen variability. WACCM-X simulations will provide for the
investigation of mechanisms contributing to Balmer alpha variability through
diagnostic analysis. Finally, WACCM-X climate simulations will be analyzed to
study the expected response of hydrogen-containing constituents to increases in
greenhouse gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.