* 2050069
* Functionally Graded Metallic Materials by Directed Energy Deposition Additive Manufacturing: Computational Design, Fabrication and Validation
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* ShunLi Shang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 04/30/2024
* USD 568,745.00

The layer-by-layer process of additive manufacturing enables the controlled
variation of material compositions, and therefore, properties, as a function of
locations in a fabricated part. Such a unique capability has the potential to
drastically transform the engineering design paradigm, inspiring innovative
structures with spatially tailored multi-functional properties (e.g., physical,
mechanical and thermal, etc.), which are strongly desired in many applications
such as turbine blades. However, the complexity of phase formation resulted from
the simultaneous deposition of disparate materials during additive manufacturing
is least understood and hinders the ability to not only design, but also
successfully produce materials of required functional gradients. This award
supports fundamental research aimed at enabling the design and fabrication of
functionally graded metallic materials using the laser powder-fed directed
energy deposition process. The present research endeavors to develop
comprehensive understanding of phase formation and transformations during layer-
wise making of multi-component systems using integrated computational and
experimental tools. In addition to its potential to reignite U.S. manufacturing,
additive manufacturing’s power in tailoring properties within complex three-
dimensional components will also significantly expand the design space and yield
structures with enhanced integrity. The multidisciplinary nature of the research
methodologies, along with crafted educational and outreach activities, will
impact workforce development through the engagement of graduate and
undergraduate students as well as the broader manufacturing
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the present research is to
uncover the underlying mechanism of phase formation during the fabrication, via
directed energy deposition additive manufacturing, of functionally graded
metallic materials. The research will include the construction of a new multi-
component thermodynamic database covering the complete compositional space of
interest using novel high throughput first-principles calculations, deep neural
network machine learning models, and high throughput thermodynamic modeling
tools with uncertainty quantification. With this database, a combination of
thermodynamic phase equilibrium calculations and kinetic phase transformation
simulations will be used for phases formation predictions. The models will be
applied to design compositional pathways between two metallic alloys, in a
nonlinear fashion, for successful gradients in order to, e.g., avoid detrimental
intermetallic phases. The designed functionally graded materials will be
realized using a directed energy deposition machine and blending two different
powders (titanium alloy and iron-nickel alloy) varying along the build height
according to the design. Further, the compositions, microstructures and
mechanical properties of fabricated parts will be thoroughly characterized and
quantitatively compared with simulation results to refine the computational
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.