* 2050639
* Capacity Building to Address the Shortage of Mathematics Teachers in Hawaii
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Kara Suzuka, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2022
* USD 124,858.00

This project aims to serve the national needs of understanding and filling the
teacher shortage in secondary mathematics. In particular, it will build capacity
to examine systemic issues within and across the teacher workforce pipeline in
Hawai‘i. Such issues include influences on the recruitment and education of new
mathematics teachers as well as the ongoing professional growth and retention of
classroom teachers in high-need schools. This project involves data sharing,
collection, analysis, and interpretation among multiple institutions and
organizations working collaboratively to address the critical shortage of
mathematics teachers in Hawai‘i. It seeks to develop fuller answers to the
following questions: What keeps promising individuals from pursuing teaching
careers? What barriers or hurdles do aspiring teachers face? What impedes
teachers from having long and successful careers in high-need schools and
classrooms?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of
Hawai‘i at Mānoa includes a strategic partnership among all three university
campuses (University of Hawai‘i West O‘ahu; University of Hawai‘i Hilo) and two
community colleges in the University of Hawai‘i System (Leeward Community
College and Kap‘iolani Community College). It also features partnerships with
the Hawai‘i State Department of Education, which operates all public schools in
the state, as well as with the Hawai‘i Data eXchange Partnership, a
collaborative that manages data from Hawai‘i’s education and workforce sectors.
Project goals include carrying out cross-institutional research to inform
efforts to address Hawai‘i’s mathematics teacher shortage, develop partnerships
and engagement for these efforts, and build/refine data collection, sharing, and
reuse for these purposes. The project will carry out quantitative and
qualitative analyses of multiple data sources, including program documents,
secondary sources, and new survey and interview data. The intellectual merit of
the project entails advancing knowledge about the mathematics teacher shortage
in Hawai‘i. It will offer a research foundation to: design approaches for
engaging STEM college students and attracting them into teaching careers;
address challenges that aspiring mathematics teachers may face when trying to
enter and complete teacher education programs; and better support teachers and
administrators at high-need schools. The broader impacts of this project include
development of data collection and reuse systems, together with analytic
approaches, that will allow stakeholders to look across the teacher workforce
pipeline both now and in the future. This Noyce Capacity Building project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.