* 2050152
* RAPID: Performance of Agricultural Storage Silos and Farm Bins in Nebraska and Iowa During the August 2020 Derecho
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Christine Wittich, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 41,934.00

This grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) will investigate the wind
performance of agricultural storage silos and farm bins during the August 2020
Derecho. This high wind event left a path of structural damage exceeding 750
miles in length and crossing several Midwestern states, including Nebraska,
Iowa, Illinois, and Indiana. This event presents a unique opportunity to
evaluate the performance of agricultural storage silos and farm bins because of
the unusually large area impacted in a predominantly agricultural region of the
country and the wide range of wind speeds encountered (ranging from 60 â€“ 130
mph). Despite the criticality of the agricultural industry to the U.S. economy
and global food production, agricultural storage silos and farm bins have
received relatively little attention with respect to natural hazards research.
Furthermore, these structures are not designed to a consistent standard in the
United States, which has led to a significant vulnerability in rural
communities, and there is a critical need to understand the influence of design
and construction parameters on the wind resistance of these structures. Findings
from this study will advance fundamental knowledge regarding the performance of
these structures in severe wind events and enable consideration of new design
approaches and the evaluation of mitigation measures to safeguard U.S. food
production and agricultural economies. Results generated in this project also
will enable detailed studies of rural community resilience, which require an
understanding of the unique structural typologies that comprise the built
environment - a necessary step towards enhancing national resilience. This
project will support a graduate student researcher, serving to train the next
generation of STEM leadership, and will leverage an NSF-supported Research
Experiences for Undergraduates Site to broaden participation of underrepresented
groups in engineering. Data from this project will be archived and made publicly
available in the NSF-supported National Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org) for broad use
within the engineering community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID grant seeks
to answer fundamental research questions regarding the influence of key
parameters on the wind resistance of agricultural storage silos and farm bins:
(1) How do foundation type, anchorage depth (if present), and baseplate design
influence the wind resistance of agricultural storage silos and farm bins?, and
(2) How can the probability of failure for agricultural storage silos and farm
bins be represented as a function of wind speed? These questions will be
answered through a detailed investigation of the performance of agricultural
storage silos and farm bins during the August 2020 Derecho. Specifically,
perishable data will be collected documenting undamaged and damaged storage
silos and farm bins in the path of the derecho. The team will document the
design and construction of individual structures, estimated condition of the
structure prior to the event, and current condition of the structure following
the event. Aerial imagery and three-dimensional point clouds will be acquired
for structures evidencing complex damage patterns. The typology and performance
of nearby structures will also be documented to obtain more detailed estimates
of wind speeds in the vicinity of the storage silos and farm bins. Data will be
analyzed to generate empirical fragility curves to evaluate the influence of
several design and construction parameters including foundation, anchorage, and
baseplate design. The fragility curves can be used for subsequent research in
rural community resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.