* 2050260
* Collaborative Research: Targeted neurosteroidogenesis and complex memory function
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* John Bracht, American University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,088,636.00

Hormones travel through the blood and profoundly affect tissues far from their
source. Neurons communicate with electrical signals and the release of
neurotransmitters across the microscopic space of a synapse. We have recently
documented a combination of these two signaling systems, one example of which is
estrogen synthesis at the synapse (SES). However, we know little about how
electrical and hormonal signaling interact at the synapse, or how this SES may
affect complex behaviors like memory function. Neither do we know if learning
affects SES. We will use the zebra finch, a species with abundant SES to
understand how synaptic steroid synthesis interacts with membrane electrical
activity and neurotransmitter release. Then, we will ask how SES modulates
learning, storage and recall of newly learned spatial information. Lastly, we
will probe changes in the genome associated with learning, memory, and SES. The
investigators on this project are all committed to undergraduate education and
extend research opportunities to students and area high school teachers, thereby
increasing outreach at local institutions. The PI will host a streaming video
show highlighting the interactions between healthy food preparation and hormonal
change. Finally, we will provide content on the physiological and vocal changes
to LBGT+ choruses and choirs on the effects of hormone therapy on vocal
performance. These outreach activities are designed to exploit the researchersâ€™
scholarly, outreach, and public engagement to increase the awareness of
scientific research to a diverse set of citizens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synaptocrine signaling, evidenced by steroid synthesis at
the synapse may be a signaling system that combines paracrine and electrical
signaling. The abundant synaptic aromatase in the finch brain makes it an
invaluable model in understanding the interplay between electrical activity and
steroid provision. Further, the accessibility of the avian hippocampus (HP), the
plentiful synaptic aromatase therein, and its established role in spatial
memory, allow for an unparalleled opportunity to understand the role of
synaptocrine aromatization in memory formation and performance. We propose to
use biochemical, behavioral, and genomic techniques to understand how: ionic
flux affects hormone synthesis and neurotransmitter release at the synapse, how
aromatization in the HP affects components of memory function, and how changes
in the hippocampal transcriptome are altered by aromatization and learning. This
proposal combines the skills of researchers at two predominantly undergraduate
institutions, all of whom are committed to academic and public education. The
PIs will welcome high school teachers and undergraduates into their laboratories
for summer internships and will design and implement a new course in
Neuroanatomy for undergraduates in Neuroscience. Public outreach will consist of
a streaming cooking show that discusses the endocrinology and physiological
consequences of healthy food preparation. Finally, the PI and a colleague in
Music will design and provide content to choral performers in the LBGT+
community on respiratory and vocal changes during chronic hormone-therapy. Taken
together these outreach activities will benefit a wide array of the public
across ages, genders, ethnicities, and socioeconomic
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.