* 2050268
* CSBR: Living Stocks: Database upgrade, digitization, and increasing accessibility of the Atlanta Botanical Garden Plant Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Lauren Eserman, Atlanta Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2025
* USD 410,887.00

The Atlanta Botanical Garden (ABG) has served as a leader in plant science
research, education, and conservation for more than four decades. These
collections house 106,028 individual plants from 25,335 genetically unique
accessions representing 12,096 taxa (species, subspecies, and varieties) from
276 plant families and over 1,800 genera. Most notably, ABG maintains the most
diverse living collection of orchids in the United States with 2,328 taxa. Data
related to these diverse plant collections are currently stored in an in-house
database and are not accessible by the public or researchers. The focus of this
project is to upgrade data storage to a modern commercial database with a public
interface allowing visitors, researchers, conservationists, and educators to
search ABG plant collections remotely or while at the Garden. This project will
make plant collections at the Atlanta Botanical Garden publicly accessible for
research, education, and conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Botanic gardens play
a critical role in basic plant research by providing freshly collected plant
material to researchers from extensive living plant collections for very low
cost. In addition, a highly skilled staff of horticulturists maintain and
preserve collections full-time. The Plant Collections at the Atlanta Botanical
Garden have been used in NSF funded projects and many other research projects,
including graduate student research, and for conservation projects. To increase
visibility and use of the collections for research, this project will migrate
the existing Plant Records database to an updated platform which will be
connected to external databases, making collection data publicly searchable.
Priority plant collections will be digitized and permanently planted priority
collections will be mapped. Research requests will be streamlined via creation
of a Google Form. This will enable collection information to be shared with the
greater research community via outreach to professional botanical societies and
on the Gardenâ€™s social media pages. We expect utilization of the collection to
significantly increase, allowing creative and impactful research to be
undertaken with plants in the collections. During public events showcasing the
collections the public database interface will be promoted to encourage visitors
to explore collections digitally both before, during, and after their visit to
the Garden. Finally, undergraduate and high school students will be integrated
into the digitization project, learning plant morphology and GIS mapping, which
are useful and transferable skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.