* 2050972
* REU Site: Secure, Robust, and Resilient AI-enabled System Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Jiawei Yuan, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 03/31/2024
* USD 404,620.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) has gained significant attention in recent years as
an enabler of technologies such as autonomous cyber-physical systems and
cybersecurity. This funding establishes a new Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth with a
focus on secure, robust, and resilient AI-enabled system engineering. In each
summer, ten undergraduate students will participate in research for ten weeks.
During the research, participants will learn engineering principles to support
the rigorous design and quantitative test of systems and incorporate AI
components to ensure properties such as security, robustness, and resilience.
This program will provide a research experience with a balance of theory, hands-
on practical skills, and applications. The project is led by a team of
experienced faculty who will mentor the participating researchers through a
number of professional development activities, which prepare them to take a
systems perspective while maintaining technical excellence to enhance the
robustness of AI-enabled systems in commercial and societal contexts. This
project will provide unique opportunities for undergraduate students, especially
for those from underrepresented and minority groups and institutions with
limited research resources, to participate in real-world
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial intelligence has gained significant
attention in recent years as an enabler of technologies such as autonomous cyber
physical systems and cyber security. However, engineering principles to support
the rigorous design and quantitative test of systems incorporating AI components
are needed to ensure properties such as security, robustness, and resilience. AI
system engineering research will provide the foundation required to establish
user trust and promote regulatory activities such as safety assurance. To enable
to the promise of AI systems, this project proposes a unique Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site focused on secure, robust, and
resilient AI-enabled system engineering. This REU Site will intertwine AI
research with cybersecurity and systems engineering in a portfolio of
synergistic projects. Ten undergraduate students will be engaged in a ten-week
summer research program to conduct research at the University of Massachusetts
Dartmouth (UMD). The themes of the proposed REU Site are AI, cybersecurity, and
system engineering research and their combined implications. Specifically, the
following research topics will be explored: (1) cyber attacks that degrade the
performance of AI algorithms; (2) AI-enabled cybersecurity against malicious
actors; (3) resilient AI-enabled system engineering methods. These research
themes will create opportunities for multidisciplinary knowledge sharing between
AI and cybersecurity from software, hardware and system engineering
perspectives, including topics in biometrics, UAVs, brain computer interaction,
and signal processing. The REU will prepare talented young researchers to take a
systems perspective, while maintaining technical excellence to enhance the
robustness of AI-enabled systems in commercial and societal contexts. The site
will provide unique opportunities for undergraduate students, especially for
those from underrepresented and minority groups and institutions with limited
research resources, to participate in real-world
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.