* 2050564
* Chicago STEM Teaching Collaborative: Developing a STEM Master Teachers Program
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Nancy Wrinkle, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 02/28/2023
* USD 121,211.00

This project aims to serve the national need for highly effective K-12 STEM
teachers in high-need school districts. It intends to do so by developing a STEM
Master Teaching Fellowship (MTF) model designed to produce master teachers who
are technically, culturally, and pedagogically proficient. Chicago faces a
crisis in teacher retention, particularly for STEM teachers in high-need school
districts. The average school in Chicago Public Schools turns over 50% of its
teachers every five years. Each year almost a third of the 520 Chicago Public
schools have trouble filling one or more teaching positions. The high attrition
rate combined with the general scarcity of STEM teachers is creating an acute
shortage of teachers in high-need schools. This project intends to design an MTF
model that serves diverse, high-need communities and addresses the causes of
teacher attrition. The project will identify, recruit, and select exemplary
teachers to the MTF program. This project will extend the current mentoring of
new STEM teachers from one year to beyond the third year, the point at which
teacher attrition increases sharply. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Capacity
Building project at Northeastern Illinois University includes partnerships with
Chicago Public Schools, City Colleges of Chicago, and the New Teacher Center.
Goals of the project are to (1) build the capacity of key stakeholders to share
expertise and resources and to build a strong community of practice; (2) develop
a mentorship and instructional coaching model rooted in culturally relevant,
culturally sustaining, and community immersive STEM teaching; and (3) build
capacity for in-person, hybrid, and virtual coaching and mentorship that
addresses teachers’ ability to design instruction and facilitate learning
remotely. The theoretical basis for the project’s design resides in research
literature on teacher leader development. It stresses activities and experiences
that promote development of highly effective STEM teaching skills, knowledge of
community, culturally relevant and culturally sustaining pedagogy, and the
ability to skillfully deliver STEM content virtually. The project anticipates
that teacher leaders with these skills and knowledge will have the potential to
transform high-need schools and ameliorate high turnover and remediation needs.
The project intends to conduct a needs-analysis to identify gaps in current CPS
teachers’ pedagogy and cultural competency and deficiencies in CPS STEM student
learning outcomes. The MTF program will be designed to address the identified
gaps. The analysis will also include remote and hybrid mentoring for new
teachers. Potential contributions to the field are high as the project
disseminates key findings locally, regionally, and nationally through STEM
partnerships and conferences. This Capacity Building project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.