* 2050867
* REU Site: Advanced Materials Synthesis at the University of Virginia
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* J. Floro, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 410,440.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This REU site offers unique opportunities for
undergraduate students in the mid-Atlantic region to engage in research in
advanced materials synthesis. The REU students, recruited heavily from
historically black colleges and universities and two-year community colleges,
include all populations that are underrepresented in science and engineering
fields; thus, the students are diverse in gender, race, ethnicity, first-
generation, socioeconomic status, disability, age, and sexual orientation. They
work in interdisciplinary research teams and receive training in materials
science and engineering, state-of-the-art research methods, science
communication, responsible conduct, and career development during the ten-week
summer program. Integrated throughout the REU are mentorship activities,
workshops, and seminars that prepare students for successful careers in
industry, national laboratories, and academia, and build a pipeline of scientist
and engineers to address grand challenges of the 21st century. This REU advances
fundamental research to support applications in additive manufacturing and
printing, nanomaterial synthesis, materials development and discovery, and
electrochemical processes. Hence, the REU students meaningfully contribute to
studies supporting the development of societally-important materials and
technologies relevant to advanced manufacturing, transportation, water
filtration, energy storage, catalysis, and drug
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The participants spend the
summer embedded in a research group working with one of 12 participating faculty
mentors. Interns participate in immersive experiences, with topics falling into
one of four foci: (1) Additive Manufacturing and Printing ; (2) Nanomaterials
Synthesis; (3) Materials Development and Discovery; (4) Electrochemical
Processes. The individual studies support the development of materials and
technologies relevant to advanced manufacturing, transportation, water
filtration, energy storage, catalysis, and drug delivery, which are current
concern to society and where advances will have real and lasting impacts. The
students learn advanced synthesis and characterization techniques and develop
skills for obtaining quality data, providing meaningful analysis of the data,
and communicating their work to their peers. The Advanced Materials Synthesis
REU experience becomes even more transformational for students’ career
preparation by including extensive mentorship training, evaluation and feedback.
The REU impact is assessed and supported by embedded data collection on how
participation in research affects interns’ learning and overall professional
development, beyond simple measures of persistence in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.