* 2050130
* Collaborative Research: From User Reviews to User-Centered Generative Design: Automated Methods for Augmented Designer Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Lu Wang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 211,870.00

This project investigates design processes where the unmet needs of users are
elicited from social media, online forums, and e-commerce platforms, and
translated into new concept recommendations for designers using artificial
intelligence (AI). The motivation stems from the growing abundance of user-
generated feedback and a lack of advanced computational methods for drawing
useful design knowledge and insights from that data. The research will establish
a rigorous computational foundation that (1) enables large-scale elicitation of
user needs from online reviews using advanced natural language processing (NLP)
algorithms, and (2) translates the elicited needs into the visual and functional
aspects of new concepts using novel generative adversarial networks (GAN)
algorithms. The theoretical innovations will advance the fundamental
understanding of how AI can augment the performance and creativity of designers
in early-stage product development processes. This project will boost national
competitiveness in innovation by creating tacit opportunities for designing
innovative, inclusive, and competitive products. The convergent research team
will create outreach initiatives for STEM students, teachers, and
underrepresented minorities, and engage with industry and research stakeholders
to ensure technology-market fit and successful
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
establish a transformative, data-driven paradigm for empathetic design that
augments the ability of designers to uncover and address the critical yet latent
needs of users at scale. The project will create scalable and computationally
efficient NLP algorithms that capture the needs of ordinary users from reviews,
identify the underlying usage contexts, and infer extreme use-cases to
facilitate latent need elicitation. Focus groups and interviews involving ninety
design experts and crowdsourced evaluators will be conducted to test the first
research hypothesis: The NLP algorithms elicit needs that are nonobvious,
difficult to identify, and provide significant value and originality. The
project will build novel GAN architectures and algorithms for generative design
of form and function conditioned on the elicited latent user needs. New
multimodal deep regression models will be developed to evaluate the quality of
the generated samples based on user feedback on existing products. Laboratory
studies involving fifty subjects and fifty evaluators will be performed to test
the second research hypothesis: The GAN-generated design recommendations
significantly improve the quality and variety of the design concepts generated
by human designers. The project will lead to broad societal outcomes by
fostering designer-AI co-creation and innovation centered on empathy with users
to bridge the gap between user need discovery and design
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.