* 2050050
* Weber State Mathematics and Science Teacher Propel Project
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Adam Johnston, Weber State University
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 09/30/2026
* USD 964,914.00

The project aims to serve the national need of preparing more high-quality
teachers of science and mathematics. The "Propel" project will address shortages
of mathematics and science teachers, both locally and nationally, by promoting
teaching opportunities to traditional STEM undergraduates. Production of
qualified science and mathematics teachers has become stagnant in recent years.
Therefore, it is critical to schools and communities that the number of
qualified teachers is boosted in these fields. The project implements an engage-
practice-launch model, in which potential Scholars begin their preparation by
“engaging” in informal teaching experiences, then become Noyce Scholars, where
they “practice” through classroom apprenticeships and specialized coursework,
and then “launch” into the teaching profession within a carefully crafted system
of peer, university, and district support. In addition to new recruitment and
mentoring, the project will provide internships in educational contexts for STEM
undergraduates, a mentored collaborative group focused on supporting mathematics
and science teaching, and two-year scholarships. Two years of scholarship
support will be awarded to students in STEM fields who dedicate themselves to
completing a STEM baccalaureate degree and earning a teaching license, and then
teaching in a local, high-need school district for four years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Weber State University includes
partnerships between its colleges of science and education with Ogden, Weber,
and Davis School Districts in northern Utah. Three goals provide a framework for
the project's activities. First is to increase the number of qualified, licensed
mathematics and science teachers who will teach in secondary classrooms in high-
needs schools in the local area, specifically providing 18 new teachers in these
fields during the 5-year grant duration. Second is to create a clear recruitment
and development pathway for future science and math teachers that includes
tutoring opportunities, local community engagement in education, and opportunity
to work in classrooms during undergraduate programs. And third is to enable
partnerships between Weber State’s College of Science, College of Education, and
local classrooms that feature mentorship opportunities for future and early
career science and math teachers. Scaffolding of teaching opportunities,
support, and classroom mentoring during students’ experiences will provide a
model for teacher recruitment and professional learning. Integrated experiences
in content coursework, education coursework, and secondary classrooms will be
explicit responses to calls for such collaboration. This project will examine
using tutoring opportunities to recruit teachers. Additionally, the project will
test support for and integration of early career teachers within a university
program of teacher preparation. With their mentors, Scholars will begin a
Reflection-in-Practice project in which they reflect on their evolving
professional identity as an educator. All these features will be qualitatively
evaluated by surveying and interviewing students before and after their
participation in the Propel Scholar program, as well as by quantitatively
tracking numbers of students engaged in educational internships and eventually
obtaining licensure in science and math teaching. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.