* 2050635
* Focusing on Professional Engagement to Increase the Number of Highly Effective Science and Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Christine Walker, Utah Valley University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 04/30/2026
* USD 717,778.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing the number of
highly qualified and effective STEM teachers in the United States, particularly
in a high-growth, high-need region of central Utah. To do so, it will recruit
high-achieving juniors or seniors pursuing baccalaureate STEM degrees in
Mathematics, Biology, Chemistry, Physics, or Earth Science. These students will
receive scholarships and be supported to become STEM teachers through mentoring,
content enrichment, professional development, and applied classroom experience.
The project will support these future teachers to develop deep STEM content
knowledge, as well as skills in critical thinking, inquiry learning techniques,
and classroom management. Students in the classrooms of these well-prepared new
teachers are expected to have a greater understanding of STEM concepts, be
better prepared for success in college, and more likely to pursue STEM careers.
In this way, the project expects to help meet 21st century workforce needs.
Moreover, through the emphasis on professional engagement, the teachers prepared
through this project may have increased potential to become leaders in their
schools and districts, and in state and national
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Utah Valley University will
partner with Snow College, a two-year college, as well as the high-needs school
districts of Alpine, Provo, Nebo, and South Sanpete. An underlying project goal
is to increase the number of secondary STEM teachers in high-need local
educational agencies in Utah by: (1) awarding scholarships to 50 science and
mathematics majors and providing them with a strong pre-service teacher training
and in-service teacher support program focused on professional engagement; 2)
strengthening recruitment of future teachers from Snow College; and (3)
conducting longitudinal assessment and research about effective ways to recruit,
train, and retain a high-quality teacher workforce. Project evaluation will
include a longitudinal mixed methods study to investigate the impact of project
activities on teacher retention and eventual leadership. The project team plans
to disseminate project results, including information about the value of teacher
identity and community across a network of schools, districts, and colleges for
increasing teacher development and retention. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.