* 2050012
* Multi-Scale Models for Non-Stationary Spatial Datasets
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Bruno Sanso, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2024
* USD 280,131.00

This research project will develop statistical methods for spatial data using a
model-based approach. The wide availability of location-referenced observations
has resulted in a need to analyze and make predictions for very large
collections of spatial data. Current models for spatial data have difficulties
handling very large numbers of observations irregularly scattered in space. This
project will develop methods for large datasets that contain surfaces with
little variability in some parts of the region under study, but high variability
in other parts of the region. The statistical methods to be developed will be
applicable to the scientific disciplines that use large spatial datasets,
including the quantitative environmental sciences, spatial econometrics, and
statistical climatology. In particular, the project will have an impact on the
study of essential climate variables that are observed from satellites, such as
precipitation, snow cover, and wildfires. The project also will provide an
educational and training experience for graduate students. Publicly available
software will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
develop model-based geostatistical methods for non-stationary spatial fields,
featuring a multi-resolution structure that is able to capture the variability
at different spatial scales. The ability of the model to handle non-stationarity
is enhanced by the fact that the resolution changes in space. To achieve
scalability to large datasets, the model to be developed will induce sparseness
by using compactly supported kernels, coupled with carefully defined prior
distributions that introduce strong regularization for the multi-resolution
coefficients. In addition, the model fitting approach developed in this research
will avoid costly trans-dimensional Monte Carlo sampling by casting the problem
as one of variable selection and Bayesian model averaging. This project will
explore two approaches to model fitting. One approach consists of a stochastic
search to estimate the non-zero coefficients. The second approach involves a
maximization strategy to estimate the optimal model by applying a regularization
term that incorporates information about the structure of a recursive
partitioning of the domain. Initially, the model will be developed for Gaussian
data. Later, it will be extended for observations in the exponential family of
distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.