* 2050476
* Citizen Science: A Pathway to Increase and Diversify the STEM Teaching Force in Rural Georgia
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Erica Decuir, Albany State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 04/30/2026
* USD 1,486,640.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing highly qualified
STEM teachers who can adapt a unique blend of teaching strategies to meet the
needs of students from different cultures and backgrounds. Project leadership
will engage with schools and community partners in southwest Georgia, where
regional challenges caused by poverty and inequity contribute to minimal
production of STEM teachers from the local communities. There is a need to both
grow and diversify the STEM teacher pipeline to meet future staffing demands and
to improve STEM learning outcomes for underrepresented students. The project
addresses this need by developing 12 new STEM teachers and training them to
implement an innovative STEM curriculum based on Citizen Science. Such a
curriculum involves collecting scientific information from nearby areas and
attempting to solve problems that are relevant to the lives of the students and
other citizens in those local communities. The new STEM teachers' training in
Citizen Science will link three key teaching skills: (1) use of culturally
responsive instruction, (2) connecting new understanding and knowledge to what
students already know, and (3) creation of teaching exercises and lessons that
interweave concepts from multiple STEM areas during the problem-solving process.
Project outcomes will help to identify solutions to one of the most challenging
issues facing rural education in America: how to produce adequate numbers of
STEM-certified minority teachers who are exceptionally qualified and willing to
stay in high-need schools. The student population at Albany State University is
more that 70% African American, resulting in a strong potential for increasing
the number of African American STEM teachers in local
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Albany State University includes
partnerships with: 1) school districts in Southwest Georgia, specifically
Dougherty, Randolph and Terrell; 2) the USDA Research Station (Peanut Lab) in
Dawson, GA; and 3) a consortium of non-profit partners including The Albany
Civil Rights Institute, Thronateeska Heritage Center, The Flint RiverQuarium,
and Chehaw Park. The primary goal of the project is to increase and diversify
the STEM teacher pipeline in southwest Georgia school districts. Specific
objectives include: (1) train a cohort of diverse STEM teachers to use
culturally relevant pedagogy; (2) design curricular modules that are problem
based and focus on Citizen Science; (3) provide systematic and ongoing induction
support; and (4) develop STEM teacher leaders. During the 5-year project, the
project will produce 12 STEM teachers in multiple STEM disciplines (e.g.,
mathematics, physics, biology, chemistry), and support their transition from
STEM post-baccalaureates to highly qualified teachers, and to teacher leaders.
Intellectual merit of the project includes contributions to research and
practice for building a diverse STEM teacher pipeline and a more STEM literate
public. By engaging higher education and its school system partners in Citizen
Science, this project intends to encourage teacher education programs to
redesign instructional practices and curricula to draw upon the cultural assets
of teacher candidates and students they will serve. The project's focus on
Citizen Science will link the learning principles of culturally responsive
pedagogy, constructivism, and integrative learning. The project directly
addresses critical STEM teacher shortages, especially in rural areas, by
strengthening teacher preparation to meet the challenges of underrepresented
groups. This Track 2: Teaching Fellowships project is supported through the
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.