* 2050874
* REU Site: University of Maryland Eastern Shore Research Experience for Undergraduates in Marine and Estuarine Science
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Paulinus Chigbu, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 323,985.00

This REU Site award to the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, located in
Princess Anne, MD, will support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during
the summers of 2021- 2023. It is anticipated that a total of 24 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities or from an under-
represented group, will be trained in the program. The program will target
rising sophomores and rising juniors. Students will learn how research is
conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. Assessment of the program will be done through the online SALG
URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine
their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual focus of the REU
program is on marine and estuarine science, particularly in coastal lagoons.
Students will have opportunities to work on a variety of research projects, such
as eutrophication effects on benthic macroinvertebrates, mechanisms of biofilm
formation and antifouling effects of extracts from natural sources, climate
variability and food web dynamics, antibiotic resistance of Vibrio species
isolated from oysters, and biology and ecology of gelatinous zooplankton. The
program will provide rigorous education via faculty mentorship on research;
weekly workshops, discussions and seminars on valuable science topics; field
trips that provide an educationally enriching experience; a final research
report; and oral and poster presentations by the students at the end-of-program
symposium. Professional development activities will include training in GIS and
scientific ethics/responsible conduct of research. Program assessment will occur
by administering questionnaires to students. Students will be recruited using
electronic e-mail, list serves and fliers that will be distributed to targeted
schools. Students will be selected based on their application materials that
will include a standard on-line application and cumulative grade point average,
essays describing their research interests and career goals, two letters of
recommendation, and official academic transcripts. A minimum cumulative grade
point average of 2.7 on a 4.0 scale will be required. More information about the
program is available by visiting https://www.umes.edu/reu, or by contacting the
PI (Dr. Paulinus Chigbu at pchigbu@umes.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Margaret Sexton
at masexton@umes.edu). This REU Site is supported by the Division of Oceanic
Sciences (OCE) in the Directorate for Geosciences (GEO), the Division of Human
Resources Development (HRD) in the Directorate for Education and Human Resources
(EHR), and the Division for Biological Infrastructure (DBI) in the Directorate
for Biological Sciences (BIO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.