* 2050028
* Recovering Signals Sparse in a Frame: Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2023
* Xuemei Chen, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 90,774.00

During the last two decades, there has been an explosive growth of the
development of high dimensional data sensing, representation, and recovery.
Problems such as medical imaging in the form of MRI or CT, hyperspectral
satellite imaging, radar imaging, and remote sensing can involve large
dimensional data where classically designed methods become impractical. The
challenges of high dimensional data require techniques such as compressed
sensing, which is able to extract the nonlinear low-dimensional structure of the
signal. The investigator aims to further advance the scope of compressed sensing
with an emphasis on signals that are sparsely represented by a collection of
atoms, or a frame. This award will support the development of mathematical
techniques for this problem as well as its applications on imaging while
providing theoretical guarantees. The analysis in this project will apply
broadly to signal processing problems like phase retrieval, one-bit sensing, and
many data science problems in general. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Compressed sensing
aims to accurately and stably recover sparse signals from drastically
undersampled measurements. The investigator will perform a theoretical analysis
for recovering signals that are sparsely synthesized in a frame or dictionary
from very few measurements and conduct numerical experiments on imaging
applications where subsampled Fourier or convolution measurements are used. This
is motivated by (1) numerous practical applications in MRI, MIMO radar,
tomography, remote sensing, etc., where sparsity is exploited; (2) the benefit
of robust signal acquisition and expansion in redundant frames; and (3) the lack
of theoretical work on the synthesis-sparse sensing problem. The expected
outcomes of this project are building a framework of this synthesis-sparse
sensing problem, analyzing the effectiveness of randomized sensing, and
improving image restoration quality with provable
guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.