* 2050228
* Assessing the long-term stability of adaptive radiations using the fossil record
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Melissa Kemp, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 595,062.00

The proposed research uses an interdisciplinary approach to study
diversification and extinction processes in changing environments. Adaptive
radiation, the process whereby organisms diversify to fulfill a variety of
ecological roles, is responsible for producing many of the spectacular
ecological communities on our planet. But whether the ecological communities
generated from adaptive radiations persist over long timescales–and the extent
to which they are reshaped by environmental change–remains an unresolved
question. This project will reconstruct morphological diversity in a model
system–the Anolis lizards of the Caribbean–to evaluate the longevity of
morphological diversity generated by adaptive radiations. This research bridges
the biological sciences and the geosciences, providing an interdisciplinary
platform to train a diverse set of students, including undergraduates from
underrepresented backgrounds and students who are training to become K-12 STEM
teachers. Additionally, 3 dimensional models of skulls generated by this project
will be used to develop new educational modules on morphological evolution and
diversity change through time that will be deployed in undergraduate and high
school classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research provides
significant information in four main areas: (1) characterizing how species
partition morphospace in an adaptive radiation; (2) establishing whether
ecological communities persist over geologic timescales; (3) identifying the
nature of phenotypic change over geological timescales; and (4) determining if
shifts in phenotypic diversity are correlated to environmental changes. These
issues will be addressed through the creation of a comprehensive, high-
resolution X-ray chromatography dataset of extant Anolis species from alcohol-
preserved museum specimens and integration of those data with Anolis fossil
specimens from throughout the Greater Antilles. The research is relevant to
evolutionary biologists, ecologists, paleontologists, and will be particularly
instructive in identifying how ecological communities might change in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.