* 2050986
* Where the runoff begins: rethinking the role of impervious area in urban stormwater management
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Hua Zhang, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 199,966.00

Information on watershed imperviousness has been widely used for assessing the
hydrologic and environmental impacts of urbanization, developing urban
hydrologic and water quality models, and designing stormwater management
strategies ranging from drainage charge to green infrastructure across the
world. The description of watershed imperviousness has relied on the concepts of
total impervious area and effective impervious area. Both of these are lumped
and static measures that emphasize the extent of imperviousness, but they lack
consideration of the spatial pattern of various impervious surfaces. This
knowledge gap affects the reliability of hydrologic models that tend to
conceptualize pervious and impervious surfaces as two lumped components with no
interactions. This project aims to answer: 1) How do spatial heterogeneity and
hydrologic connectivity of impervious surfaces affect stormwater runoff in small
urban watersheds? 2) How can the understanding of this mechanism benefit the
modeling of stormwater runoff? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project conceptualizes
the impervious source area (ISA) of stormwater runoff as a combination of a
constant component and a dynamic component with its hydrologic connectivity
affected by pervious surfaces. The research methods highlight the use of small
uncrewed aircraft systems (UAS) in land cover classification and flow direction
analysis with centimeter-level spatial resolution. Using Corpus Christi in south
Texas as an urban laboratory, the project efforts will consist of seven
interlinked research tasks across three phases, starting with aerial and ground
data collection, transitioning into the progressive characterization of ISA
through an integrated geospatial-hydrologic framework, and culminating in the
development of a new three-component CN model that can utilize remote sensing
data at different levels. The findings of this project will lead to a spatially
explicit understanding of the effect of impervious surfaces on stormwater runoff
processes and provide an improved scientific basis for developing reliable
stormwater management strategies. Undergraduate students will be integrated into
the research team. TAMU-CC is a predominantly minority serving university and
this project will provide URM undergraduate and graduate students in these
programs with a variety of training and learning opportunities, which will serve
TX workforce needs in the areas of water resources and civil engineering. The
project team will participate in TAMU-CC's UAS Summer Camp program that aims to
train local high school students and promote their interest in STEM fields
related to UAS research. Scientific data and tools of this project will be
disseminated through an interactive online platform developed using WebGIS and
Google Earth API techniques. The project team will produce a set of videos to
introduce the use of UAS and remote sensing in engineering hydrology and
stormwater management. The project team will collaborate with the City of Corpus
Christi to enhance its stormwater education program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.