* 2050887
* REU Site: Exploring Aerospace Research at the Intersection of Mechanics, Materials Science, and Aerospace Physiology
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Virginie Rollin, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 433,369.00

As humankind reaches for the stars to journey to the next frontier in space,
research on aerospace materials, space biology, and physiology are crucial for
understanding how mechanics, space biology, and human health may be affected by
spaceflight and space exploration. Embry Riddle Aeronautical University (ERAU),
Daytona Beach, Florida, will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Site in experimental and computational multidisciplinary aerospace
research, focusing on mechanics, materials science, and aerospace physiology by
inviting ten undergraduate students for a 10-week summer program. The students
will gain experience in materials synthesis, coating, sampling characterization,
computer modeling directly related to various fields of aerospace, mechanical,
materials, and environmental engineering, as well as space microbiology and
aerospace physiology. The REU participants will publish their findings in peer-
reviewed journals and/or present at professional meetings leading to broad
dissemination of new knowledge created in the undergraduate research projects.
Moreover, seminars will expose the students to various aspects of graduate
school (applications, scholarships, presentation skills, scientific writing) and
professional life. Recruitment efforts will attract students from
underrepresented and minority groups from universities with limited research
facilities. Finally, participants will have a chance to engage K-12 students
through STEM summer camps at Embry-Riddle and inspire the next generation of
young people to consider a career in science and engineering. Believing in both
theory and practice; the REU site is interested in experimental as well as
mathematical modeling of difficult problems while at the same time building real
systems for demonstrating those solutions in real-life
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU-research projects are organized around
three main axes: (1) thermal applications; (2) biomonitoring in space; and (3)
biomimetics. The undergraduate research projects contribute to the fundamental
understanding of aerospace sciences, materials science, aerospace physiology,
and topics including space thermal management, bioinspired hierarchical
structures, and space health (e.g., effects of microgravity and space
radiation). The projects are focused on two main ideas for expanded space
exploration: (1) the need for technology supporting human space travel and
extended stays, and (2) the need to investigate the effects of space travel on
the body. Some examples of research projects include the fabrication of a
flexible, stretchable, and self-healable platform for aerospace applications, a
study of intracellular reactive oxygen species when exposed to space radiation,
or biomarker sensing using flexible transistors on skin. The site will initiate
the establishment of a mentoring relationship by conducting regular Golden Eagle
Meetings with their mentors. Students will directly conduct research starting
with literature review, conducting experiments and/or computational work,
gathering and analyzing data, and presenting their results. The undergraduate
student projects have short-term achievable milestones while simultaneously
contributing to longer-term scientific goals and technological applications. At
the completion of the program, students will present their research findings at
a summer undergraduate research symposium at ERAU. The program assessment will
be performed in collaboration with the center of learning and teaching
excellence to analyze the effect of the research experience on student
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.