* 2050338
* Meeting the Demand for Secondary STEM Teachers in Rural and Urban High-need School Districts in Kansas and Missouri
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* ERIN MORRIS, Baker University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 03/31/2026
* USD 602,483.00

This project aims to serve the national interest of growing and diversifying the
STEM workforce, including secondary STEM teachers. To do so, the project will
recruit and support 24 STEM undergraduates to become certified secondary
teachers of biology, chemistry, or mathematics. The project’s objectives will be
achieved through: (1) an innovative mentorship program pairing teacher
candidates with active teachers and peer mentors; (2) a series of online modules
focused on developing essential professional skills, learning more about
inclusive pedagogies, and addressing current issues in STEM education; (3)
online courses offered between academic terms; and (4) induction supports
designed to sustain teacher graduates in their first years of teaching. The
project intends to contribute new knowledge about best practices for preparing
STEM teachers and fill a gap in the literature about elements affecting
retention of STEM teachers in rural and urban classrooms. To analyze these
differences, project leaders will develop a rigorous and dynamic STEM education
program focused on training student teachers to succeed in diverse classroom
settings. Additionally, project leaders will collaborate to design teacher
surveys focused on: pedagogy, classroom resources, and classroom management;
lab-based teaching and the availability of supports unique to STEM classrooms;
and the teaching environment, including parent and community support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Baker University includes partnerships
with Grandview Consolidated School District #4 and Topeka Public Schools. The
project objectives are to: (1) recruit, retain, and graduate 24 undergraduate
STEM majors seeking teacher licensure in biology, chemistry, and mathematics
over the five-year period; (2) provide field experiences for STEM teacher
candidates in high-need school districts; (3) provide teacher induction support
after placement of the STEM teacher candidates; (4) improve STEM teacher
candidates’ sense of preparedness for the classroom through enrichment
opportunities, professional development, and mentorship with in-service
teachers; and (5) increase knowledge about the different causes of STEM teacher
attrition in rural and urban school districts. More specifically, the project
will explore if challenges faced by STEM teachers differ between rural and urban
school districts and whether ongoing professional development connected with a
teacher certification program might address some of these challenges. Project
outcomes and evaluation will generate evidence about successful programmatic
elements that may be replicated at similar institutions. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.