* 2050336
* A Collaborative Regional Alliance to Prepare STEM Secondary Teachers for Service in Rural, High-Need Schools and School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Jaye Luke, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 02/28/2026
* USD 739,743.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing qualified and
innovative STEM teachers among a rural population that has been
disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Transforming the early
experiences of future teachers can help to ensure the Nation has qualified STEM
educators capable of inspiring and preparing the future STEM workforce. The
project intends to do so by recruiting, preparing, and supporting a diverse
group of undergraduate STEM majors to become highly skilled STEM secondary
teachers. These future teachers will include community college students and
lower division students who represent the region's demographic diversity. The
project intends to prepare these students to serve as highly qualified middle
and high school STEM teachers in rural, high-need schools and school districts.
To recruit, prepare, and support these STEM students, project partners will
coordinate two teacher preparation pathways that emphasize early STEM research
and inquiry experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at California State
University Monterey Bay, a Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI) will leverage a
regional alliance between three other post-secondary HSIs (Cabrillo College,
Hartnell College, and Monterey Peninsula College) and the County Office of
Education, representing 24 school districts in California's Central Coast
region. Responding to consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, the project will
provide future teachers with online instruction and prepare them to be skilled
online and in-person teachers. For example, it will help future STEM teachers
develop their capacity to facilitate STEM inquiry in ways that integrate digital
citizenship and technology. It aims to recruit, support, and prepare 30 new STEM
teachers who will be recruited from undergraduate STEM majors (including
biology, computer science, environmental science, marine science, mathematics,
or statistics) at California State University Monterey Bay and partnering
community colleges. The students will receive scholarship support for their
senior year and post-baccalaureate STEM teacher credentialing year. In addition,
mid-career STEM professionals will be recruited and receive stipend support to
complete the one-year post-baccalaureate STEM teacher credentialing program. The
Next Generation Science Standards Regional Collaborative Teacher Network
coordinated by the County Office of Education will provide the prospective
teachers with access to an early, inclusive STEM community of practice of
current in-service teachers who are implementing best practices for STEM
instruction and student learning. Early STEM inquiry, teaching, and mentored
research opportunities will integrate active learning and culturally responsive
pedagogy to build early social capital and create a diverse STEM teacher
community. Project outcomes have potential to provide a model for the California
Community College system (115 colleges) and California State University system
(23 universities) to broaden the applicant pool of highly qualified STEM
teachers. Dissemination of the model and strategies will help to address short-
and long-term teacher shortages through an expanded STEM teacher preparation
pipeline. Qualified and innovative STEM teachers in rural districts will have
critical roles in developing the STEM workforce to meet emerging critical needs.
This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers
in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.