* 2050455
* Collaborative Research: LTREB Renewal: Feedbacks between evolution and demography in severely fragmented prairie populations of the purple coneflower, Echinacea angustifolia
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Ruth Shaw, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2026
* USD 490,652.00

This project continues a long-term study of natural selection in the purple
coneflower, Echinacea angustifolia. At the beginning of the 1800s, prairie
covered a great swath of North America. Since then, about 99% of the tallgrass
prairie has been destroyed. The small, isolated patches of prairie that remain
harbor great biodiversity, yet rates of local plant extinctions are alarmingly
high in these remnant prairies. This project is advancing scientific
understanding of why some populations go extinct and others persist. This
project builds on a long-term investigation of these ecological and genetic
processes and feedbacks between them affecting a model prairie plant species.
The purple coneflower typifies prairie plants in its long lifespan, often
decades, and in other attributes. This study is the first of its kind to measure
the capacity of a population to adapt. In addition to advancing scientific
knowledge and disseminating information to scientists and land stewards, this
project provides research experience and training to diverse participants at a
level appropriate for their interests and career stage: high school, college,
and graduate students, teachers, and citizen scientists in both Minnesota and at
the Chicago Botanic Garden. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses formal
quantitative genetic approaches and common garden experimental designs to
quantify additive genetic variance for fitness, population differentiation, and
inbreeding depression. Researchers will use aster statistical models to estimate
the amount of genetic variation in Darwinian fitness of individuals planted in
2003, many of which flowered for the first time in 2015. Other experiments will
estimate the reduction in mean fitness due to mating between siblings. Together
with demographic censuses of remnant populations, started in 1996, these studies
will yield comprehensive assessments of population growth rates and the
potential for evolutionary rescue. A key strength of the research is that
experiments are conducted in a realistic habitat, including interactions of the
coneflower with its pollinators and herbivores. The core datasets comprise
continuous individual fitness records, including annual survival and
reproduction of over 17,000 plants in 10 experimental plots and across 27
natural prairie remnants in Minnesota. These datasets, which will extend up to
30 years by the end of the project, offer a rare window into the interplay of
evolutionary and ecological processes of a long-lived
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.