* 2050706
* REU Site: Treatment-Related Research for Children with Social, Emotional, and Behavioral Problems
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2025
* Frances Wymbs, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2025
* USD 294,751.00

This project is funded by the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites Program in the SBE Directorate. There are scientific and societal benefits
to our program and this program provides students (i.e., scholars) with
intellectually enriching research, academic, and professional activities. The
cost of children’s social, emotional, and behavioral problems (SEB) to society
is profound (i.e., with annual costs estimated at $247 billion across youth with
various SEB), so training young scholars intent on improving care for these
youth benefits both individuals and society. There are 4 broad impacts of this
program. First, this program significantly enhances the trajectory of some of
the country’s brightest scholars. Second, this program enriches the work of
faculty and graduate student mentors by improving their ability to shape
scholars from diverse backgrounds and by integrating these diverse perspectives
into their research. Third, through collaborations among junior scientists and
faculty with diverse perspectives, participating scholars and mentors breathe
new life into traditional ways of thinking, impact the field via presentations
and publications, and grow the field of treatment-related research. Fourth, this
program increases the visibility of participating scholars and scholars’
valuable research. Previous REU scholars have mentioned that participating in
this REU has been the single most important experience that they have had in
determining their career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site is a well-
structured program for a cohort of nine students each year who are interested in
treatment-related research for children with social, emotional, and behavioral
problems (SEB). There are 5 aims: (1) Conduct individual, mentored-research
projects; (2) Build foundational knowledge on treatment-related research for
youth with SEBs; (3) Gain professional development skills; (4) Obtain
opportunities to bridge science and practice; and (5) Enhance diverse
perspectives. The site offers a 1-week online orientation as well as independent
research training, mentoring, and coursework experiences during a 7-week
intensive summer institute. This unique experience is led by highly qualified,
productive faculty in clinical psychology, sociology, health psychology,
integrative primary care, and school mental health fields who have a track
record of involving undergraduates in treatment-related research. Additionally,
a network of mentors from a variety of disciplines and underrepresented
backgrounds enhance and deepen mentoring related to important topics in academia
and research. This program increases students' ability to conduct independent
research studies and learn other foundational research skills to increase their
chances of admission into graduate school and a career in research.
Additionally, many of the projects led by undergraduate scholars have been or
will be published, informing and innovating the fields of treatment-related
research for children with SEB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.