* 2050765
* REU Site: Integrated Computational and Experimental (ICE) REU at North Carolina State University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Elon Ison, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2024
* USD 284,672.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award to North Carolina
State University (NCSU) supports the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during
the summers of 2022-2024. At this site, supported by the Department of Defense
in partnership with the NSF REU program and the Division of Chemistry, students
take part in research projects spanning the field of chemistry. This program
integrates computation and experiment, such that the computational component
provides a unifying theme across a diverse set of projects. Participants will
engage in a series of activities that facilitate their professional development
including workshops on ethics, preparing a poster, applying and preparing for
graduate school or industrial careers, and science communication. Participants
will also learn about industrial and governmental research and non-research
career options so that they can make informed decisions about their own career
and educational paths. Other social activities offered on campus provide
participants opportunities to interact with fellow researchers in other
undergraduate research programs to gain a sense of community and collegial
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Available student research projects at this REU
site cover many topics in chemistry including: materials science (polymer
synthesis, nanomaterials synthesis), life sciences (biomolecule-directed
synthesis, biomolecule sensing, and biomolecular interaction studies), and
energy sciences (homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis, electron capture,
biofuels, photochemistry), as well as research in more traditional chemistry
sub-fields (organic, inorganic, physical and analytical). An advantage of the
integrated computational/experimental nature of program is that the
computational aspect serves as a unifying theme for participants regardless of
the nature of the individual research project. The program takes advantage of
the geographic location of NCSU and exposes students to careers in non-academic
settings in the Research Triangle Park (RTP) area. Additionally, students
participate in various activities organized by the NCSU Office of Undergraduate
Research that are designed to encourage interaction with other undergraduate
researchers and aid in their professional development as they embark on future
careers. The program aims to recruit students from underrepresented groups
(persons of color, women, and first generation college students) from local
HBCUs (Historically Black Colleges and Universities), rural and non-urban
primarily undergraduate institutions, and from Puerto Rican
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.