* 2050736
* REU Site: Advancing Space Sciences through Undergraduate Research Experiences (ASSURE)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Matthew Fillingim, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 05/31/2022
* USD 159,728.00

The Advancing Space Sciences through Undergraduate Research Experience (ASSURE)
program at the University of California Space Sciences Laboratory provides
undergraduate students with an immersive experience in space science research
and engineering. Students are exposed to a multidisciplinary research laboratory
setting, conducting cutting edge research alongside leaders in the field. The
ASSURE program actively recruits participants from community colleges and other
institutions serving populations historically underrepresented in the space and
geosciences with the aim of providing research experience early in their
careers. The interdisciplinary approach taken in the program is reflective of
the range of skills that students may eventually face in the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASSURE program supports research projects
relating to the development of spacecraft instrumentation and hardware, data
analysis, and high performance computing at the forefront of federally funded
geospace research. Students involved in the program acquire experience required
for design and management of experimental research programs and support a range
of on-going geospace missions. The research staff at SSL is composed of a
diverse international community working on a range of space physics missions in
radio astronomy, magnetospheric physics, heliophysics, planetary science, high
energy astrophysics, and maintains robust engineering facilities. The range of
work at SSL provides ASSURE students with the opportunity to gain a
comprehensive exposure to a range of geospace research, including space weather
and other phenomena of national importance. Students will receive a boot camps
session in coding and professional development on communication skills including
elevator pitches and presenting at a professional
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.