* 2050659
* Developing Mathematics Teacher Leaders for Connecticut Alliance School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Gladis Kersaint, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,499,875.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing highly effective
mathematics teacher leaders who can address mathematics-specific instructional
needs of the 33 high-need school districts in Connecticut. The Connecticut
Alliance Districts serve over 40% of the state’s students and most of its
students of color, low-income students, and English learner students. To support
these districts, the project will implement a five-year mathematics leadership
development program for mathematics teacher leaders. The project aims to use the
mathematics teacher leader program to strengthen, advance, and grow the body of
research on teacher leadership and its impact on supporting equitable outcomes
in mathematics education. Participants will engage in workshops, a graduate
certificate program, and a mathematics leadership academy. Project activities
will augment the skills mathematics teacher leaders need to serve as mentors,
coaches, and professional development providers for prospective and current
mathematics teachers and enhance the state’s capacity to deliver ongoing
mathematics teacher professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
at the University of Connecticut includes collaborators from the Neag School of
Education and College of Liberal Arts and Sciences and partnerships with the
Connecticut State Department of Education and Alliance Districts. The project
will recruit 20 exemplary in-service secondary mathematics teachers from the
Alliance Districts. The goals are to: (1) develop a cadre of knowledgeable and
effective mathematics teacher leaders; (2) utilize mathematics teacher leaders
as instructional leaders within their schools, districts, and throughout the
state; and (3) develop programming for and a system to deliver ongoing learning
opportunities for other mathematics teachers and teacher leaders (e.g., graduate
certificate program, online learning modules). Overall, this program is designed
to: (1) impact a large number of diverse students (e.g., race/ethnicity, socio-
economic status, English learners); (2) promote the retention of mathematics
teachers in high-needs school settings; (3) enhance instructional effectiveness,
with a specific focus on equity; and (4) create infrastructure for increasing
math education instructional capacity. The project will be informed and enhanced
by its engagement in a rigorous evaluation process. Lessons-learned and project
outcomes will be disseminated through two project conferences, Alliance
Districts network, practitioner and research articles, and the project website.
This Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships project is supported through the
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.