* 2050899
* REU Site: Collaborative Research: Establishing New Generations of scholars to Amplify and Grow Engineering Education (ENGagED)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Denise Simmons, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/29/2024
* USD 68,890.00

As engineering education research (EER) is a relatively nascent field compared
to other disciplinary realms such as electrical or mechanical engineering, the
pathways to gaining exposure to conduct EER are not as robust. At current, there
is little awareness of engineering education among engineering undergraduate
students across the country to identify related interests. Further, there are
limited professional venues targeted for students with interests in engineering
education research related topics. With a growing need for scholars in the field
of engineering education, this program will create a low risk—high pay off
opportunity to promote exposure to the field at an early enough point to inform
career trajectories. Additionally, as the number of Black and Latinx students
attending graduate school across all engineering disciplines make up less than 4
percent combined, this experience could potentially serve to introduce an area
of research that might differentially attract students compared to traditional
engineering disciplines by the range of research promoting topics such as equity
and social justice to makerspaces and asynchronous learning. As there is a
direct link between research and practice, the goal is that diversifying the
individuals conducting engineering education research could help establish more
inclusive and just practices throughout engineering. The REU Site Establishing
New Generations of scholars to Amplify and Grow Engineering Education (ENGagED)
will address the aforementioned limitations by affording an introductory
experience to research in engineering education for undergraduate students while
also aiming to broaden participation in engineering. ENGagED will be led by
Arizona State University (ASU) and University of Florida (UF) to provide a
shared experience for engineering undergraduate students to engage in
engineering education research and establish a visible pathway to careers in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this ENGagED REU is to provide a rich
exposure to and research experience in engineering education with a focus on
underrepresented students. Having a broad range of projects anchored in
engineering education research with threads of broadening participation woven
into their framework will serve to expose students to the vast topics covered
through the engineering education taxonomy. The goal is that ENGagED may serve
as a model for identifying and attracting future talent to meet the growing
discipline, promote visibility of the field, and potentially, provide a
critical, formative experience in engineering education that results in
increased student awareness, knowledge of pathways to the field, an expanded
pool of talent and community of inclusive scholars. The explicit objectives of
the ENGagED REU will be: 1) To provide engaging research experiences to
undergraduates (i.e., depth), and specifically, students from underrepresented
groups—which for this project will focus on Black and Latinx students and as a
result of intersectionality may also include women, people from low SES
backgrounds and first-generation individuals among other minoritized
identities—that create awareness of and exposure to the field of engineering
education; 2) To equip students with the foundation necessary to collect,
analyze, interpret and disseminate quality engineering education research; 3) To
provide an opportunity for engineering undergraduates from underrepresented
groups to be mentored by graduate students and faculty from underrepresented
groups while all students learn to work collaboratively in a dynamic,
interdisciplinary research environment; and 4) To use the introduction to
engineering education research (i.e., breadth) facilitated by contributions of
the faculty mentors and scholars network as a means of increasing exposure to
research catalyzing interest in the field to grow the talent pool of future
engineering education researchers, with an immediate focus on graduate studies.
Through this REU site, cultivation of a diverse talent pool will serve to
identify and develop future talent to populate the engineering education
research community. The comprehensive set of expertise and breadth represented
by the PIs, Faculty Scholars Network, faculty research mentors and Faculty
Scholar of Outreach create an introductory exposure to engineering education for
the REU students that will serve them well in any future engineering education
pursuits. The program will foster future scholars with rich foundations in the
EER domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site is co-funded by the Division of
Engineering Education &amp; Centers (Directorate for Engineering), and the
Division of Undergraduate Education (Directorate for Education and Human
Resources).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.