* 2050133
* REU Site: Mathematical, Statistical, and Computational Methods in the Life Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Chunmei Wang, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 03/31/2024
* USD 275,585.00

The REU program Mathematical, Statistical, and Computational Methods in the Life
Sciences is an eight-week intensive program that actively engages undergraduate
students in research projects designed to introduce them to mathematical,
statistical, and computational methods that are used in the study of life
science questions. Students work individually or in groups of two or three,
under the supervision and guidance of three faculty mentors. The research
projects cover a wide array of life science applications on the dynamics of
populations, epidemics, organisms, cells, and proteins. The objectives of the
program are to engage undergraduate students, especially those from
underrepresented groups and from academic institutions with limited STEM
research opportunities, in innovative research projects, to expose them to
active research environments, and to provide them with the necessary technical
skills to do independent research. Through a series of educational and social
activities, REU participants have opportunities to enhance their professional
development and to form a network of partners among the participants and
collaborators in the program. Faculty continue to mentor the REU participants
after the 8-week program to guide them in writing their results for publication
and to assist them as they transition into graduate school. The goal of the
program is to motivate and to inspire the REU participants to continue graduate
study in mathematics, statistics, or a related field and to pursue academic or
other research careers in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
projects of the REU program introduce undergraduate students to mathematical,
statistical, and computational methods that enable them to pursue independent
research on current questions in the life sciences. Under the guidance of
experienced faculty mentors, the student research projects will involve (1)
development of new stochastic models and computational methods to address
biological questions on emerging diseases or species invasion; (2) new methods
in time-nonhomogeneous processes to determine times at which zoonotic
transmission risk is greatest; (3) development of numerical methods, especially
the primal-dual weak Galerkin finite element methods, with applications in
Nernst-Planck model arising from life sciences; (4) development of optimization
methods with the mathematical and statistical constraints inherent to the
biological and chemical aspects of the structural alignment of protein binding
sites; and (5) new insights on the effect of community structure and nutrient
cycling when aquatic food webs are subject to stoichiometric constraints. The
research projects will build on current results and aim to contribute to new
mathematical, statistical, and computational methods, algorithm design,
analysis, data collection, and implementation to address important complex
problems in the life sciences. The results from the research projects will be
disseminated through student participation in conferences and workshops, and
through publications in mathematical, statistical, and biological journals. In
addition, code packages that are developed will be available on the program's
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.