* 2050600
* Collaborative Research: Changes In Landscape, Labor And Livelihood In Long Chronological Context
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Christopher Pool, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2025
* USD 106,532.00

This project examines the strategies that households and communities undertake
when dealing with economic and environmental uncertainty. The investigation
focuses on how global and local fluctuation in sugar markets, political shifts,
demographic decline, and environmental change, have affected the households and
communities of field and mill workers, beginning with conscripted indigenous as
well as enslaved and mestizo communities of the colonial era. Archaeological
reconstructions situate present and past stressors, evaluations of risk, and
responses within their historical context, a perspective that is not accessible
through a focus on any single point of time, or through documents alone. This
project contributes to the comparative assessment of economic trends, human-
environmental interactions, resilience, and identity during periods of profound
cultural change, and facilitate nuanced approaches to community development. It
includes collaboration and education opportunities for multiple participants.
The researchers engage local communities to determine what components of the
study they find most useful in terms of application to policy and community
resilience. The diachronic nature of the project means that it examines how past
processes, revealed archaeologically, have influenced contemporary livelihoods
and their diversification in the face of rapid economic change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global economic integration, agricultural intensification,
and the expansion of cash crop production has transformed and continues to
affect communities that were once subjected to colonial domination. The
researchers are specifically interested in how global economic integration has
affected resilience strategies of local communities and households. How have
people evaluated and responded to risk? What alternatives to market
participation have they adopted? The study region hosted complex indigenous
agricultural communities, which colonists conscripted to work in local sugar
mills. An archaeological approach to the resilience of household adaptive
strategies will enable global economic factors to be examined within the context
of historical sugar communities. Paleoenvironmental reconstructions,
geomorphological assessments of the impact of intensive agriculture on area
soils and waterways, and archival analysis will complement and contextualize the
archaeological study of these sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.