* 2050507
* Spectroscopic and kinetic interrogation of organometallic complexes encapsulated in zeolites for gas-phase alkane oxidation catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Martin Bakker, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 04/30/2024
* USD 590,470.00

The U.S. has vast reserves of natural gas. While most natural gas is burned for
its heating value or to generate electricity, the light hydrocarbons that
comprise natural gas are also attractive feedstocks for manufacturing readily-
transportable liquid fuels and chemicals. Catalysis plays an important role in
natural gas up-conversion processes by accelerating reaction rates and improving
energy efficiency. Even with catalytic assistance, however, the conversion of
natural gas to higher-value liquid products remains challenging. The project
addresses that challenge through research aimed at new catalysts capable of
oxidizing methane to methanol, thus supporting U.S. energy security and economic
competitiveness in the chemical sector. The project includes educational
activities focused on inspiring undergraduate students to pursue research, and
outreach activities aimed at public science engagement with the local community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low-temperature transformation of light alkanes to useful
fuels and chemicals is a persistent challenge in the catalysis community. Porous
catalysts with mononuclear Fe active sites have been studied extensively for
alkane oxidation reactions, motivated by metalloenzymes that oxidize methane to
methanol at ambient temperature. Metal-containing zeolites and metal organic
frameworks are particularly attractive for emulating the reaction environment in
metalloenzymes, given the presence of primary binding sites with the requisite
local configurations that are housed in reaction pockets of molecular
dimensions. However, heterogeneity in the arrangements of atoms in binding
sites, and the size and shape of the cavities that confine them, complicate both
physicochemical characterization and description of prevalent reaction pathways.
Circumvention of these complications is possible if both the local coordination
and the secondary confining voids that comprise the active centers are well-
defined. A promising route towards this aim is encapsulation of molecular
complexes within the supercages of faujasite zeolites. Specifically, the project
explores hydrothermal synthesis of metal phthalocyanines (MPCs) encapsulated in
faujasite to control the identities and ligands of metal-central atoms, and to
perform a combined spectroscopic and kinetic study of coupled light alkane
oxidation and nitrogen oxide reduction reactions over these materials. An over-
arching goal is to assign spectroscopic signatures and chemical events to active
centers of known structures, thereby overcoming complications inherent in
existing metal-containing porous catalysts, while simultaneously creating a
materials platform that allows for control over the electronics of active
centers in hydrothermally stable, single-site heterogeneous catalysts. These
experiments will allow straightforward quantification of turnover frequencies
and intrinsic kinetic and thermodynamic parameters, while also evaluating
hydrothermal stability, time-on-stream stability, and broader utility of these
materials in gas-phase oxidation reactions. Undergraduate students will be
heavily involved with the research and will gain valuable skills to prepare them
for graduate studies in Chemistry or Chemical Engineering. Public science
outreach will communicate findings and research goals to the local community
through experimental demonstrations. Results from the project will also serve as
lecture material in a new graduate-level elective on spectroscopic
characterization of inorganic solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.