* 2050232
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Genome Science and Computational Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Madhusudan Choudhary, Sam Houston State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 402,562.00

This REU Site award to Sam Houston State University, located in Huntsville, TX,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2021
– 2023. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students (sophomore/junior),
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities or from an under-
represented group will be trained in the program. Students will conduct
interdisciplinary research in Genome Science and Computational Biology and
analyze genome, transcriptome, and proteome data using high-throughput
computational approaches and bioinformatics tools to validate biological
hypotheses. Students will learn the comprehensive scientific process and present
the results at regional/national scientific conferences. Students will be
encouraged to pursue graduate studies and research careers in genomics and
bioinformatics. Assessment of the program will be done thru the online SALG
URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine
their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will focus on education
and research training in computational and bioinformatic approaches on genome,
transcriptome, and proteome data analyses. Students will conduct full-time
summer research with faculty members from Biological Sciences, Chemistry, and
Computer Science. The research activity of each student will be co-mentored by a
biologist/biochemist and/or a computer scientist. Research projects include a
wide range of interdisciplinary topics that include genome analysis, microbiome,
gene expression, genetic networks, and phylogenetic relationships. Students will
learn and use various computational methods and tools. Students will attend
weekly computing workshops and lectures/discussions on basic scientific
methodology. The seminars will be supplemented with activities to enhance
scientific communications. Educational field trips will allow students to visit
basic research laboratories, genome sequencing centers, and supercomputer
facilities. Many students will present their research findings at scientific
conferences and prepare research reports and/or peer-reviewed articles.
Participants will be selected by the Principal Investigator and potential
faculty mentors after completing an online application. More information about
the program is available by visiting the program webpage
(https://www.shsu.edu/research/reu-gscb/) or by directly contacting the PI (Dr.
Madhusudan Choudhary at mchoudhary@shsu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Hyuk Cho at
hyukcho@shsu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.