* 2050925
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experiences in Computer Systems at University of Louisville
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Wei Zhang, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 04/30/2024
* USD 405,051.00

The University of Louisville will establishes a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site to host a diverse cohort of undergraduate students
across the nation in 10-week summer sessions to conduct research with faculty
mentors on topics related to computer systems, including operating systems,
parallel and distributed systems, embedded systems, mobile systems, and computer
architecture. In addition to the significant broader social impacts of the
proposed research projects, this REU site will impact undergraduate students
from schools with limited research opportunities by helping them gain
theoretical and practical knowledge in computer systems, training them in
conducting cutting-edge computer systems research and inspiring them to pursue
postgraduate education in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The end of
Moore's Law is an exciting time to explore new computer system designs for the
future. This REU Site includes a broad range of computer systems research
topics, ranging from processor architecture to storage systems and from small-
scale systems such as mobile and edge devices to large-scale systems including
exascale data centers. Research projects will advance the state-of-the-art in
computer systems by exploring new architectures for emerging applications on
mobile and edge devices, energy-efficient storage stack designs for operating
systems, energy-efficient embedded systems and microcontrollers, new software
tools for data-intensive and high-performance computing, new graph analytics
algorithms, holistic security solutions for IoT applications, novel distributed
and explainable machine learning algorithms, new quantum acceleration
techniques, and novel GPU enabled parallel document inversion algorithms for
bioinformatics applications. A multi-level mentoring model will be followed
through weekly meetings with the PIs, daily meetings with the mentors, and
continuous interaction with graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.