* 2050650
* Meeting the Needs of Diverse Students through a Next Generation of Science Teacher Leadership in Nebraska
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2027
* David Harwood, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,916,074.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing outstanding and
highly qualified science teacher leaders in high-need schools to address four
critical needs of regional and national importance. The first is to retain mid-
career science teachers in high-need schools. The second is to provide high-
quality, equitable science teaching of students with diverse learning needs. The
third is to promote strong subject matter knowledge for teaching secondary
science. And the fourth is to adapt 7-12 science curriculum to meet the Next
Generation Science Standards. Title I schools (which are those with a high
percentage of students from low-income families) are disproportionately affected
by low retention of highly qualified teachers. Evidence suggests that teachers
must have access to ongoing, high-quality professional development and learning
opportunities to improve their pedagogical skills and remain motivated to stay
in high-need schools. This project will provide unique professional development,
statewide networking opportunities, and educational degree advancement to
exceptional secondary science teachers in Nebraska. Participating teachers will
complete an educational specialist degree, a teacher-designed leadership project
focused on promoting equitable science learning, and National Board
Certification. This project aims to ensure greater access to equitable and high-
quality education for culturally and racially diverse students in Nebraska. It
has the potential to inform multiple models for effective science teaching,
which will be broadly disseminated nationally in response to a vision of
scientific literacy for all. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) includes partnerships with two high-need
school districts (Lincoln Public Schools and Omaha Public Schools) and one lead
rural school district (Grand Island Public Schools). The goal of this six-year
project is to strengthen science education in Nebraska by recruiting 26 in-
service science teachers to become teacher leaders through an educational
specialist degree program and long-term professional development. The leadership
team will use the conceptual framework of equitable science and engineering
learning offered by the Advancing Coherent and Equitable Systems of Science
Education project to ground all aspects of the program and its goals. In
conjunction with professional development, the project will use systematic data
collection and analysis to investigate research questions regarding what teacher
leaders learn, how they use key concepts from coursework to design equity-
focused leadership projects, the extent to which teacher leaders generate
leadership projects that attend to and facilitate knowledge about diverse
students’ learning, and how teachers’ personal and statewide professional
networks change over time. The project will be evaluated using qualitative and
quantitative methods with a longitudinal design to compare outcomes over time
and assess progress toward meeting project goals. Project research and
evaluation will produce new fundamental knowledge of effective teacher leader
development models, reform-based equitable teaching practices, and high-quality
education for diverse students in Nebraska and beyond, which will be
disseminated via conferences, peer-reviewed journals, and a UNL-supported
website. This Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.