* 2050727
* Human Forests versus Random Forest Models in Prediction
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Sauleh Siddiqui, American University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 291,221.00

Accurate predictions are key to effective decision making under uncertainty.
Psychology research has shown that predictive judgments can be improved by
considering the outside view: placing a problem in the context of similar
historical cases, rather than focusing on its unique features. But choosing the
right comparison is difficult: statisticians have studied the so-called
reference class problem since at least the 19th century. The main objective of
this project is to assess the performance of a new method for crowdsourcing
reference-class judgments and producing probability forecasts, relative to new
and established machine learning models. The method, called human forests,
promotes outside-view thinking by enabling forecasters to construct reference
classes from a database of historical cases. The human forests method shares a
conceptual connection with random forest machine models. In both, predictions
are based on frequencies assessed in classification trees. While random forest
models use training data to build the trees, human forests rely on forecaster'
collective knowledge. The project will examine the relative strengths of both
methods and explore combinations of the two. We will also assess methods for
improving the accuracy of individual forecasters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposal resides in its promise to address the
reference class problem through collective intelligence. The project will
compare the accuracy of human forests, complemented with metacognitive training
and statistical aggregation techniques, with that of random forest models, and a
human-machine hybrid approach. The latter will use bi-level optimization,
providing an advancement in the use of optimization in machine learning, with
the aim of pushing the frontier of both machine learning and human capabilities.
The core randomized experiments will focus on clinical trial forecasting,
namely, predicting the probability of advancement for cancer treatments. The
study methods will utilize naturalistic, longitudinal, large-scale online
experiments, and will compare the performance of subject-matter experts and
generalists. The project will also provide training for researchers and students
in machine learning and collective intelligence and develop materials for
interactive exercises in high-school STEM classes, undergraduate and graduate
courses in statistics and decision making. Assessing the relative importance of
general forecasting skill versus subject matter expertise may help address skill
scarcity problems in areas dependent exclusively on specialists. The research
aims to improve the predictability of clinical trial outcomes and similarly
complex activities. Accurate forecasts regarding the success of clinical trial
programs may in turn improve risk management, resource allocation, and
ultimately result in wider availability of life-saving
treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.