* 2050863
* REU Site: Laboratory for Research on the Structure of Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Eric Stach, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 382,650.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;This REU-Site project provides high-quality,
hands-on experience in materials research to a diverse group of ten
undergraduates with interest in the sciences and engineering. During the summer,
student participants spend 10 weeks at the Laboratory for Research on the
Structure of Matter (LRSM) at the University of Pennsylvania (Penn). The
targeted student participants are gender, racially, and ethnically diverse,
representing a broad spectrum of colleges throughout the nation including
community colleges, minority-serving institutions, and those with limited
research opportunities. During their time at Penn, students are introduced to
materials research as a cohesive subject of study. Students are active
participants in research groups of faculty affiliated with the LRSM, receiving
authentic research and mentoring experiences similar to those of graduate
students in the same groups. Beyond their own research group, students engage
with each other socially, participate in numerous professional development
workshops and activities, and learn about other fields of research to understand
different career paths they could consider. Altogether, the experience helps
strengthen the science and engineering pipeline by training, mentoring, and
supporting young researchers while simultaneously contributing to state-of-the-
art research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;This REU-Site
project provides high-quality, hands-on experience in materials research to a
diverse group of ten undergraduates with interest in the sciences and
engineering. During the summer, student participants spend 10 weeks at the
Laboratory for Research on the Structure of Matter (LRSM) at the University of
Pennsylvania (Penn). The targeted student participants are gender, racially, and
ethnically diverse, representing a broad spectrum of colleges throughout the
nation including community colleges, minority-serving institutions, and those
with limited research opportunities. During their time at Penn, students are
introduced to materials research as a cohesive subject of study. Students are
active participants in research groups of faculty affiliated with the LRSM,
receiving access to state-of-the-art facilities to conduct authentic research
and mentoring experiences similar to those of graduate students in the same
groups. Depending on their interests and educational background, REU research
activities can range from synthesizing new polymers, to probing the optical
properties of quantum dots, to measuring mechanical responses of soft materials
such as colloids and emulsions, to computing electronic band structures of
topological insulators and yet-to-be-synthesized composite materials. To extend
their research experience, students participate in a weekly research seminar to
absorb front-line materials science and engineering and learn to present their
research findings both orally and in a written report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.