* 2050542
* Building Capacity to Increase the Pool of Highly Qualified STEM Teachers in High-Need Texas School Districts with Predominantly Hispanic Student Populations
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,05/31/2022
* David Turner, St Mary's University San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 05/31/2022
* USD 74,970.00

This project aims to address the need for science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) K-12 teachers at both the national and regional level. Toward
this aim, St. Mary’s University, a four-year Hispanic Serving Institution in San
Antonio, Texas, will work with local education agency partners to evaluate and
build capacity within its STEM Teacher Certification programs. The project will
focus broadly on improving the pipeline for STEM majors seeking teacher
licensure. In addition, it will encourage STEM pre-service teachers to teach in
high-need schools and develop strategies and resources to support STEM pre-
service teachers through their undergraduate studies and early stages of their
professional K-12 teaching careers. This effort will include a careful
investigation of available resources that might influence the development of an
effective teacher preparation program and partnerships with local school
districts. The project will also work to understand factors that impact Hispanic
and other students as they make educational and career choices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at St. Mary’s University includes
partnerships with the Northside Independent School District (Northside ISD) and
the San Antonio ISD. Project goals include: 1) analyzing baseline data to
explore the need for highly qualified STEM teachers in the partner local
education agencies; 2) understanding the motivations and obstacles faced by
Hispanic and other students as they make educational and career choices,
particularly whether to major in STEM fields and to pursue a career as a K-12
STEM educator; 3) evaluating the existing university infrastructure for a robust
program for student recruitment and STEM teacher preparation; and 4) developing
a comprehensive plan to enhance the University’s ability to (a) successfully
recruit, retain, and graduate talented students as STEM teachers; and (b) to
support them during their first year as teachers in high-needs school districts.
The project will generate new knowledge about effective recruiting and support
mechanisms for diverse pre-service teachers, in partnership with school
districts that have predominantly Hispanic student populations. Project outcomes
are expected to contribute to ongoing efforts to broaden participation in K-12
STEM teaching. This Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers
in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence,
retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.