* 2050277
* REU Site: Summer Research Program for Community College Students in Physics and Astronomy at Texas A&amp;M University-Commerce.
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Kurtis Williams, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/29/2024
* USD 236,704.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at Texas A&amp;M
University-Commerce provides opportunities for six students each summer for ten
weeks from 2-year community colleges in the middle south region of the US near
northeast Texas, which borders the neighboring states of Oklahoma, Arkansas, and
Louisiana. Students in this isolated region have very few research opportunities
and may come from school districts with few STEM resources. The students will
participate in physics education, nuclear physics, astrophysics, experimental
surface physics, experimental organic semiconductor physics, and astronomy. In
addition to participating in research with a research advisor, the REU students
will engage in weekly activities to ensure that their research stays on track
and have an engaging collegial and scholarly experience. At the end of the
program, each student will write a research paper and present their work results
in a small group conference on campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site will
have several broader impacts, focusing on providing research opportunities for
undergraduates to help prepare them for future science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics careers. It also focuses on providing research opportunities for
students in two-year community colleges and facilitates four-year universities'
transition. The site has developed strategies to ensure that non-traditional
students, women, and underrepresented minorities can participate in a summer
research experience. Early involvement in research beginning in the first year
is one of the most effective ways to attract and retain talented undergraduate
students in STEM careers. Special efforts will be made to help the REU students
to become independent researchers in the near future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.