* 2050393
* Microbes on Biomedical Interfaces
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2020,11/30/2021
* Izabela Balicka, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 11/30/2021
* USD 6,887.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;The Topical Conference on Microbes at
Biomedical Interfaces will be held on November 16-17, 2020 and will bring
together biomedical and chemical engineers as well as medical professionals.
Participants will explore interdisciplinary solutions to fundamental and applied
problems to further understanding of the microbe/biomaterials interface. An
increased understanding of the physicochemical interactions between microbes and
biomaterials can tremendously aid in exploring novel and unconventional designs
of biomaterials that would limit the formation of biofilm and the accumulation
of pathogenic bacteria near medical implants. This topical conference will serve
as a highly interactive and informative platform for catalyzing increased
dialogue in this scientific area and will encourage active participation by
early stage investigators from underrepresented groups as well as graduate and
undergraduate researchers through student competitions and networking events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Very few forums
exist that bring together biomedical and chemical engineers as well as medical
professionals to discuss ways in which their disciplines can collaborate to find
new solutions to fundamental and applied problems to further understanding of
the microbe/biomaterials interface. This topical conference on Microbes at
Biomedical Interfaces will serve as a highly interactive and informative
platform for catalyzing increased dialogue in this scientific area. There will
be seven topical sessions, two of which are student and trainee centered
competitions in the area of Microbiointerface Research. Scientific presentations
will be given by a diverse group of researchers with opportunities to discuss
the presented ideas afterwards. Organizers will encourage participation from
women and underrepresented groups both as organizers, participants and
speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.