* 2050937
* ASLO Multicultural Program
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Carmen Sussmann, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2024
* USD 875,287.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hampton University and the
Association for the Sciences of Limnology and Oceanography (ASLO) will continue
to manage a program with the goal of increasing the numbers of under-represented
minorities and under-served students who choose to pursue careers in aquatic
sciences. This program is known as the Association for the Sciences of Limnology
and Oceanography Multicultural Program (ASLOMP), and organizers seek to select
diverse cohorts of students and match these students with professionals who act
as mentors. Participants receive a free membership in ASLO and support to attend
the annual ASLO Winter meeting as well as special pre-meeting workshops. This
award provides three years of support (2022-2024) for ASLOMP.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASLOMP objectives are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Expose students who
are from a wide spectrum of ethnicities and backgrounds to cutting edge aquatic
science through fully supporting their active participation in ASLO meetings
where they also present their own research work.&lt;br/&gt;2. Link diverse
cohorts of students to opportunities for internships, advanced studies, special
programs, and potential employment through interactions at ASLO meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Continue to support new cohorts of students from under-represented
groups and to support their participation in the networks of aquatic
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;4. Support the participation of scientists from under-
represented groups to serve as mentors for the program and to serve in ASLO
leadership positions.&lt;br/&gt;The program uses an expansive understanding of
multiculturalism and allocates about thirty of the sixty-five slots for students
associated with the NSF-funded Ocean Sciences Research Experience for
Undergraduate (REU) sites. This allows all involved to increase cross-cultural
competencies. ASLOMP uses a suite of special activities to enrich participantâ€™s
experiences, including keynote addresses, opening dinners, field-trips, a
student symposium, and systematic support through a system of meeting-
mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.