* 2050264
* RAPID: Keeping Shelters in Place: Understanding Residential Landlord Decision-making During the COVID-19 Pandemic
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Biswa Das, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 10/31/2021
* USD 60,000.00

Tenants face particular challenges in the face of disasters, and those
challenges have been amplified in the current pandemic. Signed into law on March
27, 2020, the “Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security” (CARES) Act
placed a 120-day moratorium on evictions in federally financed multifamily
rental properties as well as fees and penalties related to non-payment of rent
in an attempt to at least partially ameliorate a potential national housing
crisis. In addition, the Act provided some relief to property owners through
forbearance provisions on federally-backed mortgages. The Act, along with a
patchwork of similar state statutes, created temporary housing stability for
renters and provided local governments with a window of time, a window that has
ended in many jurisdictions. A direct federal intervention of this scope into
local housing policies was necessary given the expectation that individuals
isolate at home to protect community health and safety, but also unprecedented,
leaving local governments with little direction regarding how to proceed as the
moratorium and forbearance programs began to end. Renters and local housing
markets are already feeling the strain, and the long-term impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic on rental housing stability remains unknown. This Grant for
Rapid Response Research (RAPID) study investigates how the unique
characteristics of the US housing system, and in particular landlord decision-
making within that system, are contributing to rental housing instability during
the COVID-19 pandemic. In typical natural disasters, the impact on housing stems
from physical damage which creates an immediate negative shock to the housing
supply. The pandemic provides a singular opportunity to examine the housing
impacts of a disaster that affects demand rather than supply and to parse out
the role of landlord decision-making within that context. This study will
collect perishable highly ephemeral data from landlords during a particularly
uncertain period: COVID-related threats to public health and safety and the
corresponding policy interventions are constantly evolving; the economic
recession is deepening; and eviction moratoria and expanded unemployment
benefits are coming to an end. The findings will help illuminate how landlord
decision-making is shaping rental housing stability during the current pandemic
while furthering the scholarly understanding of the role of landlords in
disaster-related housing stability and recovery more generally. By evaluating
the relationship between landlord characteristics and decisions and housing
stability outcomes, the study findings will assist local government officials to
evaluate existing disaster policy responses and will provide important insights
to inform the development new and innovative rental housing stability strategies
in the aftermath of disasters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses a mixed-
methods approach to investigate the question: What factors are influencing the
decision making of residential rental property owners during the COVID-19
pandemic? The research will take place in three mid-sized US cities: Lexington,
KY; Minneapolis, MN; and Cleveland, OH. These cites, though similar in size,
have varied housing stocks, socioeconomic characteristics, and political
orientations. The study focuses on landlords, key players in the housing market
and therefore in housing stability and post-disaster housing recovery, rather
than tenants, and in doing so addresses a significant gap in the disaster and
housing literature. Data collection tasks will include (1) an online survey of
landlords and property managers identified through local residential rental
registries to identify landlord characteristics and any divergence in their
responses based on those characteristics; (2) follow up interviews with select
willing landlords and property managers to investigate in greater depth their
perceptions of COVID-related challenges and the decisions they are making in
response to those challenges; and (3) interviews with local planners, public
officials, landlord association representatives, and other policy stakeholders
to collect their understanding of rental housing problems in the city and local
landlord responses to those problems. The research team anticipates that
investigating the decisions that landlords are making during and after the
COVID-19 crisis will elucidate how those decisions contribute to rental housing
stability during and after natural disasters. Further, the analysis will assist
disaster scholars in developing new risk models and community resiliency
indicators that will be useful in response to future economic shocks and
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.