* 2050309
* CHS: Small: Experiential Learning Systems for Promoting Wellness in Low-Income Families
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Andrea Parker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Andruid Kerne
* 08/31/2021
* USD 67,294.00

This project will advance research around using health-monitoring tools, such as
sensor-based physical activity trackers, to support healthy behaviors for
children in low-income families. In comparison to the general population, low-
income families face disproportionate barriers to wellness, such as persistent
social stressors and limited environmental support for behavior change. As such,
a key technical challenge is designing systems that help families learn how to
overcome these barriers to physical activity. To identify design opportunities,
the team will first study how lower-income families currently use and think
about physical activity tracking devices and data. This knowledge will then be
used to redesign an existing software application that motivates children to
exercise by helping them learn from sensor-collected physical activity data. In
this research, the team will work closely with families to target the
application more directly at their needs, while adding features to support
"experiential learning"--the idea that reflecting on concrete past experiences
can help people develop insights that guide their future behavior. The
researchers will then conduct long-term studies of the tool in use, evaluating
its impact on exercise and health, while learning more about the design issues
that arise when supporting family-based activity tracking and learning. The
combination of the use of experiential learning approaches, the low-income and
family contexts, and the long-term evaluation all promise to extend what is
currently known about designing systems that motivate physical activity. This
work will have a practical impact on the widespread public health problem of
childhood obesity, both by directly helping the families involved in the project
and indirectly helping others through releasing the experiential learning tools
and new design insights. The work will also provide educational benefits. Apart
from the health education aspects of the system itself, the team will develop
learning opportunities where college students work closely with local
communities both to improve their learning and help those communities. These
opportunities will also give lower-income children a way to participate directly
in computer science research, helping them see what it would be like to be
computer scientists or researchers themselves.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In the
first stage of work, the project will develop a grounded theory of how well
existing physical activity tracking tools do and could support data collection,
management, and experiential learning in low-income families. This theory will
be developed through a combination of interviews and a trial deployment of
activity trackers to both children and their caregivers. This theory will guide
the second stage, in which the team will conduct participatory design research
with families. Through this work, the team will design, build, and evaluate
system prototypes that emphasize elements of experiential learning, particularly
abstract conceptualization (identifying meaningful insights from activity data
that can be applied to future situations) and active experimentation (testing
out these new insights). The second stage will have two main outcomes. The first
outcome will be a high-fidelity prototype of a system that tracks and represents
physical activity among family members in a way that engages their attention and
helps them engage in collaborative learning and experimentation. The second
outcome will be a framework for the design of experiential learning systems that
builds on the theory from the first stage. The prototype will be the basis of
the third stage, a six-month deployment of the system to a number of families.
In this stage, the team will gradually deploy features of the full system, and
use a combination of survey instruments, interviews, and logged activity and
usage data to refine the design framework and to evaluate the system's effect on
knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors around physical activity. In total, the work
will lead to design recommendations that will help researchers and developers
build persuasive systems that encourage active engagement with physical activity
data. In addition, this work will produce protocols for evaluating systems that
support experiential learning from health data, knowledge about the challenges
of designing such systems for families rather than individuals, and the software
system itself. Each of these outputs will be valuable to both researchers and
designers in this domain. Furthermore, the participatory design workshops will
engage lower-income children in the creative process of technology design, which
can pique their interest in a computer science career, while also providing the
context for an innovative service-learning curriculum for existing college
students. Finally, the software system will help to educate families about
simple biological principles about the importance of physical activity in a
socially and socioeconomically relevant way.