* 2050485
* Addressing Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Anti-Racism in 21st Century STEM Organizations
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Daniel Weiss, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The National Academies provides analysis and sound scientific judgment to inform
policy decisions and to guide scientific endeavors. This project addresses the
need for greater diversity within the science enterprise with the goal of making
the STEM workforce a more accurate reflection of the population. It will
synthesize what is known about longstanding inequities and historical, cultural,
and institutional norms that have worked to the disadvantage of people of color
as well as what is known about how to address these inequities. The project will
articulate an agenda for organizational culture change to address racism and
promote diversity as well as a research agenda to further advance diversity
science. It is anticipated that the final report will provide recommendations
for the benefit of both science and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, a committee of experts will examine the extent to which systematic
racism is a barrier to STEM careers for historically marginalized racial and
ethnic groups; analyze data that point to effective approaches for addressing
diversity, equity, inclusion (DEI), and anti-racism; and identify gaps in the
research needed to support continued progress in DEI in STEM. Previous research
has produced a rich picture of the factors that have shaped STEM workplaces,
including longstanding inequities and historical, cultural, and institutional
norms that have worked to the disadvantage of people of color and other
marginalized groups. A key focus of this study will be on mechanisms to produce
organizational change. Diversity science, a growing field, offers lessons on how
to address the systemic barriers to full participation in STEM for
underrepresented minorities. Application of these lessons can expand the
intellectual depth of science by integrating new perspectives into the nature
and process of scientific inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.