* 2050574
* REU Site: Integrated Development of Bioenergy Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Heriberto Cerutti, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 323,325.00

This REU Site award to the University of Nebraska, located in Lincoln, Nebraska,
will support the training for 10 students, for 10 weeks during the summers of
2021- 2023. The program focuses on bioenergy -- the application of molecular and
physiologic principles using microbes, algae and plants to create renewable
sources of energy to promote a sustainable society. It is anticipated that a
total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities
or from an under-represented group, will be trained in the program. One of the
greatest challenges facing 21st-century society is finding a sustainable energy
supply. Energy is the basis for a large portion of the global economy and,
currently, is largely dependent on nonrenewable fossil fuels that contribute
significantly to pollution and climate change. This REU project will train
students in finding solutions to overcome this challenge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty from the School of Biological Sciences, the Center
for Plant Science Innovation and other departments will serve as mentors.
Diverse and exciting student projects can employ molecular biology, biochemistry
and/or genetics to understand energy dynamics in model species. Students are
expected to do full-time laboratory research as well as to participate in
seminars and various workshops about ethics in research, professionalism, career
opportunities in industry and academia, and the graduate school application
process. Students will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences, tour energy industries and undergo training in technical writing
using a student-centered approach. Students are selected based on academic
record, research performance, and potential for outstanding research. Assessment
will be done using the SALG URSSA online tool to determine the effectiveness of
the training program. Students will be tracked to determine their career
advancement. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.unl.edu/summerprogram/research#bioenergy, or by contacting the PI
(Dr. Paul Blum at pblum1@unl.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Heriberto Cerutti at
hcerutti1@unl.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.