* 2050249
* Collaborative Research: Investigating STEM Teacher Preparation and Rural Teacher Persistence and Retention
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Jennifer Whitfield, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 365,871.00

The project aims to serve the national need of addressing STEM teacher shortages
in rural communities. Staffing schools with high quality STEM teachers has been
a persistent challenge for rural schools for the past century, however, to date,
relatively few resources have been allocated toward the improvement of teacher
education to prepare teachers to work in rural settings. Addressing STEM teacher
workforce needs in rural America is critical for future student success. This
project aims to address STEM teacher workforce challenges through a focus on how
educator preparation programs (EPPs) address the unique contexts of rurality and
teaching STEM in rural settings. Moreover, it seeks to identify the programmatic
features of educator preparation programs that support rural STEM teacher
recruitment, retention, and persistence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, led
by Mississippi State University with thirteen collaborative partners (Texas
A&amp;M University, Stephen F. Austin University, University of Wisconsin River
Falls, Fort Hayes State University, Clarkson University, University of Kentucky,
University of Alabama Birmingham, Texas Tech University, Morehead State
University, Texas A&amp;M University- Commerce, Winthrop University, Alabama
A&amp;M University, and North Dakota State University) has three main goals.
First is to investigate the impact of EPP features on program completers’
intention to teach as well as their persistence (continuing to teach at the same
school) and retention (continuing to teach but at a new school) in rural STEM
classrooms. Second is to engage in deep reflection leading to programmatic
adjustments within collaborating partners’ educator preparation programs
intended to increase equitable access to effective instruction for rural
schools. Third is to share emerging knowledge about programmatic features of
EPPs that support program completers’ intention to teach, their employment
decisions after completing the EPP, and their persistence and retention in rural
placements. The overarching hypothesis guiding this study is that EPPs that
explicitly address rurality through programmatic features including context
(e.g., addressing the strengths and challenges of rural teaching and stereotypes
about rural places), curriculum (e.g., a focus on place-based instruction and
rural field experiences), and conveyance (e.g., recruiting from rural or online
delivery) will support recruitment, retention, and persistence in rural schools,
which can lead to a more diverse and effective STEM teaching force for rural
schools. Research is needed to understand the impact of these programmatic
features in order to guide the design and delivery of educator preparation
programs that serve rural schools and communities. This foundational research
project uses a longitudinal, repeated-measures, mixed-methods research design in
which 14 collaborating partners across the U.S. will identify programmatic
features that address rurality and track program completers’ intentions to
teach, persistence, and retention and thus produce evidence that will be
disseminated both internally (to collaborating partners) and to broader
audiences (e.g., STEM education, teacher education, and rural education
communities). Data sources include curricular artifacts such as degree plans,
course syllabi, field placement data, and assessment data; interviews with
program faculty; and two surveys to capture demographic data, employment data,
and the three outcome variables over time. The broader impact aim of this
collaborative research is to create actionable knowledge to support rural STEM
teacher persistence and retention. This Track 4: Noyce Research project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.