* 2050826
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experiences in Big Data Security and Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Mohammad Husain, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 02/29/2024
* USD 434,930.00

This project is a renewal of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site in Big Data Security and Privacy at Cal Poly Pomona. This REU Site will
host a diverse group of undergraduate students who will spend 10 weeks in summer
working on the research problems in the intersection of big data and
security/privacy. This REU site explores the interplay of cybersecurity and big
data intelligence and focuses on two research aspects: (a) Security and Privacy
of Big Data, Model and Platform and (b) Big Data Intelligence for Security. The
students will acquire fundamental big data security and privacy concepts and
learn to use testbeds and tools. An interdisciplinary group of faculty advisors
will direct students’ research projects, for example, in privacy preserving deep
learning, 3D adversarial attacks against deep network classification models, and
the classification of phishing e-mail contents according to personality bias
using natural language processing. In addition to research activities, various
professional career development activities are well planned for students
including, presenting their research at multiple symposia and seminars and
interacting with senior researchers and peers in an Invited Speaker Series and
on a field trip to research labs. The site plans to attract talented
undergraduate students from across the nation, particularly focusing on
recruiting Hispanic and women students, groups traditionally under-represented
in the computing fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a renewal of the
REU Site in Big Data Security and Privacy at Cal Poly Pomona (CPP) and will
offer an annual and immersive 10-week undergraduate research experience with CPP
faculty mentors from 2021 to 2024. The site will host 10 REU students each
summer, 5 from Cal Poly Pomona and 5 from other institutions. The students will
acquire fundamental data security and privacy concepts and learn to use testbed
and tools in the short course/lab exercises. Faculty advisors will direct
students’ research projects in the intersection of big data and security/privacy
with an emphasis on two aspects: (a) Security and Privacy of Big Data, Model and
Platform and (b) Big Data Intelligence for Security. Student research topics
include Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) based privacy preserving deep
learning, 3D adversarial attacks against deep network classification models,
parallel algorithms for Large Scale Cyber Anomaly Detection on Heterogenous
Computing Environments, and the classification of phishing e-mail contents
according to personality bias using natural language processing, etc. In
addition to research activities, students will participate in a variety of
professional career development activities including, presenting their research
at multiple symposia and seminars and interacting with senior researchers and
peers in an Invited Speaker Series and on a field trip to research labs. Beyond
summer, this REU site also provides students with continuous support towards
their career goals in big data and cybersecurity, e.g., extending their
research, completing paper submission, and preparing for graduate school
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.