* 2050916
* REU Site: Characterization of Materials Using Synchrotron and X-ray Based Tools
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Ali Khounsary, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/29/2024
* USD 404,776.00

This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program. NSF support for this REU Site comes from the Division of
Engineering Education &amp; Centers (Directorate for Engineering) and the
Division of Materials Research (Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in Materials Research provides
undergraduate students nationwide with an opportunity to learn about X-ray
science and technology and explore their broad applications by participating in
a number of cutting-edge interdisciplinary research projects in materials
science, physics, chemistry, biology, chemical and biomedical engineering. The
main objectives of this REU are (1) to introduce undergraduates from across the
nation to the field of X-ray, and its powerful impact on modern science and
technology, (2) to provide, through a series of lectures, discussions, and
demonstrations, a basic working knowledge of the subject, including history,
generation, and utilization of X-rays, (3) to engage students with faculty and
graduate students in hands-on X-ray research projects on campus at the Illinois
Tech and off campus at Argonne National Laboratory’s Advanced Photon Source, the
largest X-ray facility in the US, (4) to conduct regular group meetings for
students to report on and discuss their research results and findings, and (5)
to organize seminars, mentorship sessions, and lectures aimed at enhancing
students’ professional skills including technical writing, technical
communication, professional ethics, team work, etc. as well exploring graduate
study and career opportunities in area of national needs including the field of
X-ray. Since its discovery, X-ray has had an outsized, broad, and significant
impact on our understanding of the physical world and has led to the creation
and development of many new fields in science with huge technical and economic
impact. This REU provides a unique opportunity for undergraduate students,
particularly those from the underrepresented groups, to learn about X-ray,
experience X-ray research first hand, appreciate its immense impact, and
potentially explore graduate studies and future careers in this field where
there is a national need for trained personnel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: The REU student participants are engaged to join the summer research
activities at Illinois Tech working with one of 12 participating faculty
mentors. The REU Site is designed to introduce REU students to the generation
and use of X-rays in science and engineering research, providing them with
firsthand experience in using X-rays. Research projects include: (1) Development
of an X-ray system for characterization of defects during 3D printing, (2)
Machine learning approaches to processing X-ray data, (3) Development of X-ray
lenses, (4) X-ray spectroscopy technique, (5) X-ray tomography, (6) X-ray
tomography in additive manufacturing, (7) X-ray study of nano-scale precipitates
in superalloys, (8) Photochemistry of crystalline 2-Dimensional Covalent Organic
Framework using X-ray, (9) Evolution of crystal structure and defects during
plastic deformation of a ductile semiconductor, (10) In-situ characterization of
battery and fuel cell materials using X-ray absorption spectroscopy, (11)
Investigation of pancreatic cancer chemotherapy using X-ray diffraction, and
(12) Operando characterization of heteroatomic transition metal-based
electrocatalysts for conversion of carbon dioxide to alcohols. The key technical
objective of the REU activities is to provide the participating students with a
basic understanding of X-rays and how they are used, exposure to various X-ray
techniques, appreciation of the broad range of their applications, and knowledge
about the immense and exciting opportunities that an education and career in
this field can provide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.