* 2050252
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Effects of Flow on Smooth Muscle Cells in an Arteriole-Sized Microchannel
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* James West, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This research will increase our understanding of regulating blood flow in
engineered human tissue. Microscopic blood vessels in the body regulate blood
flow to tissues via smooth muscle cells. These smooth muscle cells automatically
adjust vessel diameter in response to changing conditions. When this process
does not work correctly, it can cause a wide range of serious medical problems
such as hypertension or brain dysfunction. Current engineered organs and tissues
are unable to mimic this ability to regulate blood flow and, if implanted in
patients, are likely to cause the same serious medical problems. To address this
challenge, this work will develop a technique for putting smooth muscle cells
inside microscopic blood vessels in engineered tissue and coaxing these cells to
organize and behave in a way that is similar to their behavior in natural
tissue. We will then test to see whether the cells can adjust the diameter of
the engineered microscopic blood vessels in a similar fashion. The knowledge
gained from these studies will add a critical capability to engineered tissue,
and will ultimately improve the lives of future patients implanted with tissue
engineered materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the field of tissue engineering
has transitioned from employing thin tissue structures to producing thick, 3D
cell-laden tissues and organs, the need for an embedded microvasculature has
become increasingly apparent. While researchers have focused on establishing the
ability of engineered microvasculature to maintain cell viability, a critical
function of the microvasculature has been ignored: the capability to regulate
local vascular resistance. Vascular resistance is locally modulated by
adjustments in vessel lumen diameter in response to various internal and
external changes (changes in temperature, body position, metabolic needs of
various tissues, etc.), and is accomplished by the action of smooth muscle cells
in the medial layer of the microvessel wall. The objective of this research is
to establish the knowledge needed to form a functional medial layer of
contractile, circumferentially-oriented smooth muscle cells in an arteriole-
sized microchannel, thereby enabling vasoconstriction or vasodilation in
response to appropriate stimuli. In particular, this work will investigate the
ability of pulsatile flow to maintain contractile SMC phenotype and induce
circumferential architecture on the microvessel wall, expose the cells to
relevant vasoactive agents, and then characterize their ability to appropriately
modulate the lumen diameter. The relationships we establish between flow
waveforms and cell behavior will enable design rules for engineered
microvasculature with this critical functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.