* 2050691
* Collaborative Research &amp; GOALI: Direct-Fed Ethanol Metal-Supported Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Su Ha, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 225,000.00

When integrated with batteries, fuel cells can be used to significantly increase
the range of electric vehicles, potentially even making long-haul electric
aircraft possible. Most fuel cell technologies, however, rely on hydrogen as the
fuel and so the low energy density of compressed hydrogen gas and the large
energy input needed to produce cryogenic liquid hydrogen limit every-day
transportation applications of this hybrid electrical energy technology.
Ethanol, a liquid under ambient conditions, constitutes a renewable and high
energy density alternative to hydrogen, albeit with the drawback that the
ethanol must be reformed to hydrogen in a complex chemical process before it can
be fed to the fuel cell. In this proposal, the ethanol reforming process will be
integrated with the fuel cell by developing a catalyst that accomplishes this
chemical transformation on one of the fuel cell electrodes, eliminating the
costly, heavy, and energy intensive reforming process. The academic researchers
developing this direct-feed ethanol fuel cell will partner with Nissan North
America, Inc. to advance their e-Bio Fuel-Cell automotive technology. If
successful, the outcomes of this project include a total weight/cost reduction
of the reformer/fuel cell system and a simplified fuel cell internal design. The
proposed research builds on an existing collaboration between Nissan and the
academic research team. This GOALI proposal will support this close link between
the industrial and academic research teams through a student internship program,
introducing graduate students to interdisciplinary research involving material
synthesis, catalyst engineering, and fuel cell technology at Nissan, Washington
State University (WSU), and Stony Brook University (SBU). The proposed work will
have broad impact on (1) research experiences for underrepresented undergraduate
students through the Office of Multicultural Student Services at WSU and the
Inclusive Education program at SBU; (2) promoting public awareness of the
importance of science and engineering by collaborating with the Palouse
Discovery Science Center at WSU and the Institute for STEM Education at SBU; and
(3) attracting high school students to the fields of science and engineering by
mentoring a high school team for regional science events and participating in
the ACS Project SEED Program. The results of the proposed research will be
disseminated widely through the normal channels of publication and presentation
at technical meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In pursuit of practical direct-feed
ethanol fuel cells that will enable long-distance electric transportation, the
primary aims of this research program are to (1) develop ethanol reforming
catalysts in the form of Mo-doped Ni (Ni-Mo) nanoparticles highly dispersed
within a three-dimensionally ordered mesoporous BaO-based support that can
strongly adsorb and activate H2O as the internal ethanol reforming layer over
the conventional Ni-based fuel call anode, and (2) investigate the catalyst
performance under conditions expected for transportation applications of direct-
feed ethanol metal-supported solid oxide fuel cells (MS-SOFCs). A significant
advantage of a direct-feed ethanol MS-SOFC is the simplicity afforded by not
having to externally reform the ethanol fuel to hydrogen; however, under the
harsh operating conditions of conventional MS-SOFC operation, the Ni-based
anodes would quickly deactivate due to severe coking. To address this issue, the
academic research team will design the multifunctional bilayer anode by electro-
spraying Ni-Mo nanoparticles as the internal reforming layer over the anode
surface. To successfully fabricate this bilayer anode, the PIs will first tune
the electronic structure of Ni-Mo nanoparticle by controlling the Mo doping
level and then infiltrate the nanoparticles into the high surface area, three-
dimensionally ordered mesoporous BaZr0.4Ce0.4Y0.2O3 (BZCY) support. Operando
X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and environmental transmission electron
microscopy (E-TEM) will be used to determine the oxidation state and structure
of the Ni-Mo/BZCY catalysts under the nominal ethanol-reforming reaction
conditions to relate those measurements to observed catalytic performance. The
PIs will also use in-situ Raman and DRIFT spectroscopy to investigate the
relationship between catalyst molecular structure and reforming reaction
mechanisms. Based on the identified structure-activity relationships, the PIs
will fabricate the high-performance Ni-Mo/BZCY internal reforming layer over the
MS-SOFC anode and will use an in-situ Raman spectroelectrochemical system to
investigate its internal reforming and overall electrochemical activity under
actual SOFC operating conditions. Through the proposed Nissan North America,
Inc. internship program, graduate students will work with Nissan engineers to
evaluate and validate model MS-SOFCs with the internal reforming layer at Nissan
under test conditions relevant to the vehicle operation. From these road profile
tests, the power quality capability and performance of the direct-feed ethanol
MS-SOFCs under a range of driving conditions will be
assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.