* 2050173
* Noyce Scholars en la Frontera (Noyce Scholars on the Border)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Jennifer Miller, Sul Ross State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,128,171.00

The Noyce Scholars en la Frontera (Noyce Scholars on the Border) project aims to
address the critical need to prepare and increase the number of highly qualified
mathematics and science teachers serving high-need schools located on the Texas-
Mexico border. Activities include a strong mentoring program with hands-on
activities to ensure Noyce Scholars are equipped with the knowledge, skills, and
dispositions to support learner success in mathematics and science in high-need
school districts. Noyce Scholars will benefit from both the Sul Ross State
University (SRSU) teacher preparation program and additional professional
development opportunities through summer institutes. The project intends to
create a pipeline of well-qualified, diverse STEM teachers to serve in a high
need school districts, by recruiting participants from a pool of academically
talented undergraduate STEM students attending either SRSU, a local community
college, or collaborating high schools that offer STEM dual credit
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this project at SRSU includes
partnerships with five public high-need school districts (Presidio, Ft. Davis,
Marfa, Alpine, and Uvalde) and one community college, Southwest Texas Junior
College. All serve high percentages of low income and minority students. The
overarching project goal is to recruit and support 16 STEM majors to complete
their baccalaureate degrees with teacher certification The project aims to
support the preservice teachers in developing content-specific pedagogical
practices and culturally responsive teaching (CRT). This is to support bilingual
students and English Language Learners to promote student success in mathematics
and science in high-need schools. The resulting attributes gained by the
preservice teachers will be measured by the Culturally Responsive Teaching
Survey and Teacher Efficacy and Attitudes Toward STEM (T-STEM) Survey. In
addition to a focus on developing skills in CRT, the project intends to support
the development of self-efficacy in integrating technology in STEM courses among
the preservice teachers, as well as Education and STEM faculty members. The
Technology Proficiency Self-Assessment for 21st Century Learning (TPSA) and
T-STEM Survey will be used to measure this. Ultimately, the project seeks to
answer the question: How does a culturally responsive teaching and mentoring
program influence underrepresented and underserved STEM students in their
pursuit of teacher certification from an institution serving isolated
communities? Project strategies and results have the potential for broad
application to other institutions serving isolated regions of the country with a
need to improve self-efficacy of STEM preservice teachers, STEM literacy,
culturally responsive teaching approaches by STEM faculty and preservice
teachers, and enhanced technology integration in STEM teacher preparation
programs. Results will be disseminated through scholarly publications and
presentations at conferences with regional, state, and national audiences. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.