* 2050267
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates at the National Weather Center
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Daphne LaDue, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 02/28/2026
* USD 682,016.00

The Real-World Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) in Atmospheric
&amp; Geographic Sciences will bring 70 undergraduate students from all U.S.
states and territories to Norman, Oklahoma, to conduct scientific research and
learn about the wide range of career opportunities available to them. The heart
of the program is an authentic research experience that introduces participants
to scientific research under the guidance of one or more scientists in the
weather, climate, and radar organizations within the University of Oklahoma-
Norman's University Research Campus. These organizations span across Federal,
state, university, and private sector groups that work collaboratively to
improve our understanding of weather and climate. Additional activities in the
REU program are designed to provide a well-rounded experience that help
participants determine their next steps in regard to advancing education and
careers. Participants attend seminars and workshops to learn about cutting edge
science and to build their research skills. They tour weather, climate, and
radar-related facilities and are able to learn about a day in the life of a
research scientist. At the end of the program, participants share their research
projects with each other, the local scientific community, and the larger
scientific community at a professional conference. &lt;br/&gt;This new proposal
will help evolve the program in exciting new ways. It will help to advance the
field by developing a Scientific Writing Workshop curriculum that is piloted,
refined, and shared widely with other REU programs. It will also connect and
expose participants to the idea of convergent research through a new, hands-on
activity with a wide array of instrumentation ranging from experimental radars
to drones and weather stations. This program will leverage experiences running
the 2020 program online to offer place-bound students the opportunity to
participate and for all participants to connect more broadly with alumni of the
program. Over the past 20 years, this program has brought in more than 270 U.S.
undergraduate students, introducing them to research while teaching them
valuable skills for graduate school and future careers. The scientific workforce
is becoming more equitable because of this program, with half of the
participants being female and a quarter being racial and ethnic minorities,
veterans of the U.S. armed forces, non-traditional students, or students with a
physical disability, all of whom are underrepresented in atmospheric sciences.
The majority of this programâ€™s alumni have pursued a graduate degree and now
work in meteorology or a related field. This REU has and will continue to have
broader impacts at the individual, local, university, state, national, and
international level through publications each year while also producing or
improving databases and tools useful beyond their own research projects. Several
participants' research results have been used for National Weather Service
training and emergency management operations. This program builds a diverse
community of scientists with a deep appreciation for quality research and
increases collaborative and convergent research between the academic, public,
and private sectors. These efforts assist in the growth of the next generation
of inclusive scientists to maintain U.S. global leadership in weather and
climate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.