* 2050357
* Bifacial all perovskite tandem solar cells for a sustainable energy future
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Jinsong Huang, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 03/31/2024
* USD 389,998.00

Solar energy is a clean, renewable and most abundant energy resource, however
electric energy from solar cells still only contributes to a very small portion
of the global electricity generation. Achieving highly efficient and low-cost
photovoltaic modules is critical to make solar energy a truly viable and
attractive solution for a sustainable energy future. Tandem solar cells have a
much higher thermodynamic efficiency upper limit than single junction devices.
Due to low-cost solution processing for both subcells, the all-perovskite tandem
solar cells have enormous potential to reduce the levelized cost of energy below
those of silicon based single-junction and multijunction cells. Tremendous
progress has been made over the past five years to improve the efficiency of
all-perovskite tandem solar cells from 10.8% to over 25%, but they have not yet
reached the full potential of this technology. This project aims at increasing
the equivalent efficiency of all-perovskite tandem cells to over 33% via a
bifacial tandem architecture and address the related fundamental material and
device challenges. The success of this project can yield a promising renewable
energy source with cost competitiveness to fossil energy, thus reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and environmental pollution. The project will provide
training to graduate and undergraduate students through interdisciplinary
research and will bring them an entrepreneur mindset. A strong focus of the
project is on increasing participation of minorities and providing early
exposure of research to a broad audience through several outreach activities at
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
efficiency of all-perovskite tandem solar cells is primarily limited by the
larger than usual open circuit voltage deficit of wide-bandgap perovskite cells
and the low external-quantum-efficiency of narrow-bandgap perovskite cells. We
propose to develop bifacial all-perovskite tandem cells with a damage-free
deposition of transparent electrodes on tin-containing narrow-bandgap perovskite
cells which have a much higher efficiency upper limit of over 33%. The bifacial
tandem architecture not only enhances the upper limit of realistic power
conversion efficiency, but also shifts the optimal bandgap of wide-bandgap cell
to a lower value, thus avoids the large open circuit voltage deficit problem for
larger bandgap perovskite cells. In addition, we will enhance light harvesting
efficiency of the narrow-bandgap perovskite cells. In order to overcome the low
external-quantum-efficiency issue in the narrow bandgap perovskite cells, this
project will explore the fundamental processes that limit the carrier diffusion
length of tin-containing narrow bandgap perovskites and address the related
defects with specialized additives. Moreover, this project will provide a
comprehensive understanding of the impact of ground reflected albedo effects,
weather conditions, and module installation conditions on the efficiency of
bifacial all-perovskite tandem cells, in turn, providing valuable feedback to
improve solar cell design. This research will address the fundamental
understanding of bifacial all-perovskite tandem solar cells and provide a
promising renewable energy with low levelized cost of
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.