* 2050589
* Collaborative Research: Community-Engaged Preparation of Highly Skilled, Equity-focused Secondary STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Jacqueline Stillisano, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 02/28/2026
* USD 30,001.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing highly skilled STEM
teachers for high-need school districts. The project is centered at a Hispanic-
Serving Institution and will be conducted in partnership with a community
college and a high-need school district. The project aims to support 24 Noyce
Scholars as they complete STEM degrees and gain secondary teaching
certification. At the heart of this partnership is a decade-long mutual
commitment to develop and retain culturally competent, day-one-ready secondary
STEM educators through a strong community-engaged teacher preparation program.
The project seeks to ensure that Noyce Scholars will know and understand the
students they will teach. To this end, the project will engage community mentors
to share local knowledge and cultural awareness with the Noyce Scholars. In
addition, the project incorporates service-learning and self-efficacy-building
experiences, with an emphasis on relationship-building with a diverse community.
The overall goal is to prepare equity-focused teachers who will use culturally
relevant, highly effective teaching strategies that increase student learning,
success, and sense of belonging in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at
Texas A&amp;M University Corpus Christi includes a partnership with Del Mar
College, Texas A&amp;M University, and West Oso School District. It seeks to
recruit 24 highly qualified, diverse biology, chemistry, marine and life
sciences, mathematics, and physics majors and support them to become culturally
competent critical thinkers and effective STEM educators in high-need school
districts. The project intends to generate new knowledge related to how project
activities develop future teachers’ STEM self-efficacy, STEM interest, and
changes in perception of inclusive teaching and learning. The project also seeks
to identify mechanisms, resources, and policies that support and constrain
effective implementation of the teacher preparation program and to create a
replicable model that can be replicated at other institutions with similar
resources and challenges. Outcomes from this project will be disseminated
through presentations and scholarly publications. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.