* 2050042
* REU Site at Clemson, IMPRESS (IMPlanting the ResEarch Seed in Students)
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Carlos Garcia, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 02/29/2024
* USD 376,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to Clemson
University, located in Clemson, South Carolina, will support the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2021-2023. In this program,
supported by the Division of Chemistry, participants select a research project
in the broad area of materials with targeted functions, and they are placed into
small teams mentored by a cluster of faculty mentors with complementary
expertise. The research experience is supplemented by ethics training as well as
an introduction to state-of-the-art instrumentation linked to the research
projects. The program offers a number of workshops meant to enhance the
experience of the participants, their professional development, and their
research-related social competencies. These activities improve participants'
ability to interact in professional settings and network, highlight the
relevance of their research experience, and help them become advocates for
diversity and inclusion in chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students at the
Clemson CHE-REU site will be engaged in individual projects encompassing a broad
swath of chemistry, with an emphasis on materials with targeted functions.
Projects offered include the synthesis and characterization of novel organic and
inorganic materials; development of methods to unveil chemical interactions of
nanoparticles; preparation of deep eutectic solvents; and new approaches to
enhancing energy harvesting. A planned professional development series will
accompany the research experience and will include seminars on collecting,
analyzing and communicating scientific results; integrating and cultivating
professional networks; and applying REU competencies to build future careers.
Embracing social, economic and cultural diversity, this program aims to recruit
non-traditional/high potential students, minority students from South Carolina
and surrounding minority serving institutions, students in military schools, and
students from distant geographic areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.