* 2050525
* Recruiting and Preparing Undergraduate Mathematics Majors for Teaching Careers in Urban High Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Jeffrey Smith, Otterbein College
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2026
* USD 646,197.00

This project aims to serve the national need of increasing the number of highly
qualified middle and high school mathematics teachers in urban, high-need
schools. To do so, the project will recruit diverse mathematics majors into the
University’s teaching certification program. It will help these future teachers
develop mathematics knowledge, as well as skills in math-specific teaching
practices for urban schools. As they serve in high need schools, the new
teachers will receive resources, support, and incentives to help them succeed
and persist in a teaching career. These highly skilled mathematics teachers can
help improve the mathematics skills of middle and high school students, helping
to ensure the students build a foundation for STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This five-year project at Otterbein University includes a
partnership central Ohio’s Columbus City Schools, Ohio’s largest public school
district. Project goals include: (1) Recruit, retain, and graduate 20
mathematics undergraduate majors who also earn an Adolescent to Young Adult
Teaching Licensure; (2) Implement academic programs to support pre-service
mathematics teachers to use research-based pedagogies for achievement in high-
need, urban settings; (3) Provide induction support for new mathematics teachers
in high-need, urban schools to foster teacher success and retention; and (4)
Advance the knowledge base for pre-service teacher preparation through rigorous
assessment and evaluation of project interventions. The project team will
investigate the research question: “What is the impact of a five-day, intensive
urban teaching workshop and participation in a professional learning community
on knowledge, perception, interest, and attitudes of pre-service teaching
candidates?” The findings from this research can contribute to the knowledge
base regarding factors that attract STEM students to teaching and effective
methods to prepare teacher candidates for high-need urban schools. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.